








































Notes on the Origin of  the Public 
Space in the West 
Pedro Azara. Barcelona School of Architecture (ETSAB)

The Public Square Today, A Space of 
Representation (Use and Abuse) 

A public square is an open space. As it is public, 
it does not belong to anyone in particular or to 
any one group but to everyone. It is a place of  
passage where people come to exchange goods 
and ideas. An empty square symbolises that 
nobody has been able to implant any sign of  
belonging.

The occupation of  a square is always regu-
lated: it lasts for a limited time. Markets, fairs, 
“entertainment” activities, concerts and diverse 
types of  events are held, regularly or occasion-
ally, in this space provided that the public au-
thorities, in keeping with all citizens who they 
represent whether they have voted for them or 
not, have clearly stipulated this, without the 
edict giving rise to conflictive interpretations.

In all cases, those who occupy the public 
space know that they have to leave it after the 
agreed time. In contrast with a private space, 
nobody can take root in a public space. They can 
only pass through; the interruption of  move-
ment is momentary. A public space is always 
empty; in other words, available to anyone 
who wants to express an opinion, to exhibit 
merchandise or even themselves (games and 
theatre were authorised in the Roman forum 
but not in the Greek agora in the classical era, 
although they were before the 5th century 
BC). The great contribution to coexistence 

introduced by the agora in urban life is actu-
ally the definition or delimitation of  a space, 
which no one, citizens or representatives, could 
appropriate. All voices and all decisions were 
welcome, provided none dominated. One of  
the great conflicts in history, Achilles’ refusal 
to fight along with his comrades-in-arms in 
the sacking of  Troy, was because Agamem-
non briefly took the lead in the agora (in this 
case, an empty space on the beach where the 
Achaean ships had moored in front of  the wall 
of  the city of  Troy) or, rather, he imposed his 
voice when he should not have because, in the 
agora, everybody participated or performed in 
an ordered and orderly fashion.

However, it is true that public squares are 
taken over by demonstrators, on some occasions 
for an almost indefinite time. Let’s recall the 
occupation of  Tiananmen Square in Beijing. 
In most cases, the aim is the abolition not only 
of  a government but a whole political system, 
almost always dictatorial, in favour of  another 
democratic way. The change is substantial. The 
prevailing order and law are no longer accepted. 
The occupation is not, therefore, illegal because 
legality is not recognised. 

However, in the case of  the 15-M Spanish 
demonstrations, the aim was not to denounce 
a political system but to exalt it, cleansing it 
of  imperfections, distortions and corruptions. 
Everybody took the democratic system for 
granted, so much so that any decision was not 

IEmed 26.indd   113 25/05/2018   11:15:52



114  Notes on the Origin of the Public Space in the West  Pedro Azara

taken into consideration if  it was not voted for 
(by a show of  hands, a system unacceptable to 
Athenian democracy). They sought to preserve 
the heart of  the system. Therefore, the objec-
tive was not to annul or abolish the law, or to 
confront it, but to refine it. But this law that 
was extolled by returning its purity was at the 
same time challenged when a space that cannot 
be occupied but rather shared was occupied.  
 The presence of  demonstrators in the Span-
ish public squares in 2011, as a response to the 
economic crisis and the measures taken by the 
right-wing Catalan and Spanish governments, 
gave rise to interesting legal cases. Settled 
indefinitely, they erected what some demon-
strators called a “city”. A “city” governed by 
some rules, divided into neighbourhoods or 
activities, with areas for food or rest, debates, 
trade and leisure (mainly concerts). Perhaps it 
was not really a city but a camp but it was of  
course a regulated area. Regulated, however, by 
rules that were not those of  the city because, 
by law, the public space cannot be occupied 
permanently. So in the event of  conflict – of  
occupation of  the public space by a group of  
legally non-representative citizens –, what 
law must be applied? The law approved by the 
city or the law that the demonstrators had is-
sued for a space that belongs to everyone but 
that cannot hold everyone, at least physically? 
This should not have been a problem. Those 
occupying the square might have been the 
representatives of  all citizens or groups. But 
were they? Which law supported them? Who 
had appointed them? They might have been 
elected but the election had not been made vis-
ible. Moreover, which law could be invoked by 
those moving around the square but who were 
not demonstrators, or those attending what 
was happening without being agents? Public 
law or the law that prevailed in the square?  
 The debates were public. They took place in 
full view of  those who wished to attend or 
observe. They were, therefore, performances 

(it is significant that in classical Athens some 
citizen assemblies were held in a theatre). What 
mattered was what was said or debated but it 
was also important for the debate to take place 
in full view of  everyone, not to be followed or 
discussed by everyone, but rather to be seen, 
symbolising a “state” of  protest. What was 
said mattered as much as the performance of  
what was said; that it was discussed and that 
the image of  the event appeared on the front 
page of  the press.

We live in the world of  image, amidst a 
performative event. The square is a big 
stage where people always debate in front 
of  an audience. Demonstrators were (are) 
representatives or acted as representatives. 
They assumed a role

We live in the world of  image, amidst a 
performative event. The square is a big stage 
where people always debate in front of  an audi-
ence. Demonstrators were (are) representatives 
or acted as representatives. They assumed a 
role. They were known as representatives. 
But they probably represented themselves; 
they represented themselves as citizens who 
debated. While those who debate in the fora 
usually do so because they are (elected) rep-
resentatives, in this case when debating they 
become representatives. Action gave meaning 
to them. This is why the demonstrations should 
have lasted forever; their end was not foretold. 
The aim of  the action was to last forever.  
 The protest was just or unjust; this is not the 
issue, because the issue concerns the occupied 
“space”. The debate, then, occurred as a perfor-
mance. Those taking part assumed a role. Real 
debates are always public. They take place in 
spaces arranged as a theatre, as we have seen 
(such is the shape of  many modern parlia-
ments: the members of  the parliament are at 
the same time actors and members of  an audi-
ence, watching themselves acting). Halls of  de-

IEmed 26.indd   114 25/05/2018   11:15:52



Quaderns de la Mediterrània 26, 2018: 113-121 115

bate, congresses and assemblies have stands and 
a stage. The orators “go up on” the dais. What 
happens possesses the truth contained in art: it 
imitates or enacts life. But, for this to happen, 
those taking part must have been elected. They 
must have been recognised by the whole audi-
ence; that is, by the citizens. In a debate taking 
place in full view of  everyone, the city, through 
its representatives, offers itself  as a perfor-
mance; and the play is the city under debate. 
 Is this exactly what happened in the case 
of  the 15-M demonstrations in spaces that 
were public or taken by those attending? 
Occupants appropriate a space. They make it 
their own. Thus they “steal” or take it from the 
enjoyment of  others. This action is legitimised 
if  the occupants have been designated for the 
role or the function they take on. Was it so in 
those cases? 

Halls of  debate, congresses and assemblies 
have stands and a stage. The orators “go 
up on” the dais. What happens possesses 
the truth contained in art: it imitates or 
enacts life. But, for this to happen, those 
taking part must have been elected. They 
must have been recognised by the whole 
audience; that is, by the citizens

Of  course, the demonstrations symbolised 
a breakdown of  public law. The crisis was not 
only economic but moral. The laws were jeop-
ardised. They were not applied. They could not 
be applied. They were replaced by others. The 
blame, perhaps, lay with those who represented 
us; in other words, it concerned everyone when 
we elected representatives who are afraid to 
apply the law – who feared conflict, that is, the 
debate –, but they did not dare change it. By 
leaving it be, the city dissolved itself  and once 
dissolved there was no longer room for images 
of  something that no longer existed. The “city” 
in the public square only has a meaning if  the 
city exists. By rejecting its existence, it rejects 

itself; although, paradoxically, the fact that the 
square was occupied by a small “city” was proof  
of  the goodness of  urban life, a goodness faced 
with which the occupation of  the square should 
have been meaningless. 

The Mesopotamian Square: Between 
High Street and Junction  
in Southern Mesopotamia 

The great archaeological missions of  the 20th 
century interwar period in Iraq cleared and 
excavated large areas thanks to hundreds or 
thousands of  workers. A famous photo taken 
in the city (or site) of  Ur, during the discovery 
of  the royal tombs from the mid-third millen-
nium BC, in a place unknown today, in the late 
1920s, illustrates the enormous task. In a few 
years the political and religious centre of  this 
very extensive and highly populated metropolis 
was revealed. 

The excavations, however, progressed rap-
idly. The discoveries of  valuable objects and 
inscribed tablets were essential to prevent the 
patrons who were privately funding the mis-
sions from cutting the funds. The architectural 
structures were of  less interest. Although tem-
ples, palaces and tombs, often visible because 
they were – or were meant to be – in the upper 
areas of  the city and stood out markedly in an 
arid and flat environment, were not negligible, 
the urban fabric, the residential, trade and 
crafts neighbourhoods attracted much less 
enthusiasm.

For this reason, and given the conditions of  
the Mesopotamian sites today that impede or 
make new studies or the review of  the plans 
drawn up one thousand years ago difficult, Mes-
opotamian town planning is almost unknown. 
Only a few limited urban fabrics in some cit-
ies such as in Ur, Uruk, Kish and Mari and in 
Sumerian colonies in northern Mesopotamia 
have been explored and studied.

IEmed 26.indd   115 25/05/2018   11:15:52



116  Notes on the Origin of the Public Space in the West  Pedro Azara

The French archaeologist and historian 
Jean-Claude Margueron believed he had dis-
covered an outstanding – unique – space in 
the city of  Mari: a triangular open space in 
the urban fabric of  Mari that he interpreted 
as a market square. In my view, it is difficult 
or impossible to be sure about the function of  
this space, which has certainly not been found 
in any other city.

The few neighbourhoods explored reveal 
a dense network of  dwellings linked by inner 
courtyards, barely open towards narrow alleys 
whose arrangement would be capricious if  it 
did not seem to follow the light slopes of  the 
ground through which the waters were natu-
rally drained during the big annual rains and 
that seeped into the clayey soil with difficulty. 
The neighbourhoods seem like the prelude to 
the later Arab medinas and kasbahs, and the 
Early Middle Ages cities.

Although the archaeological remains 
hardly enable us to discern the Mesopota-
mian town planning, the vocabulary might 
provide us with a clearer picture of  how 
Mesopotamians conceived the urban fabric. 
Although several Sumerian and Acadian words 
are always translated as street, esir and tilla are 
perhaps the most common Sumerian terms. 
They partly reveal what the city should be 
and how they imagined it. Esir is a compound 
word. E is a very common term that means 
house (also used to designate the temple, be-
cause this is the simple house of  the deity). Sir 
has, among others, the meaning of  uniting, of  
joining. Thus, a street is a link between houses. 
The street does not seem to have its own entity. 
The house is the unit that constitutes the town 
and the street, the environment that manages 
to move from the house to the town, keeping 
these basic units together. The city is a group-
ing of  houses, and urban life takes place within 
them, although they are not entirely enclosed 
in themselves but possess a bond with other 
spatial units.

 Square was usually designated with the 
Sumerian words salidagal and tilla, already 
used in the most ancient texts from the first 
half  of  the third millennium BC. We already 
know the latter: it also means street. Since 
Ancient Greece, the difference we establish 
between the street and the square does not 
seem to exist. Both spaces are designated with 
the same term, which means that there were 
no squares, just longitudinal alleys between 
dwellings. These might be linked by squares, 
certainly, but they have not been found in the 
excavations.

The street does not seem to have its 
own entity. The house is the unit that 
constitutes the town and the street, the 
environment that manages to move from 
the house to the town, keeping these basic 
units together. The city is a grouping of  
houses, and urban life takes place within 
them

The question about the differentiated ex-
istence of  the square, as a town development 
element with its own formal, functional and 
symbolic characteristics, might be clarified if  
we comment briefly on the aforementioned 
word siladagal. It is a compound word. We 
also know the first element sila is translated 
as street and dagal means wide. It is a term 
related to the word damgal, which comprises 
the adjective gal (big).

Thus, the square would be a wide street, a 
boulevard as we would call it today, the high 
street (the Roman cardo and decumanus that 
crossed, or should have crossed, in the forum). 
The squares would be unusual urban elements 
because the streets, at least in the third millen-
nium BC sites studied, were very narrow. We 
must not perceive this narrowness from our per-
spective but as a quality deliberately pursued.

The square would barely be distinguished 
from the street. It would fulfil the same func-

IEmed 26.indd   116 25/05/2018   11:15:52



Quaderns de la Mediterrània 26, 2018: 113-121 117

tion. It would not be a space of  exchange, 
negotiation and debate, as the Greek agora 
and the Roman forum were later, but it was 
planned, built and imagined perhaps as a more 
rapid transport link, or planned for chariots – 
from the mid-second millennium –, between 
the foundational elements of  the city, of  any 
human settlement: the houses.

The functions of  the agora and the forum 
might have taken place in the street 
crossroads, points where the movements 
were temporarily interrupted to negotiate; 
they were not limited spaces, with their 
own value, that people headed to but 
places where people met

In any case, tilla – street or square – also 
has another sense that can help us understand 
what a square in Mesopotamia might be like, 
or to what it would be equivalent today. Tilla 
also meant junction: a meeting of  two streets. 
The space is not physically wider than that of  
a street, although it is at a visual level. The 
functions of  the agora and the forum might 
have taken place in the street crossroads, 
points where the movements were temporarily 
interrupted to negotiate; they were not lim-
ited spaces, with their own value, that people 
headed to but places where people met. Of  
course, in Rome, the juctions were different 
from the roads (and the squares) and were 
under the protection of  their own divinities 
or spirits that only acted and were effective at 
these points. A junction enables both a change 
of  direction and a rearrangement. The world 
can change based on a junction. Necessarily, 
like the myth of  Hercules suggests, a junction 
involves stopping, reflecting and choosing a 
direction to the detriment of  others; it requires 
a decision, which may determine the route. 
The path drawn up is interrupted and makes 
us think about where we are going and where 
we come from. A junction is a physical space 

with not only spatial but also moral values or 
qualities. Thus, in Mesopotamia a square would 
be a stop on the journey. It would not veer from 
the route, like the square, but would require 
awareness of  the place where we are, of  the 
place we occupy in the world. 

The Mesopotamian Square:  
Between the Square and the Garden 
in Northern Mesopotamia 

Despite all the efforts by archaeologists and 
epigraphers, neither the texts nor the archaeo-
logical remains of  Mesopotamian cities from 
the fourth and third millennia reveal the exist-
ence of  urban public spaces (squares, markets, 
gardens, Fields of  Mars or parade grounds, 
etc.). The cities have streets and undeveloped 
areas within the perimeter of  the wall – prob-
ably grazing crop fields useful in the event of  
siege –, and the temples have many spacious 
courtyards, but the residents were not allowed 
to enter them or the sacred rooms and spaces, 
separated from the rest of  the city by walls, 
although the whole town belonged to the deity. 
There was no separation of  the urban space into 
sacred areas and profane areas, as in Greece.

 Some ancient Greek authors argued that 
the public space, specifically the agora, was a 
characteristic feature of  the Greek city that 
distinguished it from the Mesopotamian city. 
However, such a statement has been qualified 
today. The search for eastern public spaces 
must not be carried out in the south of  Meso-
potamia but in the north. The Assyrian and 
neo-Assyrian capitals, from the second half  of  
the second millennium until the fall of  Assyria 
around the mid-first millennium, were founded 
and built following the models of  the previous 
southern cities. Walls, palaces and temples 
with a ziggurat characterised Assyrian cities. 
However, these had a space that had not existed 
before: gardened public spaces, different from 

IEmed 26.indd   117 25/05/2018   11:15:52



118  Notes on the Origin of the Public Space in the West  Pedro Azara

the palace gardens (hanging?, in other words, 
located on promontories). These gardens must 
have been similar, profusely endowed with a 
large variety of  trees, including fruit trees. 
The imperial gardens could only be enjoyed by 
the emperor, in contrast to the public gardens: 
areas within the urban fabric, at street junction, 
like today’s central squares, which freed spaces 
opposite some temples. No building spoiled or 
constrained them. Neither were they residual 
spaces but rather well planned within an often 
orthogonal layout in the neo-Assyrian cities 
founded. Access to these collective spaces was 
free.

The agora had no owner. It belonged 
to the group, to all citizens (who did 
not account for the whole population, 
certainly, as women and slaves could not 
use this central space)

However, these “public green areas” were 
different from the Greek agora, even though 
they were almost contemporary (the neo-
Assyrian city flourished in the 8th and 7th 
centuries BC while the Greek city excelled 
barely one century later). The agora had no 
owner. It belonged to the group, to all citizens 
(who did not account for the whole population, 
certainly, as women and slaves could not use this 
central space). The “municipal government” 
was in charge of  developing and maintaining 
the agora. Meanwhile, the Assyrian garden or 
urban park was an emperor’s gift, who surren-
dered its usufruct to the community.

Moreover, just like the agora, despite the 
temples devoted to gods that kept watch over 
trade and work and monuments to the city 
heroes, was a profane space – thorough which 
any citizen could walk –, the space of  the whole 
Mesopotamian city belonged to the gods, who 
delegated care of  this space to the emperor. 
Thus, the neo-Assyrian emperor offered a space 
to his subjects that was not his property but 

had been entrusted to him by heaven, which 
probably reflects a true belief. In this manner, 
all citizens could benefit from divine generos-
ity and give thanks to heaven by honouring it 
ritually.

The Greek Agora 

Specialists agree: the agora is the major con-
tribution of  the Greek city. It is a new kind 
of  space, or a new concept of  space, which 
no longer belongs to the gods or their true 
representative on Earth, but consists of  a com-
munity space. The community, which only 
includes free men born in the city, directs and 
occupies this place. Gods have their own place 
(the acropolis) but it is in the heights, separated 
from the daily life of  the city. The central lo-
cation of  the agora is a symbol that does not 
belong to anyone in particular, that does not 
incline towards or embrace one group rather 
than another. Moreover, nobody can appropri-
ate the agora, not even temporarily, for their 
benefit or exhibition.

The agora is surrounded by public build-
ings. It also houses holy spaces belonging to 
the deities that watch over the verbal and trad-
ing exchanges taking place there. Similarly, 
many monuments and sculptural groups are 
arranged in the centre and on the outskirts of  
the agora. They represent gods and heroes of  
the past linked to the mythical history of  the 
city, such as the Altar of  the Twelve Gods, the 
Altar of  Zeus Agoraios (Zeus of  the agora) or 
the Monument to the Eponym Heroes. It also 
exhibits personifications of  citizen values, such 
as Justice or Health.

What perhaps has not been sufficiently 
emphasised is the very pertinent exhibition of  
monuments (divine and heroic statues) in the 
agora. These only take on meaning in this place.

The agora is a place of  exchange and meet-
ing that not only accommodates living beings. 

IEmed 26.indd   118 25/05/2018   11:15:52



Quaderns de la Mediterrània 26, 2018: 113-121 119

A city not only comprises living citizens but 
also includes the dead and the gods, each one in 
their own space: the acropolis and the necropo-
lis, to which citizens go to meet invisible beings. 
 However, the most direct and intimate meeting 
occurs in the agora. It is symbolised and mani-
fested in the agora. The statues that populate 
it are effigies of  beings from another time, a 
time before humans, when the Earth was only 
inhabited by gods and heroes. But these beings 
are still alive, are still in the city as spirits. The 
statues grant them a body thanks to which 
the spirits or souls and the disembodied and, 
therefore, invisible beings are embodied: they 
are shown full length among the humans, the 
citizens. The meetings between citizens in the 
agora repeat those established between the 
living and the dead or, rather, between mortals 
and immortals.

These meetings can only take place in the 
agora. Mortals can dialogue with immortals; 
immortals enlighten mortals by example; 
they inspire them, advise them, give them 
guidelines of  conduct, models of  ethical ac-
tion, which must later govern intrapersonal 
relations. Thus, the agora is a meeting space 
“at all levels”. And these “high level” meet-
ings, between men and heroes, give meaning 
to, rule and determine later meetings between 
men. The agora is thus a training space that 
turns man into citizen because, after having 
dialogued with the heroes, after having seen 
how they behaved, how they were on Earth, 
what they were “like”, he can then be similar 
and create communities of  human beings.

The Agora of Athens 

After the end of  the Mycenaean world, in the 
late second millennium, when the kings were 
judges and priests, they lived at the top of  the 
acropolis, and after a period of  decay – unless it 
corresponds to a little known period, partly be-

cause of  the apparent disappearance of  written 
texts –, the capital of  the city-state of  Athens 
was again arranged very differently from the 
mid-7th century. The three powers, civil or 
political, judicial and religious, were located in 
different places (although worship continued 
to define the most apparently civilian events).

Thus, the acropolis was entirely devoted to 
the gods, mainly of  the city (at the dawn of  
time Athena and Poseidon competed for the 
possession of  Attica; Athena won because her 
present, an olive tree, was preferred to that of  
the god of  the seas, which was a well of  salt 
water, unfortunately).

The acropolis was entirely devoted to 
the gods, mainly of  the city (at the dawn 
of  time Athena and Poseidon competed 
for the possession of  Attica; Athena 
won because her present, an olive tree, 
was preferred to that of  the god of  the 
seas, which was a well of  salt water, 
unfortunately)

The neighbouring hill of  the Aeropagus 
was occupied by the assembly of  justice. It was 
there where the god of  war, Ares, was forgiven 
for the death of  a daughter of  a god of  the 
seas, and it was also there where Orestes, son 
of  Agamemnon, leader of  the Greek army in 
the Trojan war and of  Clytemnestra, was tried 
for having murdered his mother after she had 
previously taken revenge on him because the 
king had sacrificed her daughter in order to 
obtain the benevolence of  the winds to sail to 
Troy. Finally, the valley where the agora was 
located, at the foot of  both hills, Acropolis and 
Aeropagus, housed the market and the politi-
cal institutions where the laws of  the city-state 
were discussed.

The agora was not, however, a profane space, 
exclusively in the care of  men. What happened 
is that while the hills were in the care of  celes-
tial gods (the Olympic gods), the valley of  the 

IEmed 26.indd   119 25/05/2018   11:15:52



120  Notes on the Origin of the Public Space in the West  Pedro Azara

agora was under the protection of  infernal gods 
and, in particular, of  mother goddesses. Thus, 
the Legislative Assembly (called the Boule) 
operated in a space that housed a sanctuary 
devoted to a mother goddess, or mother of  the 
gods. She was located, as an engendering de-
ity of  the cosmos, in the bowels of  the Earth. 
From the underground, she watched over the 
goodness of  the transactions and the laws that 
governed them. Thus, the goods marketed 
came from the Earth, and the Earth was the 
deity that ruled their production and exchange. 
The agora also housed the Altar of  the Twelve 
Heroes, immemorial mythical figures that pro-
tected the life of  the city and citizens.

Finally, the Temple of  Hephaestus stood 
on one side. He was a son of  Zeus, the father 
of  gods, but he never lived on top of  Olympus. 
He was not a celestial god but, as the god of  
the forge, educated by infernal deities such as 
the Cabeiri on the handling of  fire, from the 
interior of  the Earth, a god with close links to 
the underworld. His own limp and deformed 
figure, due to the hard work of  handling forge 
irons by the fire that scorched the skin and 
gave him a possessed appearance, related him 
to underground rather than aerial forces. At the 
same time, as a blacksmith god, he protected 
the craftsmen who traded in the agora.

Thanks to well-regulated trade, humans 
were in harmony with the Earth, and the pow-
ers of  the depths of  the valley ensured that 
humans went for nothing, goods and goodness, 
food and fair laws.

The Meaning of the Square 

Is the square inseparable from the city? Does 
it need it? Rome – and the European medieval 
city – curiously recovered the eastern urban 
form. It has often been argued that Rome (at 
least before Nero’s urban reform after the big 
fire) was closer to an Arab kasbah than to a well-

planned city with an orthogonal layout around 
an empty central space. The Roman city had a 
forum – or several – but these were located on its 
outskirts, where the markets were in the Middle 
Ages, at the city gates or even outside the wall. 
The imperial fora were in the centre of  Rome 
but they were not public but rather holy spaces. 
They had the same function as the courtyards 
of  the eastern sanctuaries: they provided access 
to the temples, a privilege for only a few.

Rome did not have an agora or squares. 
It possessed markets, Fields of  Mars – where 
military parades were held –, spaces for bloody 
games (of  a religious nature), always in periph-
eral places, while the city centre was made of  
insulae or blocks grouped together.

Thanks to well-regulated trade, humans 
were in harmony with the Earth, and the 
powers of  the depths of  the valley ensured 
that humans went for nothing, goods and 
goodness, food and fair laws.

This model endured, with exceptions, until 
the early urban growth plans and the Spanish 
colonial green field cities in the Renaissance.

The square was not necessary. The street was 
the meeting point, as were the market, the public 
baths – which lasted until the Early Middle Ages, 
when the Church no longer tolerated these “pro-
miscuous” sites, openly discussed or disputed. 
The festivals, processions and Saturnalia were 
held in the street, day or night. In fact, the urban 
layout, even in Greece, had been established 
based on the procession paths that linked the in-
tramura and extraurban sanctuaries, often built 
or delimited before the city itself. The dances, 
processional parades and the wandering of  the 
choirs determined the layout of  the city. It was 
built based on chants and parades. 

The street was the main structuring ele-
ment. It was there where the festive outpour-
ings occurred, which could thwart the social 
order, certainly, but also welcomed parades in 

IEmed 26.indd   120 25/05/2018   11:15:52



Quaderns de la Mediterrània 26, 2018: 113-121 121

which the city recognised itself, confirming 
the bonds that united citizens with their city.

The street was the main structuring 
element. It was there where the festive 
outpourings occurred, which could 
thwart the social order, certainly, but 
also welcomed parades in which the city 
recognised itself, confirming the bonds 
that united citizens with their city

The square is an empty, dead, space. Nobody 
knows how to plan it. The square was mean-
ingful in absolutist governments because they 
showed themselves in broad empty spaces, nec-
essary for such manifestations of  ostentation. 
But the trade and debates, which in Greece 
took place in the open air or within view of  
all, are today held behind closed doors. So, is 
the square necessary?

In New York, for instance, the most vibrant 
spaces are not squares but streets: Times Square 

is not a square but a long space that is the result 
of  the temporary confluence of  streets that 
separate again after a few hundred metres. One 
of  the most vibrant public spaces is an open 
elevated park (High Line).

The street takes the pulse. A city can live 
without squares but not without streets: the 
Arab city does not have squares. Squares are 
often fenced, as if  they were empty plots: places 
in front of  whose limits the city stops. The city 
comes to a complete halt when the street is 
taken over. During the 15-M demonstrations in 
Spain, the cities did not stop: the tents occupied 
the squares, spaces almost always indifferent to 
urban life. In Barcelona, plaça de Catalunya is 
a big empty space; in contrast, plaza de la Villa 
in Madrid has life because it is the origin of  all 
the roads and arteries that run through the city 
and link it to other cities.

The square had a meaning in classical 
Greece. Does it have one today? Is this not proof  
of  idleness or incapacity to plan the city?

IEmed 26.indd   121 25/05/2018   11:15:52


