








































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































2011_Proceedings_Vol2.pdf


PLEA 2011 - 27th Conference on Passive and Low Energy Architecture, Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium, 13-15 July 2011.

 DESIGN TOOLS AND METHODS    59

Solar radiation and architectural design in 
Barcelona

Reconciling protection in summer and gain in winter 

Alexis AGUILAR1 Carlos ALONSO1 Helena COCH1 Rafael SERRA1

1

ABSTRACT: The principles of the passive solar house were defined in the 1970s. Since that time, strategies 
have been conceptualized and tested with different examples built in the USA and in Europe. Models directly 
related to the Mediterranean climate are rare in this context. They will be the subject of the present study. In 
these cases, the main issue is to reconcile solar gain in winter and solar shading protection in summer. In 
addition, summer heat can be lost through natural ventilation. The research will focus on aspects of architectural 
design to implement alternatives for optimizing control of radiation. The Heliodon 2TM computer software will be 
used to establish evaluation methods for certifying the energy efficiency of the solutions under study. 

Keywords: solar radiation, Mediterranean climate, architecture

1. INTRODUCTION 
When addressing the issue of solar radiation in 

a priori

chosen this dichotomy. Except in particular cases 
that are architecturally designed for summer [2] or 

air conditioning throughout

and jointly assess their impact in summer and winter. 
The objective is to identify compromise solutions that 
give a good response for both summer and winter. 

2. METHODOLOGY 
The sun’s path follows a daily and seasonal 

pattern. That path is closel
an architectural form experiences different degrees 
of exposure to radiation.  

an attempt is made to quantify the annual radiation 
received by each architectural surface using 
theoretical model calculations. The radiation 
reaching the earth's surface must pass through the 
atmosphere [3] and cloudiness is a variable that is 

approximations of absolute values are valid. In 

comparative relations will be correct. In th
relationships that differentiate one area from another 
are invariable because they are due to purely 
positional geometric relations of a flat surface with 
regard to solar radiation.  

These relationships will be explored later on in 
this paper as they relate to the latitude of Barcelona 

representative of the 
Mediterranean climate. The computer software tool 

Beckers & Luc Masset [5]. The program performs 

without taking into account either the diffuse radiation 
emitted by the sky [7] or the radiation reflected by 
nearby surfaces. This method of calculation is not a 
drawback because its purpose is not to determine 
precisely the absolute value of radiation received. As 

relationships between the gain of some surfaces and 
others. The 2TM Heliodon program is highly useful 
for this in that it also performs the calculations for the 
desired time period.  

radiation accumulated during winter (21-Dec to 21-

summer it will not be. The study establishes an 
assessment procedure that is justified as follows: 

Phase 1: design aspects are not incorporated 

Compares radiation received by the same 

form aligned with the cardinal points is used. 

Phase 2: design aspects are incorporated 

Knowing the different exposures of a surface in 
terms of its orientation raises design aspects that 
improve the performance of a project in regard to 
radiation. Each aspect provides design alternatives 
with different impact in terms of radiation. In each 

provides the best response to radiation and 
reconciles the situations of winter and summer. The 
following table sets out the aspects and alternatives 
considered: 

Table 1: Aspects and design alternatives 

ASPECTS ALTERNATIVES 

1- Proportion of the 
rectangular layout 

Analysis of various 
proportions of the layout 



PLEA 2011 - 27th Conference on Passive and Low Energy Architecture, Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium, 13-15 July 2011.

60   DESIGN TOOLS AND METHODS

2 – Protection elements 
of the southern facade 

Dimensioning of the 
horizontal overhangs 

3 - Protection elements 
of the eastern and 
western facades 

Choice of protection: 
horizontal or vertical 

4 – Slope of the roof Flat or sloped with 
various inclinations and 
orientations 

3. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
3.1. Not considering design aspects (phase 1) 

The audit consists in assessing the amount of 
solar energy received by the different planes of a 
cube the vertical surfaces of which are strictly 

adds the energy received on a horizontal flat surface 
corresponding to a hypothetical flat roof. 

Figure 1: total solar radiation on a 6x6x6m cube, in 
Barcelona, in winter 

Four periods were assessed. The first two 
correspond to winter (Fig. 1) and summer. The next 
two were associated with months related to extreme 

(Fig. 2) summarizes the data obtained in a graph. 

Figure 2: total solar radiation (kWh) on the surfaces of the 
6x6x6m cube in Barcelona, in the summer and winter, and 

in the months of January and July 

We should point out the importance of radiation 

radiation received on any other surface. In July 

received in the entire winter. 

mentioning that the radiation received is 
approximately 1.4 times higher in winter when 
compared with summer. 

notice how the radiation received in summer is 
almost comparable to that received on the southern 

by these facades is only around 30% of that received 
on the southern facade. 

3.2. Considering design aspects (phase 2) 

3.2.1. Proportion of the rectangular layout: 
analysis of various layout proportions  

linear forms have better thermal performance 
throughout the year if they are elongated in an east-

capture radiation in winter with the large area of 

because the east and west facades are smaller. 

shape is. The study was conducted based on two 
parameters: the ratio between width and length and 
orientation of the shape. Three layout relationships 

6x6 (1:1). The floor area 
same: 36 m2

always the same: 216 m3. The two rectangular 
relationships of the layout were evaluated by 
positioning them based on two orientations: orienting 

the long facades to north and south. A square shape 
is symmetrical in the two possible orientations and its 

behaviour are assessed seeking a balanced solution 
that reconciles protection in summer and gain in 
winter. 

(Fig. 3) summarizes the data obtained in a graph. 

Figure 3: total solar radiation (kWh) on the surfaces of 
various rectangular shapes, in Barcelona, in the summer 

and winter 



PLEA 2011 - 27th Conference on Passive and Low Energy Architecture, Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium, 13-15 July 2011.

 DESIGN TOOLS AND METHODS    61

The graphs that show the behaviour of a single 
surface offer obvious results. Gain increases with the 
size of the facade.  

The interest lies in following the behaviour of the 
graph that describes what happened in terms of total 
gain to the volume. 

facades to the north and south is the most favourable 
one since it is the one with lower gain. This 

option that is oriented in 

the same volume with longer facades oriented to the 

lengthen the volume of the longer facades to the 
north and south. The capture capacity of the south 

zero contribution of the 

of the east and west facades.  

that have elongated layouts orienting their largest 

mentioned high gain capacity in winter. 

3.2.2. Protection elements of the southern 
facade: dimensioning of the horizontal 
overhangs 

optimize its performance. The role the south face 

amount of radiation. T
performance of the south facade it is advisable to 
lower its gain in summer without being detrimental to 

an alternative design: overhangs for screening the 
sun. 

Given that the sun follows a higher path in the 

dimension overhangs to screen radiation in summer 
and allow radiation in winter. 

overhangs seeking the most favourable relationship 
between the height of the facade to be protected in 
the summer and the length of the overhangs. An 
attempt is made to determine the compatible option 
for the two seasons by performing calculations. 

The overhangs are labelled “o” and the height of 
the façade “h”. We evaluated the following 

without o. 
(Fig. 4) shows an illustrative image of the 

 Figure 4: solar radiation with an overhang o=h, in winter 

The results are compared using graphs (Fig. 5 
and 6) to facilitate understanding and conclusions. 

Figure 5: total solar radiation (kWh) with different lengths of 
overhangs, in Barcelona, in summer and winter 

Figure 6: percentage of radiation received with different 
lengths of overhangs, in Barcelona, in summer and winter 

Of all the relationships between the height of the 
facade and the lengths over

high and the façade receives only 36% of the 
same overhang intercepted 

little radiation and allowed 73% of the radiation to 
reach the facade. 



PLEA 2011 - 27th Conference on Passive and Low Energy Architecture, Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium, 13-15 July 2011.

62   DESIGN TOOLS AND METHODS

3.2.3. Protection elements of the eastern and 
western facades: choice of horizontal or 
vertical protection

 The particularity of the east and west facades is 

the south facade. This does not occur in winter. The 
amount of radiation received by the two facades 
does not equal the radiation received by the south 

we want to improve 
performance in comparison to radiation on these 

gain. What type of protection would be proposed for 
this purpose? 

The east and west are associated at the time of 
sunrise and sunset. Radiation is quite flush at that 

incidence of radiation that is quite perpendicular to 

ation must pass through 

much.

in the southeast and southwest respectively. In 

around the east and west occupies many more hours 
the height of the sun is 

considerable and radiation is no longer flush. 

approach effective solar protection on the east and 
west is reformulated as follows: Should the 
overhangs be horizontal (as in the case of southern 
orientation) that impede ra
should protections be vertical to intercept flush 
radiation? 

the radiation received by an eastern oriented 3x3 
vertical surface at Barcelona’s latitude. 

The response was evaluated in summer and in 

vertical protection on the south (Fig. 8). 

 Figure 7: solar radiation received by an eastward oriented 
surface, in summer, with overhang 

 Figure 8: solar radiation received by an eastward oriented 
surface, in summer, with vertical protection on the south 

All protective elements will be exactly the same 
size to compare the effect of only changing their 

the absolute values (Fig. 9) and another graph 
comparing the percentage received in comparison to 
the situation without protection (Fig. 10). 

Figure 9: total radiation (kWh) received by an eastward 
facing surface with various protective elements, in 

Barcelona, in the summer and winter 

Figure 10: percentage of radiation received by an eastward 
facing surface with various protective elements, in 

Barcelona, in the summer and winter 

The vertical protective effect on the north is 
negligible. The discussion comes down to choosing 
between vertical protection on the south or the 
overhang. The overhang is the more successful of 
the two. It reduces the amount of radiation received 
in summer (58%) and allows a greater amount of 
radiation to be received in winter (75%). 



PLEA 2011 - 27th Conference on Passive and Low Energy Architecture, Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium, 13-15 July 2011.

 DESIGN TOOLS AND METHODS    63

of radiation control shading 

relation to the optimum position. Considering the 
advisable to suspect that 

horizontal positioning of the slats will be most 
suitable. 

11) or vertically (Fig. 12). The arrangement of the 
slats is every 30cm and they protrude 30cm above 
the surface of the opening. The radiation calculations 
are performed for two study periods: summer and 
winter. 

The case in which no shading protection is used 
is also added to the assessment. This makes it 
possible to comment in terms of percentage of 
radiation received in relation to a hypothetical case 
with no shade protection.  

to show the results. The first shows the absolute 
values of radiation received (Fig. 13) and the second 
the percentage values of radiation received in 
comparison with the case of no shade protection 
(Fig. 14). 

Figure 11: solar radiation received by an opening oriented 
towards the west protected with horizontal slats, in summer 

Figure 12: solar radiation received by an opening oriented 
towards the west protected with vertical slats, in summer 

Figure 13: total radiation (kWh) received by a westward 
facing surface with protective slats, in Barcelona, in the 

summer and winter 

Figure 14: graph comparing the percentage of radiation 
received by a westward facing surface with protective slats, 

in Barcelona, in the summer and winter 

The benefit of horizontal shading is clearly superior 

rsus 17% of that possible 

benefit is blatantly superior. When the radiation is not 

of that possible. 

3.2.4. Slope of the roof: flat or sloped with 
different inclinations and orientations 

roof is twice that received by a southern facade of 

roof receives 75% of the 
radiation hitting the southern facade. This reflection 
demonstrates the great importance of the roof in 
bioclimatic design.  

The same floor area is covered with roofs with 
different inclinations and orientations; the radiation 
received in each case is recorded. 

An illustrative image of the simulations of the 
radiation received is shown below. It corresponds to 
the radiation received in summer by a roof with an 
inclination of 50% to the south (Fig. 15). 



PLEA 2011 - 27th Conference on Passive and Low Energy Architecture, Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium, 13-15 July 2011.

64   DESIGN TOOLS AND METHODS

Figure 15: solar radiation received in summer by a roof with 
a 50% inclination towards the south 

Figure 16: total radiation (kWh) received by the same roofs 
with different inclinations and orientations, in Barcelona, in 

the summer and in winter 

variations between the gains in summer and winter 
became more pronounced. A southward facing roof 
with a 50% inclination has double the gain in summer 

higher in summer. 

convenient option at Barcelona’s latitude. The 
radiation received in summer is situated exactly at 
the point of balance between the roofs with the same 

there is reduced gain compared with roofs facing 

compared with north-facing roofs. 

radiation received by the roof does not move inside 
in the form of hot air that descends to ground level. 

is the radiation exchange with the user. The roof 

radiation toward the user jeopardizing comfort. 

4. CONCLUSION 
The modelling of architecture linked to controlling 

radiation is entirely feasible. Geometric relationships 
exist between the sun’s pos
form to radiation and the design of protective shading 
devices. The sun’s path is characteristic at each 

is possible to associate form with a certain latitude. 

elements will be most effective in all directions at 

Barcelona’s latitude (Fig. 17). Due to the existence of 
geometrical laws that describe the regularity of the 

tool that enables quick calculations for long time 

relationships that compare the radiation received by 
different design solutions 
efficiency.  

Figure 17: real case: bar of the School of Architecture of 
Barcelona: vertical (left) and horizontal (right) slats. 

5. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

professor at the University of Technology of 

Heliodon 2TM at our disposal. It is useful software for 
the architectural design process when the aim is to 
prepare a model based on energy efficiency. 
Heliodon 2TM offers synthetic responses with rapid 
calculations and expressive representations. 

This paper is supported by the Spanish MICINN 
under project ENE2009-11540. 

6. REFERENCES 

bioclimática y constru

(2009). 
[2] J.-L. Izard and J.-R. M

(1998). 

and user guide (2007). 
[5] www.heliodon.net 

arquitectónico con la lu

– Peru (2007). 
l interpretation of sky 

Switzerland (2009). 


