
















































Template for full WREC XI Papers


World Renewable Energy Congress XI 
 25-30 September 2010, Abu Dhabi, UAE 

 
The tropical roof:  

thermal simulations of the ventilated double roof in moist-warm climate 
 

Master Arch. Mariana Guimarães Merçon1*, Ph.D. Arch. Helena Coch2* and Ph.D. Arch. Rafael Serra3*
 

Arquitecture, Energy and Environment Group, School of Architecture of Barcelona, U.P.C. 
Diagonal, 649, 7th. 08028 Barcelona - Spain 

 
* Corresponding authors: 1marimercon@gmail.com, 2helena.coch@upc.edu and 3rafael.serra@upc.edu. 

 
 

Abstract 
In warm climate the inside temperature in the living space is largely affected by the roof, which 
receives more than 50% of the thermal load that acts on the building. The design and materials of the 
roof are able to minimize the thermal effects caused by the high heat of the tropics. Simulations with 
physical-mathematical calculations found the necessity of ventilated double roof. These simulations 
have also found out that the use of local materials in the design has greater significant results in the 
average inside temperature of the living space than the same design using standard industrial 
materials used in construction. The differences reaches 5 ºC in average inside temperature. Besides 
that, it was noticed that the increase of air has no effective cooling capacity of heat, although the flow 
of air inside the attic is significant because it prevents the heat expanding in this space. 
 
Keywords: single-layer cover, ventilated double-layer cover, ventilated roof, moist-warm climate, 
tropical climate. 
 
 
1. Introduction 
One of the main functions of the building is to propose a comfortable internal environment to humans 
beings. Climatic variations and their influence on heat transfer through the walls of the building, are 
intrinsically related to its envelope where the cover takes on a leading role, that is, it is the main 
responsible for the gain of heat in a building, specially in hot areas like Brazil. 

In these regions, it is necessary to take measures to break the heat flow through the roof, since the 
solar radiation absorbed by the building envelope has a great influence on the thermal environment 
inside. Mascaro et al., 1992 [1] show values around 70% of the heat load received by the cover. 
Vecchia and Nolasco, 2006 [2] show the need of double roof in the tropical climate of Brazil in order 
to ensure adequate thermal performance of buildings. 

Considering these aspects, the aim of this study is to calculate the average value of the indoor 
temperature of the building for certain outdoor weather conditions (summer), and for certain 
conditions of the building, taking into account that all actions are constant over time. Based on that, 
we intend to check the efficiency of the different cover types and cover materials, by comparing the 
single-layer cover with ventilated double-layer cover designed with different materials used in 
construction, in Brazil - from local materials to industrial materials. Besides that, we plan to study the 
thermal performance of wind speed in the interior of the building. 

2. Methodology 
2.1. Analysis Model 
Figure 1 shows the schematic of the cover with a single-layer and with ventilated double-layer. 

The dimensions of the model are defined by X (m), Y (m), H (m), d (m), where X = 3.20 m, Y = 2.50 
m, H = 2.60 m and d = 0.50 m (Fig. 2).  

Please put the session title here, e.g. LEA: Low Energy Architecture 568



World Renewable Energy Congress XI 
 25-30 September 2010, Abu Dhabi, UAE 

 
Figure 1 – Heat transfer mechanisms of single-
layer cover and ventilated double-layer cover. 

 

 
 
Figure 2 – The dimensions of the model. 
 

2.2 Analysis conditions 
The model used in the simulations was designed for the city of Vitória, Brazil, which is 20.6º south 
latitude and is 40º west longitude, at sea level. 

The average maximum temperature for a typical day in January (summer) is 31.9 ºC and average 
relative humidity is 80.4% [3]. The prevailing wind blows within this period with greater intensity in 
the northeast direction. The average maximum solar radiation intensity is 854 W/m2 in horizontal 
plane and 454 W/m2 in vertical plane [4].  

2.3 Cases analysis 
For models presented in Figure 1 we defined inner and outer layer materials, presented in Table 1, 
with their thermophysical characteristics. These materials are divided into two groups: local natural 
materials and industrialized materials. 

Table 1 – Thermophysical characteristics of the cover construction materials. 

Material λ 
(W / m K) 

K 
(W / ºC m2) 

Thickness 
(m) 

ρ 
(Kg / m2) 

Absorptance 
α 

Natural fiber 0,045 1,50 0,03 200 0,50 
Wood 0,13 4,33 0,03 430 0,70 
Ceramic tile 1,00 50,00 0,02 2000 0,65 
Cement tile 0,22 36,67 0,006 1200 0,60 
Steel tile 50,00 8333,33 0,006 7800 0,65 
Concrete slab 1,316 8,77 0,15 1330 0,60 
PVC ceiling 0,17 8,50 0,02 1390 0,05 
Plaster ceiling 0,25 12,50 0,02 825 0,08 

Based on the roof and ceiling materials we defined the case studies, totaling 21 in all: 5 one single-
layer cover cases and the remainder 16 ventilated double-layer cover cases, on Table 2. 

Table 2 – Cases analysis. 

Composition  Composition Cases 
Tile Ceiling  

Cases 
Tile Ceiling 

Case 1 Natural fiber   Case 3D Ceramic tile PVC ceiling 
Case 2 Wooden tile   Case 3E Ceramic tile Plaster ceiling 
Case 3 Ceramic tile   Case 4B Cement tile Wooden ceiling 
Case 4 Cement tile   Case 4C Cement tile Concrete slab 
Case 5 Steel tile   Case 4D Cement tile PVC ceiling 
Case 1A Natural fiber Natural fiber ceiling  Case 4E Cement tile Plaster ceiling 
Case 1B Natural fiber Wooden ceiling  Case 5B Steel tile Wooden ceiling 
Case 2A Wooden tile Natural fiber ceiling  Case 5C Steel tile Concrete slab 
Case 2B Wooden tile Wooden ceiling  Case 5D Steel tile PVC ceiling 
Case 3B Ceramic tile Wooden ceiling  Case 5E Steel tile Plaster ceiling 
Case 3C Ceramic tile Concrete slab     

 

Please put the session title here, e.g. LEA: Low Energy Architecture 569



World Renewable Energy Congress XI 
 25-30 September 2010, Abu Dhabi, UAE 

2.4 Physical-mathematical model 
From the cases we find the average indoor temperature (tin) given by equation [5,6]: 

G . (tin – tou) = E +D      

The calculation of the heat transfer coefficient (G), considering the building heat losses through 
renovation of air and by transmission through the walls - opaque or transparent - is defined by the 
equation: 

G = [∑ S . K . (tin – tou) + 0,29 . N (tin – tou)]/V     

The solar heat gain (E) and different indoor heat gain (D) are calculated respectively by the 
expressions: 

E = Sv . Rv       

D = (∑ n . e . nh)/24 . V      

The indoor heat gains (D) were not considered in this study. D = 0 W/m3. 

The equivalent window area is given by the equation: 

Sv = (∑  S . γ .  CR)/V      

It was adopted the average solar-air temperature (tsa) rather than the average outdoor temperature (tou), 
since the temperature which is very close to the roof is higher than the average outdoor temperature, 
due to a combination of solar radiation and construction material properties. tou = tsa. This is defined 
by the equation: 

tsa = tou + (I . α . Rso)      

It was considered the thermal resistance in the attic given by equation , within it there is an 
exchange by convection and radiation, which is equivalent to say that in attic thermal resistance is: 

R = 1 / (hc/2 + hr)      

The inverse of R = 1 / K (m2ºC/W). 

Nomenclature: 
 
G 
E 
D 
tin
tou 
tsa 
K 
R 
S 
V 
CR 
N 
I 

heat transfer coefficient (W/m3ºC) 
solar heat gain (W/m3) 
indoor heat gain (W/m3) 
average indoor temperature (ºC) 
average outdoor temperature (ºC) 
solar-air temperature (ºC) 
thermal conductance (W/m2ºC) 
superficial thermal resistance (m2ºC/W) 
area for heat transfer (m2) 
indoor volume (m3) 
coefficient as window guidance 
number of air changes per hour (m3/m3h) 
solar radiation intensity (W/m2) 

α 
γ 
λ 
Rse
Sv
Rv
 
hc
 
hr 
n 
e 
nh 

surface absorptance 
solar gain coefficient 
thermal conductivity (W/mK) 
outdoor surface resistance (m2ºC/W) 
equivalent window area (m2/m3) 
average solar radiation intensity on vertical 
plane (W/m2) 
convective heat transfer coefficient 
(W/m2ºC) 
radiation heat transfer coefficient (W/m2ºC) 
number of radiating heat elements 
energy radiated by element (W) 
operating daily hours 

 

Please put the session title here, e.g. LEA: Low Energy Architecture 570



World Renewable Energy Congress XI 
 25-30 September 2010, Abu Dhabi, UAE 

3. Results 
First it was made a comparison between cases with a single-layer cover. Then we compared cases with 
ventilated double-layer covers. It was finally compared the cases presenting the same outer layer 
material with different inner layer materials. This last comparison allowed us to analyze the extent in 
which the inner layer material interferes in the overall cover thermal efficiency. 

For each case was made a comparison of different rates of air in order to verify if the amount of air 
changes per hour has the ability to minimize thermal effects on the cover - when it has an attic - and of 
the interior living space. 

3.1 Single-layer cover (Fig. 3) 

 
Figure 3 – Average indoor temperature (tin) for different construction materials and different numbers 

of air changes per hour in single-layer cover. 
 

In the case of a single-layer cover (Cases 1-5), tin values reach far above tou, surpassing a 15 ºC 
difference between tin and tou (Case 5). The choice for certain materials (Case 1) makes tin more 
enjoyable. Depending on the values of λ and α, tsa can increase a lot and consequently tin increases. 

With the increase of more air in the building, tin decreases although the air flow inside the attic is 
insignificant to cooling the interior space. 

3.2 Ventilated double-layer cover (Fig. 4) 

  
Figure 4 – Average indoor temperature (tin) for different construction materials and different numbers 

of air changes per hour in ventilated double-layer cover. 
 
The choice of inner layer material makes the tin difference clear in living space. Comparing the 
different materials of the inner layer with the same outer layer material, we notice that the material 
which has a smaller K presents also lower tin (materials A and B). 

Please put the session title here, e.g. LEA: Low Energy Architecture 571



World Renewable Energy Congress XI 
 25-30 September 2010, Abu Dhabi, UAE 

The fact of introducing air into the cover, this way creating a ventilated cavity, helps minimize tin, 
reaching a maximum of 2 ºC on the cover with better performance (Cases 1B and 2B) - covers that use 
local materials. In industrialized materials covers, the difference achieved is about 1.5 ºC by 
comparing the solutions with 1N and 20N. There is a considerable increase in the number of air 
changes per hour to obtain any satisfactory result. 

3.3 Single-layer cover X Ventilated double-layer cover (Fig. 3 and 4) 
In cases of ventilated double-layer cover, some cases present substantial results if compared to the 
single-layer cover. The temperature difference between the two types can reach 5 °C. 

It can be noticed that the best results for tin are covers made of local materials, either single-layer or 
ventilated double-layer. 

The cases that use natural fiber (Cases 1A, 1B and 2A) have the most pleasant temperatures for all the 
possibilities of study. The cases that use wood in the inner layer (Case 3B, 4B and 5B) show the best 
performance of tin per group of outer layer, between the covers made of industrial materials. 

Among cases of covers made of industrial materials, the cases of group 4 (Cases 4B, 4C, 4D and 4E) 
are those that have the best tin in living space for the same number of air changes per hour. This 
happens because cement tile (4) presents a K and α lower than ceramic tile (3) and metal tile (5). On 
the other hand, metal tile (5) presents the worst results for tin as it shows the highest K among all 
solutions studied. 

4. Conclusions 
The analysis shows that the design of ventilated double-layer cover is adequate in reducing tin, 
concluding that: 

 The tin decreasing is appreciable in virtually all cases studied by comparing the single-layer cover 
and ventilated double-layer cover with the same materials of roof and under the same analysis 
conditions. The temperature difference reaches 5 °C. 

 The selection of materials with low K combined with low α for both layers (inner and outer 
layers) always presents better results. The combination above increases overall efficiency. 

 The introduction of a ventilated cavity contributes for tin reduction, although the increase of air 
does not have an effective heat cooling capacity. This is why it is necessary to considerably 
increase the number of air changes per hour to obtain any satisfactory result. However, the airflow 
inside the attic is significant because it prevents the heat expanding in this space. 

 The solutions which use local materials (non-industrialized), in the outer layer as well as in the 
inner layer, present lower tin compared with other solutions, under the same analysis conditions. 

 
5. References 
 
[1] J. L. MASCARÓ and L. E. R. MASCARÓ (eds.) (1992) Incidências das variáveis projetivas e de construção 
no consumo energético dos edifícios. Sagra-dc Luzzatto: Porto Alegre, Brazil. 
[2] F. VECCHIA and G. C. NOLASCO (2006) Reacción ante el calor en cuatro sistemas de cubiertas. Ingeniería 
Revista Académica, january-april, year/vol. 10, n. 001, pp. 17-23, Universidad Autónoma de Yucatán: Mérida, 
México. 
[3] INMET – National Institute of Meteorology. Clima – Normais Climatológicas. Ministério da Agricultura, 
Pecuária e Abastecimento: Brazil. Available: http://www.inmet.gov.br/
[4] J. M. EVANS (1995) Software iSOL 1.1 - Intensidad de la radiación, ángulos y trayectorias solares. Centro 
de Investigación Hábitat y Energía, Facultad de Arquitectura Diseño y Urbanismo, Universidad de Buenos 
Aires: Buenos Aires, Argentina. 
[5] G. Y. PARAREDA (1982) Energia Solar, Edificación y clima (Elementos para uma Arquitectura Solar): 
Tomo I. Ministério de Obras Públicas y Urbanismo: Madrid, Spain. 
[6] R. SERRA and H. COCH (1995) Arquitectura y Energía Natural. Ediciones UPC: Barcelona, Spain. 

Please put the session title here, e.g. LEA: Low Energy Architecture 572

http://www.inmet.gov.br/

