























































Template and Instructions for Preparation of Full Paper for PLEA 2007


PLEA2012 - 28th Conference, Opportunities, Limits & Needs Towards an environmentally responsible architecture Lima, Perú 7-9 November 2012 

 

 

An Environmental Review of Wineries Over the Last Centuries: 

From Vernacular to High Tech 

CAROLINA GANEM
1
 AND HELENA COCH

2
 

 
1
INCIHUSA – CONICET and FAD – Universidad Nacional de Cuyo, Mendoza, Argentina 

2
AiEM – ETSAB – Universidad Politécnica de Catalunya, Barcelona, España. 

 
 

ABSTRACT: From Egyptians and Phoenicians to our times, the process of making wine and wineries have gone a long 

way. Primitive wineries were caves found or made in the compact solid ground or special rooms constructed with high 

inertia materials such as rocks or earth blocks. These type of construction, with design variations, lasted until industrial 

revolution when new materials, mainly steel and glass sheets, were available for construction promoting bigger, faster 

and cheaper possibilities for industrial buildings.  These changes affected interior temperatures and, as a consequence, 

mechanical energy consuming systems like serpentine pipes inside tanks controlled temperature during the fermentation 

process and air conditioned equipment were installed on oak breeding barrels rooms began to be mandatory in wineries. 

These last decades innovation in wineries materiality went from different types of metal sheets to petrol derived materials 

such as polymers. As thinner and lighter the building skin, the more important the amount of envelope in contact with the 

compact solid ground. This paper presents results in envelope characterization by energy flux exchanges and 

compactness of different constructive solutions for wineries responding to two different concepts: the high tech image 

(while traditional envelope still host wine production) and new skins (new industrial designs). The three main production 

stages (fermentation, breeding and storage) are discussed in the light of passive architecture.  

Keywords: wineries, envelope, traditional skins, new skins. 

 

 

INTRODUCTION  
Primitive wineries were caves found or made in the 

compact solid ground or special rooms constructed with 

high inertia materials such as rocks or earth blocks. Both 

solutions presented a full structure of thermal mass 

resistance and therefore great stability of interior 

temperatures, crucial for wine production.  

 

Near the village of Areni, in Armenia, archaeologists 

have unearthed the earliest, most reliable evidence of 

wine production, dating back 6,100 years. (Figure 1) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

Figure 1. Wine production site in Areni, Armenia 

The installation suggests the Copper Age vintners 

pressed their wine the old-fashioned way, using their 

feet. Juice from the trampled grapes drained into the vat, 

where it was left to ferment. The wine was then stored in 

jars—the cool, dry conditions of the cave would have 

made a perfect wine cellar. [1]  About the best conditions 

to preserve wine, since the Antiquity Age, wine’s 

temperature sensibility has been known, therefore sun 

protected constructions were built. In other cases, thick 

earth blocks walls were used in deposits, as an example 

the Rameses II winery, in Tebas.  [2] (Figure 2) We 

know that recipients [containing wine] were placed in 

cold and dark warehouses. [3]  
 

 

 

 

Figure 2. Rameses II warehouses in Tebas, Egypt 



PLEA2012 - 28th Conference, Opportunities, Limits & Needs Towards an environmentally responsible architecture Lima, Perú 7-9 November 2012 

 

These type of construction, with design variations, 

lasted until industrial revolution when new materials, 

mainly steel and glass sheets, were available for 

construction promoting bigger, faster and cheaper 

possibilities for industrial buildings.   

 

These changes affected interior temperatures and, as a 

consequence, mechanical energy consuming systems like 

serpentine pipes inside tanks controlled temperature 

during the fermentation process and air conditioned 

equipment were installed on oak breeding barrels rooms 

began to be mandatory in wineries.  

 

These last decades innovation in wineries materiality 

went from different types of metal sheets to petrol 

derived materials such as polymers. As lighter the 

building skin, the more important the amount of envelope 

in contact with the compact solid ground. 

 

The objective of this paper is to present results in 

envelope characterization by amount of exposed surface 

and compactness of  two different constructive solutions 

for wineries in the Spanish Rioja Region, classified as 1. 

The high tech image (while traditional envelope still host 

wine production) and 2. New skins. (new industrial 

designs). The three main production stages -

fermentation, breeding and storage- are then discussed in 

the light of passive architecture. 

 

 

THE HIGH TECH IMAGE 

The high tech image refers to old wineries that, in an 

effort to renovate, include some signature building 

related to public activities. This new image does not 

interfere with the traditional building in which the wine 

is produced.  

 

Two of the most famous 21
st
 century winery images 

in the Spanish Rioja region are Frank Gehry’s dwelling 

in “Bodegas Marques de Riscal”, built with a series of 

rectilinear elements and clad in sandstone combined with 

sweeping panels of gold and pink titanium, and mirror 

finish stainless steel; and Zaha Hadids’s steel and glass 

“Tondonia Pavillion” in “Bodega López de Heredia”. 

(Figures 3 and 4)  

 

Traditionally, the wineries in the region are not open 

to the public, but as a component of an overall plan to 

redefine and invigorate its public image, Marques de 

Riscal commissioned the design of a small building 

intended to provide a unique experience for visitors to 

the winery. [4] The building hosts a hotel, a wine tasting 

room, a restaurant and a conference facility among other 

amenities.  Gehry’s building is intended for tourism and 

marketing. Wine production facilities date primarily from 

the mid-nineteenth century with thick walls that maintain 

temperature levels stable.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

Figure 3. Frank Gehry’s dwelling in Bodegas Marques de 

Riscal in Elciego, Rioja region, Spain 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

Figure 4. Wine-tasting pavilion by Zaha Hadid for López de 

Heredia winery, Rioja region, Spain 

 

In the same line of thinking, high tech Zaha Hadid’s 

wine-tasting pavilion in the López Heredia functions as a 

tasting room and as a portal to the winery. Zaha Hadid 

describes it as:  

 

A new bottle for an old wine: a design to safeguard 

one of López De Heredia’s treasures [the winery’s 

elaborately carved mahogany and oak display stand for 

the 1910 Brussels Worlds Fair]. Originally 

commissioned as a new pavilion to contain an older 

pavilion restored from the early 20
th

 century, this became 

a bridge between the past, present and future evolution of 

its world-famous bodegas. [5] 

 

Wine production is undergone in traditional industrial 

buildings, some of them dated from the last decades of 

the 19
th

 century to the beginning of the 20
th

 century. 

López de Heredia Winery sticks to the winemaking 

methods for fermentation and aging established by 

Rafael López de Heredia, who founded it in 1877. No 

stainless-steel vats or computer-run temperature controls 

can be found here. [6]  

 

 

 



PLEA2012 - 28th Conference, Opportunities, Limits & Needs Towards an environmentally responsible architecture Lima, Perú 7-9 November 2012 

 

López de Heredia Winery 

Today the estate covers an area of 53,076 m
2
 including 

19,718 m
2
 of buildings, 3,433. 41 m

2
 of which are 

underground cellars up to 200 metres long and 

descending to an overall depth of 15 metres.  Some 

13,000 Bordeaux oak barrels are stored in the heart of a 

mountain within the cellars. (…) Oak casks play a 

pivotal role in the fermentation of wines as they use 

completely natural and traditional methods of wine 

making. [7] 

 

The buildings stand below and above ground. Main 

subterranean facility, called “Bodega El Calado” (1892), 

is excavated out of rock into the mountain and stores 

wine in barrels between 6 to 10 years. (Figure 8) 

 

Above ground the building called “Bodega Blondeau 

o cocedero” (boiling ward) were fermentation takes 

place, was designed so that the wind will keep it 

naturally fresh, thus avoiding the high temperatures 

associated with fermentation. [7] (Figure 5)  

 

Also above ground the “Pabellón Nº1” (1878) and 

“Bodega Nueva” (new cellar) (1907) where breeding 

takes place. "La Bodega Nueva" was one of the first 

building works undertaken in Spain which used hand-laid 

concrete (1904). [7] (Figures 6 and 7) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Figure 5. Bodega Blondeau o cocedero. Fermentation. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Figure 6. Pavellón Nº 1, 1878. Breeding. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

Figure 7. Bodega Nueva, 1907. Breeding. 

 
 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Figure 8. Bodega El Calado, 1892. Storage. 

 

 

NEW SKINS 

The new skin concept refers to new wineries built at the 

end of the 20
th

 century or beginning of the 21
st
 in which 

there has been some innovation in their envelope’s form 

and materiality. This buildings are meant for wine 

production while, at the same time, they tend to create a 

strong image of the new winery. 

 

 One of the most famous new skins in the Rioja region 

is Calatravas’s Ysios Winery (2001). The design main 

objective was to give a distinctive image to this new 

label. The building is conceived as an element 

completely integrated in the surrounding landscape and, 

at the same time, as an autonomous site-specific 

sculpture. (Figures 9 and 10) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
Figure 9. Calatrava’s Bodega Ysios, Laguardia, Rioja Region, 

Spain. 

 

 

 



PLEA2012 - 28th Conference, Opportunities, Limits & Needs Towards an environmentally responsible architecture Lima, Perú 7-9 November 2012 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
Figure 10. Curved roof and facades detail. Bodega Ysios 

 

 

Today the estate covers an area of 72,000 m
2
 , 15,384 

of which are urbanized, including 8,000 m
2
 of buildings. 

The facility has a capacity of 1.5 million bottles a year 

and is designed for possible future expansion.  

 

The structure employs laminated wood beams of 

Scandinavian fir, which span 26 meters between the front 

and back of the building, rising up and down along the 

exterior walls in sine curves. Reflective aluminum 

sheeting serves as the finishing material for the roof. 

Calatrava finished the south facade with horizontal strips 

of cedar to match the tonalities of the earth under the 

vines, and he added a reflecting pool with a mosaic 

border of broken ceramic tiles that runs the full length of 

the building. [8] The facade to the north is precast 

concrete panels with few narrow openings. The eastern 

and western facades are clad in fret aluminum plates. [9] 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 11. Fermentation. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

Figure 12. Fermentation 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 
Figure 13. Breeding and Storage 

 

 

The interior of the winery unfolds in a roughly linear 

sequence on two levels, with hoppers of grapes entering 

on the west, two storey fermentation areas (Figures 11 

and 12), a breeding and storage central double height 

space (Figure 13), and finished cases of bottled wine 

exiting to the east.  

 

Calatrava exposed the utilitarian nature of the 

interiors, specifying simple materials and finishes and 

allowing the swooping ceilings and zigzagging walls to 

provide the visual excitement. [8] 

 

ENVELOPE CHARACTERIZATION 

 

Materiality  

López de Heredia winery grew into time to conform a 

series of related buildings. They were built with the latest 

technology of the time and therefore each cellar has its 

own personality.  

 

The concrete cover for “La Bodega Nueva” was in 

fact one of the first private constructions to use 

reinforced concrete in Spain, and the new cellar was also 

one of the first places in Spain to use concrete brace 

beams (1902). [7] 

 

Nevertheless, from underground to innovative 

concrete slabs, all dwellings are today considered as 

traditional regarding its heavy materiality and standard 

constructive technology. (Table 1) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



PLEA2012 - 28th Conference, Opportunities, Limits & Needs Towards an environmentally responsible architecture Lima, Perú 7-9 November 2012 

 

Table 1. Main materials’ properties. López de Heredia Winery  

 

  
LOPEZ DE HEREDIA WINERY 

 

 

 

Concrete 
Slabs 

 

Rock 

 

Earth 

 

Tiles 

= Density            
(Kg/m

3
) 

 

2400 

 

2400 

 

1800 

 

1300 

C = Specific 

Heat   

(J/Kg.K) 
 

 

805 

 

800 

 

1460 

 

840 

= Thermal 
Conductivity 

(W/m.K) 
 

 

1.63 

 

2.50 

 

2.10 

 

0.49 

s = material 

thickness 
 

0.15 

 

1 

 

0.05 

 

0.05 

 

In Ysios winery, the architect developed a repertoire 

of dynamic structural forms drawn from history, 

specifically a family of curves found in the thin-shell 

concrete vaults of Felix Candela and other engineers in 

the 1960s [8], giving them a new materiality and 

meaning. 

 

The North and South walls undulate in plan, which 

maximizes their stiffness while reducing the thickness of 

the envelope (but adding insulation) and enlarging the 

amount of exposed skin to the exterior. As a 

consequence, reducing thermal mass and increasing 

energy flux exchanges surface. (Table 2) 

 
Table 2. Main materials’ properties. Ysios Winery 

 

  
YSIOS WINERY 

  
Precast 

concrete 

 

Laminated 

wood 

 

Alumi 

num 

 

Polyur

ethane 

= Density            
(Kg/m

3
) 

 

2400 

 

530 

 

2700 
 

32 

C = Specific 

Heat   

(J/Kg.K) 
 

 

805 

 

1600 

 

900 

 

1500 

= Thermal 
Conductivity 

(W/m.K) 
 

 

1.63 

 

0.15 

 

237 

 

0.052 

s = material 

thickness 
 

0.05 

 

0.005 

 

0.0003 

 

0.05 

 

 

 

 

 

Energy flux exchanges 

To perform a comparison of the conductive heat transfer 

of the two cases, Fouriers Law Equation (Eq. 1) is used. 

 

Q =  * S * (Te – Ti) / s            (1) 

 

Where: 

Q =   flux (W) 

  

S =   Envelope surface (m
2
) 

Te =  Exterior temperature (K) 

Ti =  Interior temperature (K) 

s = material thickness (m) 

 

To calculate energy fluxes for the two types of space 

and compare energy flux exchanges, there will be 

established two fixed parameters: 

 

S =   Envelope surface = 100 m
2
 

T (Te – Ti) = 10 K (except for subterranean cases 

where  T (Te – Ti) = 0 K). 

 

The following results were obtained. They show a 

tendency of the amount of energy flux that will be 

exchanged: 

 

López de Heredia Winery: 

Average Fermentation /Breeding:  

Walls Q = 4570  W 

Roofs Q = 3120 W 

 

Storage (El Calado):  

Walls and Roofs Q =  25 W 

 

Ysios Winery: 

 

Average Fermentation / Breeding / Storage:  

Walls Q = 1040 W 

Roofs Q = 2000 W 

 

Exposed envelope 

López de Heredia winery has 18% of the envelope  

underground while Ysios winery maximizes the exposure 

of the whole above the ground envelope to a 130%. 

(Figure 14) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

             López de Heredia                    Ysios 

 

 

Figure 14. Schemes of exposed envelope for the two 

wineries in analyses. 

82% 
 

 

18% 
130% 

 



PLEA2012 - 28th Conference, Opportunities, Limits & Needs Towards an environmentally responsible architecture Lima, Perú 7-9 November 2012 

 

 

Comparison of the compactness of the two cases by 

using Serra and Coch's compactness coefficient (Eq. 2 

and 3) [10]. 

 

c = Seq/SG                                      (2) 
 

c = 4.836 * VT 
2/3

 / SG                   (3) 

 

Where: 

c =  compactness coefficient. A-dimensional. Values 

between 0 and 1, been 1 the compactness 

coefficient of a sphere. 

Seq = equivalent surface 

VT = total volume of the building 

SG = global surface 

 

To calculate compactness for the two different 

buildings and compare the amount of exposed envelope 

according with envelope design, there will be established 

one fixed parameter: VT =   Total volume of the building 

= 1000 m
3
 

 

López de Heredia winery c = 0.58 

 

Ysios winery c = 0. 37 

 

 

DISCUSSION 

 

Wine climatic needs on each production stage  

Temperature and humidity regimes and the principal 

environmental factors that need to be precisely controlled 

in the different sites of wineries.  

 

A-Fermentation: on metallic double-skinned tanks. 

- Temperature is more important in the containers than in 

the total dwelling.  

- As these casks have a superior opening, CO2 generated 

by chemical reactions, that has a higher density than air, 

descend and accumulates in the inferior part. Therefore 

inferior ventilation is needed to renovate the air.  

- As light can also affect fermentation, therefore it has to 

be controlled. 

 

B- Breeding: on oak barrels and casks. 

In this stage stability within the following reference 

ranges is very important: 

- Air temperature between 12-16 ºC and relative 

humidity between 70-82 %. 

- Minimal light. Only when it is absolutely needed. 

 

C-Storage: on glass bottles in cellars.  

Of all stages, in this last one inside the building, stability 

is also a priority. To keep the four microclimatic 

parameters (temperature, humidity, illumination and 

ventilation) controlled is essential to obtain the expected 

result. 

 

Case analyses 

The analysed cases approach to the production needs of 

wine’s industrial process from different perspectives.  

 

While the López de Heredia winery new high tech 

constructions do not participate in the industrial process 

itself, it contributes to the renovation of the label. Cellars 

remain as they were conceived a hundred years ago with 

massive materials and traditional constructive 

techniques. Each production stage has a different cellar 

and therefore envelope performance adjusted to the 

specific needs. The “Calado” cellar, built underground is 

the best solution of all, especially for storage.  

 

Ysios winery bets on a new image of the industrial 

building that will host the production as the visitors. 

There is no past tradition to preserve, as it is a new 

brand. The winery is built with an innovative 

morphology and materiality in an unitary building that 

must attend all needs with the same envelope. In this 

case, the storage facility has too much natural light and 

glass for the recommended microclimatic needs of this 

production stage.  As the envelope thinners and expands, 

the logical conclusion would be a poorer performance, 

but the use of insulation controls energy flux exchanges. 

 

Assuming a volume of 1000 m
3
 López de Heredia 

winery will have a conductive heat transfer of 19000 W 

while the Ysios winery will have a value of 12000W in 

the same conditions with the same volume only 

considering opaque elements of the envelope.  

 

If we take into account the huge amount of glass of 

the storage facility in Ysios winery (almost 25% of the 

envelope of this space), the energy flux exchanges grow 

enormously in a key production stage glass has a thermal 

conductivity of 0.96 W/m.K and air filled double glass 4-

16-4 has a thermal conductance of 2.7 W/m2.K. (Fig. 13). 

 

Prospective 

To continue whit this study, thermal inertia and its 

effects on inside temperature stability will be analysed in 

the future, as the great performance of insulation to 

diminish energy exchanges in an expanded envelope will 

not play the same role in the pursuance of stable 

temperatures for each stage production. 
 

 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS.  

Authors thank ANPCyT – FONCYT (Argentina) and 
CA1-ETSAB-UPC (Spain) for funding this research. 
 

 

REFERENCES 
1. Barnard, H.; Dooley, A. N.; Areshian, G.; Gasparyan, B. and 

Faull, K. F. (2011). Chemical evidence for wine production 



PLEA2012 - 28th Conference, Opportunities, Limits & Needs Towards an environmentally responsible architecture Lima, Perú 7-9 November 2012 

 

around 4000 BCE in the Late Chalcolithic Near Eastern 

highlands. Journal of Archaeological Science, Volume 38, 

Issue 5: p. 977-984. 

2. Yravedra Soriano, M. J. (2003) Arquietctura y cultura del 

vino. Munilla-Lería. p.103. 

3. Ruiz Mata, D. In Blanco J. L. et al. (1995) Arqueología del 

vino. Los orígenes del vino en Occidente. Consejo regulador de 

las D.O. Jeréz-Xérès-Sherry y Manzanilla-Sanlúcar de  

Barrameda. p.157. 

4. arcspace.com. http://www.arcspace.com/architects/gehry/ 

riscal_winery2/riscal2.html 

5. Zaha Hadid Architects (2001-2006) R. Lopez De Heredia 

Wine Pavilion. http://www.zaha-hadid.com/design/r-lopez-de-

heredia-wine-pavilion/ 

6. Cohn, D. (2007) R. López de Heredia Viña Tondonia, Haro 

The Architectural Record, February 2007. http://archrecord. 

construction.com/projects/portfolio/archives/0702lopez.asp 

7. Bodega López de Heredia. http://www.lopezdeheredia.com/  

english/arquitectura/arquitectura.html 

8.Cohn, D. Bodegas Ysios. (2003) The Architectural Record, 

May 2003. http://archrecord.construction.com/projects/bts/ 

archives/industrialbuildings/BodegasYsios/overview.asp 

9. ARCSpace (2004) Santiago Calatrava. La Rioja. Bodegas 

Ysisos. http://www.arcspace.com/architects/calatrava/wine/ 

10. Serra, R and Coch, H. (1995) Arquitectura y energía 

natural. Edicions UPC. p.240. 

 

http://www.arcspace.com/architects/gehry/
http://www.lopezdeheredia.com/%20%20english/arquitectura/arquitectura.html
http://www.lopezdeheredia.com/%20%20english/arquitectura/arquitectura.html

