










































Editors
Luís Bragança
Manuel Pinheiro
Ricardo Mateus

PORTUGAL SB13
 CONTRIBUTION OF SUSTAINABLE BUILDING TO MEET EU 20-20-20 TARGETS

30 Oct > 1 Nov | 2013 | Guimarães | PORTUGAL



 

 

 

 

 

PORTUGAL SB13 

CONTRIBUTION OF SUSTAINABLE 
BUILDING TO MEET EU 20-20-20 TARGETS 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Organized by 

  Universidade do Minho  Instituto Superior Técnico
 

Partners 

 
 



 

 

 

 

 

PORTUGAL SB13 

CONTRIBUTION OF SUSTAINABLE 
BUILDING TO MEET EU 20-20-20 TARGETS 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Editors 

Luís Bragança 

Manuel Pinheiro 

Ricardo Mateus 



© 2013 The authors 

All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system,  
or transmitted, in any form or by any mean, without prior written permission from the Publisher. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

ISBN 978-989-96543-7-2 

 

Printed by Multicomp 

1st edition, October 2013 

Legal Dep. 365726/13 

 

LEGAL NOTICE 

The Publisher is not responsible for the use which might be made of the following information. 



Scientific Committee 

Albert Cuchí 
Universidad Politécnica Cataluña, Spain

Manuela Almeida 
Universidade do Minho, Portugal 

Aleksander Panek 
University of Warsaw, Poland 

Maria Teresa Barbosa 
Universidade Federal de Juiz de Fora, Brasil 

Alexander Passer 
Graz University of Technology Austria 

Marina Fumo 
University of Naples, Italy 

Andreas Rietz 
Fed. Inst. for Research on Building, Germany 

Maristela Gomes da Silva 
University of Espirito Santo, Brasil  

António Tadeu 
Universidade de Coimbra, Portugal 

Mat Santamouris 
University of Athens, Greece 

Appu Haapio 
VTT, Finland 

Miguel Amado 
Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Portugal 

Charles Kibert 
University of Florida, USA 

Natalie Eßig 
Hochschule München, Germany 

Christian Wetzel 
Calcon, Germany 

Nicolas Kerz 
Fed. Inst. for Research on Building, Germany 

Dimitrios Bikas 
University of Thessaloniki, Greece 

Nils Larsson 
iiSBE, Canada 

Dorota Chwieduk 
Institut Techniki Cieplenj, Poland 

Pekka Huovila 
VTT, Finland 

Eduardo Maldonado 
Universidade do Porto, Portugal 

Petr Hajék 
University of Prague, Czech Republic 

Emilio Mitre 
GBC España, Spain 

Raymond Cole 
University of British Columbia, Canada 

Fátima Farinha 
Universidade do Algarve, Portugal 

Ricardo Mateus 
Universidade do Minho, Portugal  

Fernando Branco 
Instituto Superior Técnico, Portugal 

Rogério Amoêda 
Green Lines Institue, Portugal 

Frank Schultmann 
University of Karlsruhe, Germany 

Ronal Rovers 
Zuyd University, The Netherlands  

Gerd Hauser 
Technical University of Munich, Germany 

Said Jalali 
Universidade do Minho, Portugal 

Helena Gervásio 
Universidade de Coimbra, Portugal 

Sungwoo Shin 
Hanyang University, Korea 

Hipólito de Sousa 
Universidade do Porto, Portugal 

Tarja Häkkinen 
VTT, Finland 

Jaume Avellaneda 
Universidad Politécnica Cataluña, Spain

Teresa Ponce Leão 
LNEG, Portugal

Jorge de Brito 
Instituto Superior Técnico, Portugal 

Tomas Luetzkendorf 
University of Karlsruhe, Germany 

Luís Bragança 
Universidade do Minho, Portugal 

Tom Woolley 
University of Central Lancanshire, UK 

Luís Simões da Silva 
Universidade de Coimbra, Portugal 

Vanessa Gomes 
Universidade Estadual de Campinas, Brasil

Manuel Correia Guedes 
Instituto Superior Técnico, Portugal 

Vasco Peixoto Freitas 
Universidade do Porto, Portugal 

Manuel Duarte Pinheiro 
Instituto Superior Técnico, Portugal 

Vítor Ferreira 
Universidade de Aveiro, Portugal 

 

vii



Contents 
 

Foreword 
Luís Bragança, Manuel Pinheiro, Ricardo Mateus 

Chapter 1: Nearly Zero Energy Buildings 
 

 
 
Cost optimal building renovation with a net zero energy target for the Portuguese 
single-family building stock built before 1960 3

Manuela Almeida, Marco Ferreira, Micael Pereira 
 

Zero-Energy-Buildings and their arrangement in Zero-Energy-Urban-Quarters in 
different climates: Derivation of design strategies based on climatic parameters, 
examples for building and urban quarter typologies and comparison with the existing 
ones 11

Udo Dietrich, Franz Kiehl, Liana Stoica 
 

The first phase of a zero emission concept for an office building in Norway 19
Torhildur Kristjansdottir, Sofie Mellegård, Tor Helge Dokka, Berit Time, 
Matthias Haase, Jens Tønnesen 

 
Assessing design practices towards nearly zero energy buildings 27

Patrícia Morais, Ana Tomé 
 

Cost optimality and nZEB target in the renovation of Portuguese building stock. 
Rainha Dona Leonor neighborhood case study 35

Manuela Almeida, Ana Rodrigues, Marco Ferreira 
 

Energy Performance of a Galician Hostel 43
Ruth Dominguez Sanchez, César Bedoya Frutos 

 
Monitoring of Indoor Climate of a Net Zero Energy Office in Flanders 51

Griet Verbeeck, Elke Meex 
 

The qualifications and professional competencies of architects on the energy 
efficiency of buildings. Are they prepared to embrace the 2020 targets? 59

Sílvia Fernandes, Rui Oliveira, Maria Isabel Abreu  

Chapter 2: Policies for Sustainable Construction 
 

Including sustainability into portfolio decisions: The example of the University of 
Vienna 69

Sigrid Niemeier, Harald Peterka 
 

 
 

ix



Inspection and Diagnosis: A contribution to modern buildings sustainability 75
Sara Amaral, Dulce Franco Henriques 

 
Climate change effect on freeze-thaw cycles in Nordic climate 83

Toni Pakkala, Jukka Lahdensivu, Arto Köliö 
 

Energy rating of windows for the cooling season: a proposal for Europe 91
Dimitrios Bikas, Katerina Tsikaloudaki, Konstantinos Laskos 

A Qualitative Assessment of the UK Green Deal: Enabling Energy Efficiency of 
Buildings by 2050 99

David Oloke 
 

Dividing indoor comfort limits by climate zones and describing it as a curve for the 
benefit of passive and low tech architecture design. 107

Gustavo Linhares de Siqueira, Udo Dietrich  
 

The Primary Energy Factors Play a Central Role in European 2020 Targets 
Achievement 113

Lorenzo Leoncini 
 

Sustainability in construction, between politics and economics. A comparison of the 
U.S. market and the Italian one. 121

Maria Antonia Barucco 
 

Changing Mindsets; Identifying the Need for a Paradigm Shift in Construction 
Education 129

Conor McManus, Garrett Keenaghan, Maurice Murphy 
 

Tomorrow’s sustainability: Devising a Framework for Sustainability Education of 
Future Engineers and Architects 137

Maria Olga Bernaldo, Gonzalo Fernandez-Sanchez, Ana Castillejo, Mª José 
Rodriguez-Largacha, Ana María Manzanero, Daniel Estévez, Maria Del 
Mar Cenalmor, Jesús Esteban 

 

Chapter 3: High Performance Sustainable Building Solutions 
 

Cost vs Benefits analysis in the implementation of sustainable construction principles 
in a residential building 145

Sérgio Martinho, Constança Rigueiro, Ricardo Mateus 
 

Water reuse for domestic consumption - A key element for environmental and 
economic sustainability 153

José Coimbra, Manuela Almeida 
 

Energy consumption and thermal comfort of a passive house built in Romania 161
Cristina Tanasa, Cristian Sabou, Daniel Dan, Valeriu Stoian 

 
Post Occupancy Evaluation of University Eco Residences: A Case Study of Student 
Accommodation at Lancaster, UK 167

Hasim Altan, Mohamed Refaee, Jitka Mohelnikova  
 
 

x



Computational modelling of the thermal behaviour of an ETFE cushion using IES 175
Eleni Dimitriadou, Andy Shea 

Natural fibre reinforced earth and lime based mortars 183
César Cardoso, Rute Eires, Aires Camões 

Rainwater Harvesting Systems in Buildings: Rapid Changes with Substantive 
Improvements 191

Armando Silva Afonso, Carla Pimentel Rodrigues 
 

The energy of water: An evaluation of direct electricity savings due to strategies of 
water preservation in a social housing compound 199

Antonio Girardi 
 

Comparison of costs of brick construction and concrete structure based on functional 
units 207

Soheyl Sazedj, António J. Morais, Said Jalali 
 

Sustainable Daylighting Design in Southern European Regions 213
António J. Santos 

 
Moisture buffering and latent heat effects in natural fibre insulation materials 221

Neal Holcroft, Andy Shea 
 

Potentialities of using PCM in residential buildings in Portugal 229
Olli Mustaparta, Sandra Silva, Dinis Leitão 

 
Home automation controller for a water-flow window 237

Luis J. Claros Marfil, J. Francisco Padial Molina, Vicente Zetola Vargas, 
Graciela Ovando Vacarezza, Juan Miguel Lirola Pérez, Benito Lauret 
Aguirregabiria 

 
Concept and International State of Building Commissioning Activitie’s 243

Filipe Silva, João Pedro Couto 
 

Sustainable Social Housing - The User Focus 251
Jan Johansson 

 
Tradition in Continuity: thermal monitoring in vernacular architecture of farmsteads 
from northeast Portuguese region of Trás-os-Montes 259

Joana Gonçalves, Ricardo Mateus, Teresa Ferreira, Jorge Fernandes 
 

The contribute of using vernacular materials and techniques for sustainable building 269
Jorge Fernandes, Ricardo Mateus, Luís Bragança 

 

Chapter 4: Design and Technologies for Energy Efficiency 

Urban Form and Daylighting: Examining daylighting conditions with regard to 
building block typologies 279

Dimitra Tsirigoti, Katerina Tsikaloudaki, Dimitrios Bikas 
 

 

xi



Lighting Research & Development aligned to the demands for lower energy usage 
combined with better quality and a more holistic building design 

287

Kevin Kelly, James Thomas Duff 
 

Energy and water use patterns in Portuguese secondary schools – main relationships. 
Seven school cases analysis. 295

Patricia Lourenço, Manuel Duarte Pinheiro, Teresa Heitor 
 

Parametric analysis of the energy demand in buildings with Passive House Standard 303
Meri Cvetkovska, Andrej Andreev, Strahinja Trpevski, Milos Knezevic 

 
Evaluating determinants of energy use in higher education buildings using artificial 
neural networks – an enhanced study 311

David Hawkins, Dejan Mumovic 
 

Energy efficiency of photovoltaic façade for different latitudes in Portugal 319
Helenice Maria Sacht, Luis Bragança, Manuela Almeida 

 
Bioclimatic buildings strategies for the climate of Araras city, São Paulo - Brazil 327

Juliana Nascimento, Helenice Maria Sacht, Luis Bragança 
 

Protocol of control for the model of building energetic efficiency in existing buildings 335
Ángel Rubio González 

 
Towards adaptive control systems: Bayesian models for energy efficiency 339

Roberta Ansuini, Albero Giretti, Massimo Lemma, Roberto Larghetti 
 

Sustainable Energy Management for Underground Stations: Potential Savings 
through Lighting Upgrade 347

Roberta Ansuini, Albero Giretti, Massimo Lemma 
 

Energy Assessment and Monitoring of Energy-Efficient House 355
Libor Šteffek, Petr Jelínek, Milan Ostrý 

 

Chapter 5: Innovative Construction Systems 
 

ECODOR: sustainable proportion for concrete sleeper 365
Maria Teresa Barbosa, Mariana Maia, José Castañon, Zelia Ludwig 

 
Technical solutions and industrialised construction systems for advanced sustainable 
buildings 371

Eugenio Arbizzani, Paolo Civiero  
 

A project contribution to the development of sustainable multi-storey timber 
buildings 379

Catarina Silva, Jorge Branco, Paulo Lourenço 
 

ARGAD: High Performance Mortar 387
Maria Teresa Barbosa, White Santos 

 
 

xii



Lightweight steel framed construction system 395
Cláudio Martins, Paulo Santos, Luís Simões Da Silva 

Assessment and monitoring of a student residential building using an innovative 
execution solution 403

Pedro Andrade, Safira Monteiro, Helena Gervásio, Milan Veljkovic 
 

Chapter 6: Building Sustainability Assessment Tools 
 

Space design quality and its importance to sustainable construction: the case of 
hospital buildings 413

Maria de Fátima Castro, Ricardo Mateus, Luís Bragança 
 

The Development of Building Materials Embodied Greenhouse gases Assessment 
System (SUSB-BEGAS) for Supporting the Green Building Certification System (G-
SEED) in Korea 421

Sungwoo Shin, Seungjun Roh, Sungho Tae 
 

Can sustainability rating systems fairly assess construction solutions under 
assessment? 427

Joana Andrade, Luís Bragança 
 

Defining best practices in Sustainable Urban Regeneration projects 435
Guilherme Castanheira, Luís Bragança, Ricardo Mateus 

 
An investigation of Indicators, Metrics, and Methods Used to Measure and Quantify 
Green Buildings’ Occupancy and Usage 443

Mohamed Ouf, Mohamed Issa, Shauna Mallory-Hill 
 

From lighthouse projects to sustainable building stock 451
Christian Wetzel, Rosemarie Dressel 

 
Modelling Moisture and Site-Related Information for Sustainable Buildings 457

Christina Giarma, Dimitris Kotzinos 
 

Comparison of two sustainable assessment tools on a passive office in Flanders 465
Elke Meex, Griet Verbeeck 

 
Spatial Quality Assessments for Building Performance Tools in Energy Renovation 473

Fernanda Pacheco, Annemie Wyckmans 
 

AQUA certification system and the design of buildings 481
Maria Aparecida Hippert, Luiz Felipe Dutra Caldeira 

 
The implicit definition of ‘utility’ in the sustainable building assessment methods 489

Joan Puyo Collet, Albert Cuchí Burgos 
 

A Review of Research Investigating Indoor Environmental Quality in Green 
Buildings 497

Ahmed Radwan, Mohamed Issa, Shauna Mallory-Hill 

  

xiii



Sustainable Construction Key Indicators 505
Catarina Araújo, Luís Bragança, Manuela Almeida 

 

Chapter 7: Renovation and Retrofitting 
 

Renovation project / sustainable rehabilitation centre headquarters district of Porto - 
Portugal. 515

Lurdes Duarte, Luís Narciso, Luis Calixto 
 

Strategies for regeneration of widespread building heritage in Italy 523
Paola Piermattei 

 
Environmental Impacts of Elementary School Building Renovation - Comparative 
Studies 531

Jiri Sedlák, Zuzana Stránská, Karel Struhala, Petr Jelínek 
 

Regenerative Universities? The role of Universities in Urban Regeneration Strategies 539
Duarte Marques Nunes, Ana Tomé, Manuel Duarte Pinheiro 

 
The integration of sustainable solutions in Portuguese old building architecture 547

Rui Oliveira, Maria Isabel Abreu, Jorge Lopes 
 

The Collective Self-Organized (CSO) housing approach: improving the quality of life 
towards nearly zero energy strategies 555

Silvia Brunoro 
 

Technologies, strategies and instruments for energy retrofitting of historic cities 565
Carola Clemente, Federica Cerroni, Paolo Civiero, Paola Piermattei, Mauro 
Corsetti, Pietro Mencagli, Leonardo Giannini 

 
The inhabitable greenhouse 573

Mathilde Petri, Mette Rasmussen 
 

Criteria for thermal rehabilitation of hotels in Gran Canaria 581
Maria Eugenia Armas Cabrera, Jaume Avellaneda Diaz-Grande 

 
Optimization of the sustainability during the refurbishment operation of a residential 
building 589

Isabel Mateus, Ricardo Mateus, Sandra Monteiro da Silva 
 

Thermal Rehabilitation for Higher Comfort Conditions and Energy Efficient 
Buildings 597

Mihai Cinca, Olga Bancea 
 

Energy efficient envelope for renovation of terraced housing 605
Andrea Boeri, Jacopo Gaspari, Danila Longo 

 

 
 

xiv



Chapter 8: Eco-Efficient Materials and Technologies 

Using MCDA to Select Refurbishment Solutions to Improve Buildings IEQ 615
Sandra Silva, Manuela Almeida 

 
Which architecture has proven to be successfully climate responsive? Learning from 
traditional architecture by looking at strategies for resource efficient and climate 
responsive constructions 623

Sonja Schelbach, Udo Dietrich 
 

Research into natural bio-based insulation for mainstream construction 631
Ceri Loxton, Elie Mansour, Robert Elias 

 
Bioclimatic solutions existing in vernacular architecture - rehabilitation techniques 639

Débora Ferreira, Eduarda Luso, Sílvia Fernandes, Jorge Vaz, Carlos 
Moreno, Rafael Correia 

 
Overview of Technological Industrialized Solutions for Temporary Facilities in 
Construction Sites 647

Christine Miranda Dias, Sheyla Mara Baptista Serra 
 

Chapter 9: Urban Regeneration 
 

Science of complexity for sustainable and resilient urban transformation 659
Serge Salat 

 
Sustainable tall building and vertical compact city 677

Sung Woo Shin 
 

Solar urban planning to the EU 20-20-20 targets 697
Miguel Amado, Pedro Rodrigues, Francesca Poggi, João Freitas 

 
Power of a Million Small 709

Pedro Faria 
 

Urban Regeneration. Developing strong sustainable urban design perspectives 719
Duarte Marques Nunes, Ana Tomé, Manuel Duarte Pinheiro 

 
Nearly zero energy applied to urban zones – Main Challenges and Perspectives 727

Giorgio Borlin, Manuel Duarte Pinheiro, Maria Beatriz Marques Condessa 
 

ICT supporting energy efficiency improvements in urban and rural neighbourhoods 735
Mari Sepponen, Martine Tommis 

 
Monitoring and Evaluation of urban regeneration processes. The case of Cova da 
Moura. 743

Ana Valente 
 

How to address sustainability at the city level 751
José Amarilio Barbosa, Luís Bragança, Ricardo Mateus 

 

xv



Chapter 10: Design for Life Cycle and Reuse 
 

Building connections and Material recovery: from deductive to inductive approach 763
Claudia Escaleira, Rogério Amoêda, Paulo Cruz 

 
 
Against Over-materialization. Architecture of Negatonnes 771

Leszek Świątek 
 

Opportunities and obstacles of implementing transformable architecture 775
Mieke Vandenbroucke, Wim Debacker, Niels De Temmerman, Anne Paduart 

 
Multiple design approaches to transformable building: construction typologies 783

Waldo Galle, Niels De Temmerman 
 

Condition monitoring and durability assessment of straw bale construction 791
Andrew Thomson, Pete Walker 

 
Innovative Sustainable Architecture: constructive processes and materials 799

Mariana Pinto, Pedro Henriques 
 

Chapter 11: LCA of sustainable materials and technologies 
 

Carbon footprint impact of balcony glazing in Nordic climate 809
Kimmo Hilliaho, Jukka Lahdensivu 

 
Assessment of carbon footprint of laminated veneer lumber elements in a six story 
housing – comparison to a steel and concrete solution 817

Lars Gunnar F. Tellnes, Torhildur Fjola Kristjansdottir, Magnus Kron, 
Sigurd Eide 

 
Designing Model House Based on the Cradle-To-Cradle Methodology 825

Inês Ramalhete, Miguel Amado 
 

LCA “from cradle-to-cradle” of energy-related building assemblies: Promoting eco-
efficient materials 837

José Dinis Silvestre, Jorge de Brito, Manuel Duarte Pinheiro 
 

Reducing fossil based energy consumption and CO2 emissions in the construction 
sector 847

Pedro Henriques, Álvaro Pereira 

Life Cycle Assessment of an ETICS system composed of a natural insulation 
material: a case study of a system using an insulation cork board (ICB) 855

Marta Matos, Liliana Soares, Luis Silva, Pedro Sequeira, Joaquim Carvalho 

 

 

 
 

xvi



Chapter 12: Thematic Session - Smart Regions: which strategies? 

Energy Performance Certificate: A valuable tools for buiding-to.grid interaction? 865
Marta Oliveira Panão, Hélder Gonçalves 

 
Smart battery management systems: towards an efficient integration of Electrical 
Energy Storage Systems in Smart Regions 871

António Gano, Hugo Silva, João Correia, Maria Martins 
 

The NetZEBs in the near Future. Overview of definitions and guidelines 
towardsexisting plans for increasing nZEBs 879

Laura Aelenei, Hélder Gonçalves, Daniel Aelenei 
 

Nudging Residential Consumers to Save and/or Defer Energy Consumption 887
Lucy Ting, Hélder Leite, Luís Barreira 

 
Enabling Self-Healing Strategies in a Smart Grid Context 893

Hélder Leite, Luís Moreira, Nuno Silva 
 

Value materials and energy flow to toward energy independence: agro-forest and 
urban biorefineries 897

João Nunes 

 

xvii



 
1 THE SUSTAINABILITY AND THE LIMITATION OF THE AVAILABLE MATERIAL 
FLOWS 
1.1 Sustainability: our point of view   
The spreading of the use of the word sustainable in all the fields, from scientific literature to the 
daily speech, as well as its different interpretations, nearly require, in a research as this one, pay 
a minimum attention to establish the point of view adopted to avoid mistakes. Such as J. M 
Naredo (Naredo & Valero Capilla 1999) has explained, the word ‘sustainable’ appeared related 
with the environmental worries as an adjective of the idea of the ‘sustainable development’. In 
fact ‘sustainable’ was not a strange word for economists devoted to development, because they 
have used this adjective to talk about the ‘self-sustained growth’. For this reason it was easily 
acceptable. But this notion have a high degree of uncertainty because it links in a single expres-
sión the worry about the economic development, normally defined in the economics file as 
growth of the production in monetary terms, with the intention to maintain the health of the eco-
systems, without specifying how these would be compatible, which has caused a rhetorical use. 
In fact, the definition in the Brundtland report (Comissió Mundial sobre el Medi Ambient 1987, 
p. 41), became canonical, keeps this ambiguity. However, the original worry for the physical vi-
ability of the human systems has brought some authors to go more deeply into the research of 
the content of the sustainability notion. 

«The greater part of the current lack of definition comes from the insistence of reconciling the 
economic growth (or development) with the idea of sustainability, when each of these aspects 
are referred to different levels of abstraction and reasoning systems». The notions of economic 
growth –and development– are based on the usual idea of economic system and work with the 
corresponding units of the homogeneous monetary aggregates of ‘production’ and their deri-
vated units. However, the worry for the sustainability is based on the singular and heterogene-
ous physical processes (Naredo & Valero Capilla 1999, p. 60).  

The implicit definition of ‘utility’ in the sustainable building 
assessment methods. 

J. Puyo Collet  
Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya, Department of Architectural Technology I (Vallès School of 
Architecture), Sant Cugat del Vallès, Spain 
joan.puyo@upc.edu 

A. Cuchí Burgos 
Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya, Department of Architectural Technology I (Vallès School of 
Architecture), Sant Cugat del Vallès, Spain 
alberto.cuchí@upc.edu 

ABSTRACT: The research is focused on the concept of ‘utility’ regarding the sustainable build-
ing assessment methods. The study presented is part of a wider research that analyses the sus-
tainable building assessment methods regarding the challenge of sustainability. Keeping in mind 
that the condition of sustainability is the material cycles closure, we highlight the place that 
‘utility’ occupies in the measure of the sustainability. We explore how the standards of LCA and 
sustainable building assessment deal with this question. Then we point out the impossibility of 
an objective measurement of utility and the fact that the methodologies adopt a conventional 
definition of this concept. Finally we contribute a formulation that has to allow us, in future 
works, analysing the definition of utility adopted by the different methodologies and the corre-
sponding implicit judgment values. 

Chapter 6 - Building Sustainability Assessment Tools

489



All the organisms, populations and ecosystems of the earth are alive thanks to the continuous 
degradation of the matter and energy involved in the material cycles. But as the earth has finite 
material resources, the maintenance of the life is only viable thanks to the fact that the biosphere 
is an open system which receives a continuous energetic flow from the sun which allows coun-
teracting the degradation. Whereas the idea of the economic system is understood as a closed 
system and suppose that the flow of the investment can counteract the deterioration caused on 
its obtaining, following the model of a continuous movement machine. The conclusions are that 
as the opening of the system and the degradation of the matter, very important questions in the 
description of the biosphere, do not have reflection in the idea of the economic system, it is not 
possible, from this point of view, deal with the sustainability in a coherent way. And, on the 
other hand, that the sustainability can be defined as the condition of the closure of material cy-
cles, which has as a corollary the need of basing all the processes on the solar energy flow. This 
last point of view, designed as a strong sustainability, is the one used here (Naredo & Valero 
Capilla 1999, p. 64). 

Some authors have thought that the economic growth and the sustainability can be compati-
ble through the idea of the decoupling. This idea supposes that even though the monetary aggre-
gates which represent the production of the wealth carry on growing, the material support of this 
production can be reduced thanks to technological changes. Other authors, however, have dem-
onstrated in an empirical way and with recent data the falseness of this hypothesis, showing that 
the absolute decoupling –the absolute reduction of troughput material at a global level– is just 
«a myth» (Jackson 2009, p. 67-86, cap. 5). 

1.2 Material cycles and flows 
Material cycles have been on earth since its origin and shaped life, while life deeply changed 
these cycles. This coevolution is the one that has determined the conditions of the environment 
which we all depend on. The deep and fast modification of the material cycles established like 
this supposes, from the point of view of the life and specifically the human life, the degradation 
of the environment. In fact, as R. Margalef points out (Margalef 1982, p. 325;Margalef 1992, p. 
88) any pollution problem can be described as an illness of the transport of the ecosystems and 
the first step for the solution is recognize the disturbed cycle.  

From a global perspective, the movement of materials in the biosphere appears as a cycle, in 
other words, it is like a journey of some materials tracing wide or short ways through the hydro-
sphere, the lithosphere, the atmosphere, or through their limits, and in a determined speed. From 
the point of view of a particular system, however, it is more useful to pay attention how this 
movement of materials crosses the borders of the delimited system and then represent it as a 
flow. Thus, when the sustainability of a system is considered, we can simply take into account if 
the inflows and outflows are compatible with the corresponding natural cycles. In this way we 
are taking into account the compatibility with the rest of the ecosystem.  

All the living being are situated in any point of the material cycles in order to obtain a flow of 
utile resources for its life, either to use on its living structure or on external structures, which al-
low a higher control of the material cycles. If the human being is different from the rest of the 
living beings is because of the big proportion of the resources which uses for the external struc-
tures in comparison with its living structure (Margalef 1982, p. 307;Margalef 1991, p. 250). The 
increase of these structures has supposed an immoderate interference in the material cycles and 
the fast transformation of the environment, putting in danger the bases of its own existence. The 
evidences of different processes of environmental damages, exposed by the scientific commu-
nity, are not more than concretions of the perturbation of each of the material cycles. It explains, 
therefore, the need of the establishment of limits of the flows involved in all the human proc-
esses, in each of the relevant areas from the point of view of each material cycle. Without going 
into detail about the discussion of the establishment of these particular limits, it is necessary to 
signal that it is from the best scientific knowledge of the moment that it is necessary to establish 
them. In the same way, as it has been done in concrete cases, it is necessary to consider the evo-
lution of the limitations of the flows in the time, establishing target reduction scenarios 
(Zimmermann et al. 2005). In conclusion, the condition of sustainability supposes the control of 
the material flows of the human technical processes. 

 

Portugal SB13 - Contribution of Sustainable Building to Meet EU 20-20-20 Targets

490



2 THE SUSTAINABILITY IN THE PARTICULAR PROCESSES 
2.1 Consequences of the sustainability for the particular processes 
It has been usual to talk about the sustainability as an attribute of an object, whether it is a sheet 
of paper, a building or a city. The indiscriminate use of the adjective ‘sustainable’, mentioned 
above (sect. 1.1), supposes that the word is used to highlight a pretended or real paid attention in 
environmental questions, in a particular process, in comparison to the usual practise. But this 
use is too generic and a little bit useful to deal with the environmental problems. In order to es-
tablish a more restrictive and operative use of the word ‘sustainable’ applied to any particular 
process –the particular sustainability– is necessary to establish the relation with the definition of 
general sustainability. General sustainability can be defined as the limitation of the total flows 
of a substance in the relevant area; and the ‘relevant area’ as the biospheric area involved in the 
material cycle in question, for example the local, regional, global field or the hydrographic ba-
sin,.... Thus, for example, the relevant area for the liquid polluting substances can be water 
down of a hydrographic basin and for GEH substances the global field. The definition of par-
ticular sustainability has to be coherent with the condition of general sustainability.  
   The condition of general sustainability, as we have said, is the closure of the material cycles, 
which can be expressed for each resource and emission as a total limit flow. 

 (1) 
Where F = total flow; and Flim = total limit flow. 
The total flow is the sum of the corresponding flows to the particular processes in the relevant 
area. 

∑  (2) 
Where fi = particular flow ith. 
The other side of a particular process, and that justifies it, is the satisfaction of needs through 

the utility. And utility is always provided by a physical support that we can call satisfier (Max-
Neef et al. 1994) and that constitutes the material flows so-called from the point of view of eco-
nomics as goods, either economic or free. For the moment we will not talk about the question of 
the definition of necessity and utility, just say that the utility cancels the need, and with the or-
dinary idea it will be enough. What interests us, in the first place, is that a particular process 
generates a satisfier able to contribute utility, so the utility is a dependent magnitude of the satis-
fier: u(s). In this expression s has to be understood as a qualitative variable: a unit of a concrete 
type of satisfier and u as a utility that we will suppose that is a measurable magnitude. On the 
other hand, a particular process generates a flow of the studied matter in such a way that an in-
tensity of flow in respect of the utility can be defined, and it can be called ecological cost –
inverse magnitude of the ecological efficiency. 

 ;        (3) 
Where ci = ecological cost; and u(si) = utility of a unit of the satisfier ith. 
Substituting the expression of the particular flow (3) in the expression of the total flow (2) we 

have: 
∑  (4) 

that indicates that the total flow of a material, produced with the objective of contributing 
utility, depends on the chosen satisfier and on the ecological cost tied to this satisfier. If now we 
substitute (4) to the condition of general sustainability (1), we obtain 

∑ í  (5) 

that shows that the condition of general sustainability limits the quantity of utility and/or the 
type (i) and quantity (n) of the satisfiers. 
 The limitation of resources is imperative since the point of view of the sustainability (Jackson 
2009), above and beyond the difficulties that we might have to determine it exactly, and there-

Chapter 6 - Building Sustainability Assessment Tools

491



fore the right-hand member can be considered theoretically fixed. Therefore, if we want to deal 
with the question of the satisfaction of the human need, we have to pay attention to the factors 
of the left-hand member. A usual way and very necessary to address the subject is to modify the 
satisfiers in such a manner that a satisfier provides the same utility with less ecological cost: it is 
the way of the efficiency through the technological evolution. Another way to address the effi-
ciency is to pay attention to the relation between the satisfiers and the contribution of utilities, 
ensuring that we make the most of all the potential contribution of utilities of a satisfier: it is the 
way of the efficiency in the use of the resources –that is the grandmother's wisdom: ‘turn off the 
light when you go out of the room’. This last treatment is related to the technology but overlaps 
the questions of behaviour and cultural factors. There is also the possibility to limit the con-
sumption (n). But above and beyond the dimension of the satisfier, as showed in the left-hand 
member, there is the dimension of the utility –and its opposite: the need– and we have to re-
member that it has been left without defining and often remain defined implicitly and that is the 
factor that we deal with in this research. 

2.2 Indicators 
The structure of the methods of assessment and rating of the building is composed by a group of 
indicators. It is important to deal with this concept of indicator and some aspects of the classifi-
cation of these. The review of the literature gives us some definitions of ‘indicator’ (Bossel et 
al. 1999;Castro Bonaño & Salvo Tierra 2001;OECD.Group on Environmental Performance 
1993) mentioned in (Monterotti 2013, p. 73) (Agència Europea del Medi Ambient 
1998;Malmqvist & Glaumann 2006). All the definitions incorporate the following aspects: it is 
a value that describes a more complex reality than its same magnitude and therefore synthesize 
the information. To highlight some aspects of the content of the term ‘indicator’, we are inter-
ested in telling the following definition, which is both descriptive, in the sense that takes into 
account the characteristics of what usually is understood as indicator, and normative, in the 
sense that the use that we do of the concept will be adjusted to this definition. An indicator is a –
quantitative or qualitative– variable that is used for having a sufficient degree of correlation 
with one or different variables that determine the state of a system, which is the object of our in-
terest. The fact that an indicator or a group are used instead of the group of variables that define 
the system is related to fundamental questions, as epistemological questions connected with the 
reality that we study, or with practical questions, as availability of data. In any event, a variable 
is never itself an indicator but it is used as an indicator when it is considered useful to do so. 
   The indicators that are part of the methods of sustainable building rating systems that interest 
us refer to the input and output flows of the system that is a building, with the limits that the 
methodology has marked for this system. If one describes the different causal steps that go since 
a particular process to the effects on the environment, a cause-effect chain can be described 
(Eriksson et al. 2005). The indicators, then, can be classified, as the place that occupy in this 
chain, with different names as state indicators, pressure indicators, response indicators,... (Bell 
& Morse 2012, p. 28) One can also form models of indicators choosing different points of the 
chain and defining in each an indicator. It is the case of the DPSIR model, Driving force (D), 
emissions to Pressure (P), midpoint changes to State (S) and end-point problems to Impact (I) of 
the European Agency of the Environment (Malmqvist & Glaumann 2006, p. 324). In any case, 
what interests us is that the indicator defined always has a causal connection, more or less close, 
to a flow generated by the process. 
   The other characteristic of the indicators used by the sustainable building rating systems is 
that always have to refer to what justifies the generation of a flow, in other words, the utility. 
This reference to the purpose is what makes possible the comparison between different cases 
and can let establish a measure of the sustainability. This question refers both to the field of the 
building sustainability assessment and to the most general field of the LCA methodology. In 
these two fields an effort of systematisation has been recently done through the formulation of 
standards, and therefore we are interested in studying how they deal with the question. 

Portugal SB13 - Contribution of Sustainable Building to Meet EU 20-20-20 Targets

492



2.3 The ‘functional unit’ and the ‘functional equivalent’ 
The UNE-EN ISO 1040:2006 and UNE-EN 1044:2006 standardise the LCA methodology. As it 
is established there, when a LCA of a product or service –i.e. of any process– is carried out it is 
done relatively to a unit of product designated as a ‘functional unit’. «A functional unit is a 
measure of the performance of the functional outputs of the product system. The primary pur-
pose of a functional unit is to provide a reference to which the inputs and outputs are related. 
This reference is necessary to ensure comparability of LCA results» (AENOR 2006a, p. 20). 
What is identified as a functional unit, therefore, is not necessarily a quantity of individual 
product but the quantity of a function identified that provides. It is necessary to highlight that 
this ‘function’ points out to the variable utility that we have defined above (sect. 2.1) 
 The standardisation of the building sustainability assessment is carried out in the set of stan-
dards UNE-EN 15643:2012. In that case we see that, in spite of the building sustainability 
evaluation supposes an analogous process to the LCA, here the concept of functional unit is not 
used but the ‘functional equivalent’, which is defined like this: «Quantified functional require-
ments and/or technical requirements for a building or an assembled system (part of works) for 
use as a basis for comparison» (AENOR 2011, p. 12). The concepts of functional unit and func-
tional equivalent occupy the same place in each of the corresponding contexts. The relevant dif-
ference is that while in the first case a basic quantity of function or utility is isolated, in the sec-
ond case a complete description of the types and level of corresponding utility to the process 
studied is done. We have to suppose that the different approach that the authors of the two stan-
dards assume, in each of the contexts, answers to supported reasons. We have to suppose that 
the difference is justified by the complexity of the utility that provides a building: the habitabil-
ity. 
    In the LCA in general, when the comparison between two alternatives of product is treated, 
what is known as a ‘comparative assertion’, there is just the problem that one must to refer to 
the same functional unit of reference. In the same way, in the case of the assessment of the 
building, we will not find any problem in comparing two alternative projects of the same build-
ing that fulfil with the established functional equivalent. The problem of the reference to the 
utility appears when one wants to develop a measure of the sustainability of the building for any 
building. And it is necessary to remember at this point that the possibility to develop a measure 
of the sustainability of particular processes depends on the capacity of being applied in a general 
way (see equations (1) and (2)). In this case, the functional equivalent rarely coincides and 
therefore it is unavoidable a reference to the utility that allows not only the comparison between 
buildings –relative measure– but also the reference to the total flows that appears in the condi-
tion of sustainability. 
    When a methodology is formulated for a sustainable building rating system, it is obligated to 
define this reference to the utility. In fact, the indicators used in these methodologies, as we say 
in the section 2.2, always are a particular type: a quotient between an indicator and the unit of 
the defined habitability –operation that usually receives the name of ‘normalisation’ (Cole 1999, 
p. 8). The question that we set out in this research is to systematise the analysis of the definition 
of the unit of habitability used to let us analyse, in the future, the implicit judgment values in the 
chosen definition. 

2.4 The definition of ‘need’ and ‘utility’ 
In the section 2.1 we have not deeply talked about the symmetrical concepts of necessity and 
utility and we just said that the needs were cancelled by the utilities provided by the satisfiers. 
The development of the ideas has placed ‘utility’, and the possibility to measure it, as a central 
concept of the research, and therefore it is necessary to analyse it with more attention. In order 
to consider the question, we can go to the field of economics that has dealt deeply with it. The 
birth of economics was based in the study of the creation of wealth. Wealth was defined as all 
those objects that «are necessary, useful and pleasant to the human being» (Naredo 1987, p. 
117). This link between wealth –as a production– and utility, what satisfies people, is the moral 
justification of the efforts for the increase of the production as well as for the study of the condi-
tions that make this increase possible. This fact is what brought to the study of the utility and the 
reason why big efforts were done in order to define it as a measurable magnitude. However, as 

Chapter 6 - Building Sustainability Assessment Tools

493



J. M. Naredo shows, the idea of the measurability of the utility, either in cardinal or ordinal 
terms, was an illusion (Naredo 1987, esp. cap. 20). 
 In fact the impossibility of a strict definition and the quantification of the utility depend on 
the lack of definition of the concept of necessity. «As other concepts and words coming from 
the evolution of the human thought, the notion of necessity has become part of the common lan-
guage, and even to the social sciences language, without defining its sctrict meaning: their limits 
are not exactly pointed out neither what is considered to extend or cut off them». This impossi-
bility is determined by the fact that the needs are based on the human appetite and these depend 
on their social and ideological context. This is why it is not «possible to specify these limits 
through a fractional analytic effort which finally results in the formulation of a really objective 
theory of human needs» (Naredo 1987, p. 53-54).  
 Keeping references contributed in mind to justify the impossibility to work with a definition 
and an objective quantification of the utility. On the other band, the application of the condition 
of sustainability to the particular processes has brought us to establish the need to measure the 
utility, as the magnitude that justifies the allocation of resources. And in the concrete field of the 
sustainable building rating systems we have also seen the need to establish a unit of reference 
that defines and quantifies the habitability. The solution depend on understand that if we want to 
establish a measure of the sustainability of particular processes, we have to do a conventional 
definition and recognise that this definition will be based on a subjective value judgment. And 
we have to realise that all the sustainable building rating systems give a definition of this type 
and therefore they are based on a value judgment. 

3 FORMULATION OF THE HABITABILITY FOR AN ANALYSIS 

Having settled down the question of the utility of reference, we set out the notation and the 
methodology that will be useful –in future works– to analyse the definitions used by different 
methods or the definitions that are possible to use. This analysis will let us show the judgment 
values that are behind the use of the different definitions of utility used. 
  We have already commented that a need can be satisfied with different satisfiers and we have 
put aside the election of satisfier to focus on the question of utility. Suppose a need, a satisfier 
already selected, the particular process to obtain the satisfier and one of the flows that generates 
this process. We can conceive the satisfier in two parts. The first one is the detailed definition of 
all the physical conditions that the satisfier provides and we can express as a physical model 
(function σ). In the equation (3) we expressed the ecological cost as the quotient between the 
flow and the quantity of utility. But as we have seen in section 2.4 it does not have any sense to 
take the utility as an objectively measurable magnitude. Being realistic, we can substitute the 
expression of the ecological cost for a new one that has as a denominator the conditions of the 
satisfier, i.e. (σ), and we obtain: 

 (6) 
Where cs = ecological cost of the satisfier; f = material flow; and σ = conditions of the satis-

fier. 
The second part that defines the satisfier, therefore, is the defined environmental cost (cs). So 

we have that the flow can be expressed as the product of the two expressions that define the 
satisfier: the cost and the conditions. And at the same time we can develop the σ function, usu-
ally as a product of different factors: 

       …         (7) 
The (f) flow is an indicator that does not comply with the condition that we established for an 

indicator of a sustainable building rating system, which is being relative to a unit of reference of 
the utility (sect. 2.2). This condition is the one that would allow the comparison between differ-
ent buildings (sect. 2.3). It is whereas a total flow of the analysed process, relative to the ‘func-
tional equivalent’. Define a conventional utility of reference means that some factors of the 
conditions of the satisfier (αi) have to be designed as legitimate representatives of the concept of 
utility.  

Portugal SB13 - Contribution of Sustainable Building to Meet EU 20-20-20 Targets

494



.
 …  

   …       (8) 

So the indicator of sustainability is defined as the quotient between the flow and these factors, 
which can be called ‘defined utility’ (u*). On the other hand, the methodology of qualification, 
because of the condition of sustainability, will have to establish a restriction of this indicator, as 
a limit of the flow. In spite of not being the object of this research, we point out that some au-
thors have worked in order to formulate methodologies to relate general limits and particular 
limits of resources (Zimmermann et al. 2005). 

.
 

   …  í   (9) 
Where u* = defined utility; and  flim = assigned flow limit. 
Having this last expression obtained, we can describe the meaning of each part. The indicator 

will be subjected to a restriction (≤ flim). The defined utility (u*) can be understood as what justi-
fies the allocation of resources, in the sense that an increase of (u*) allows an increase of (f) 
without the indicator varies, and therefore receiving the same rate. On the other hand, all the 
factors of the right-hand member, either the environmental cost of the satisfier and the rest of 
the factors of the conditions of the satisfier that have not been considered as a legitimate utility, 
became subjected to the restriction and its increase supposes the proportional increase of the in-
dicator, giving a more unfavourable rate.  

To deal with the analysis of the definition of utility used for a method, therefore, the devel-
opment and the notation contributed can be used, isolating the defined utility and studying the 
factors included in this definition and then, we can study the implicit judgment values in the 
used definition of utility. 

4 CONCLUSIONS 

The condition of sustainability supposes the limitation of the available resources and, on the 
other hand, it involves the concept of utility that can be understood as the purpose that legiti-
mates the allocation of resources. In spite of the centrality of the concept of utility for the sus-
tainability, it is not possible to make an objective and measurable definition. That is why the 
sustainable building rating methods are doomed to use any conventional definition of ‘utility’ of 
the buildings or ‘habitability’ –often in an implicit way. With the aim of analyse the definitions 
of utility that the methodologies use we have developed, in this study, a theoretical framework 
and a formulation showing the factors that are considered as legitimate representatives of the 
utility, and the other ones that are submitted to restriction. The fact that the methods do not ex-
plain this definition is a factor of lack of transparency for the comparison of their results. 

The theoretical framework and the formulation contributed let us, from now, analyse rigor-
ously the definition of habitability used by the methodologies. It also let us uses the comparative 
analysis and reflect on possible alternative definitions. At the same time, this analysis will be 
useful to show the implicit judgment values in the definitions of utility used. 

REFERENCES 

AENOR 2006a. UNE-EN ISO 14040:2006, Gestion ambiental. Análisis del ciclo de vida. Principios y 
marco de referencia. Madrid: AENOR. 

AENOR 2011. UNE-EN 15643-1:2011, Sostenibilidad en la construcción. Evaluación de la 
sostenibilidad de los edficios. Parte 1: Marco general. Madrid: AENOR. 

Agència Europea del Medi Ambient 1998. Medio ambiente en Europa: el informe Dobris. Luxemburg i 
Madrid: Oficina de Publicaciones Oficiales de las Comunidades Europeas; Ministerio de Medio 
Ambiente. 

Bell, S. & Morse, S. 2012. Sustainability Indicators: Measuring the Immeasurable? 2a ed. London: 
Taylor & Francis. 

Chapter 6 - Building Sustainability Assessment Tools

495



Bossel, H.; International Institute for Sustainable Development & Balaton Group 1999. Indicators for 
Sustainable Development: Theory, Method, Applications: a Report to the Balaton Group.: 
International Institute for Sustainable Development. 

Castro Bonaño, J. M. & Salvo Tierra, E. 2001. Bases para un sistema de indicadores de medio ambiente 
urbano en Andalucía: experiencias internacionales en la medición de la sostenibilidad en las 
ciudades.: Junta de Andalucía; Consejería de Medio Ambiente. 

Cole, R. J. 1999. Building Environmental Assessment Methodes: Clarifying Intentions. Building 
Research & Information, 27(4/5):230-246. 

Comissió Mundial sobre el Medi Ambient 1987. Our common future. Oxford: Oxford University. 
Eriksson, O.; Glaumann, M. & Assefa, G. 2005. Life cycle impact assessment. A damage-based 

weighting method for environmental impacts.In SB05 Tokyo: Action for Sustainability - The 2005 
World Sustainable Building Conference in Tokyo, Japan, 27 - 29 September 2005. Tòquio: in-house 
publishing. 

Jackson, T. 2009. Prosperity without Growth: Economics for a Finite Planet. London: Earthscan. 
Malmqvist, T. & Glaumann, M. 2006. Selecting problem-related environmental indicators for housing 

management. Building Research & Information, 34(4):321-333. 
Margalef, R. 1982. La teoría ecológica y la predicción en el estudio de la interacción entre el hombre y el 

resto de la biosfera. In: Sioli,H. (ed.)  Ecología y protección de la naturaleza: conclusiones 
internacionales. Barcelona: Blume. 

Margalef, R. 1991. Teoría de los sistemas ecológicos. Barcelona: Publicacions de la Universitat de 
Barcelona. 

Margalef, R. 1992. Planeta azul, planeta verde. Barcelona: Prensa Científica. 
Max-Neef, M. A.; Elizalde, A. & Hopenhayn, M. 1994. Desarrollo a escala humana: conceptos, 

aplicaciones y algunas reflexiones. Barcelona: Icaria. 
Monterotti, C. 2013. Análisis y propuestas sobre la contribución de las herramientas de evaluación de la 

sostenibilidad de los edificios a su eficiencia ambiental. Cuchí,A. (dir.). Tesi doctoral, Universitat 
Politècnica de Catalunya, Depàrtament de Construccions Arquitectòniques I, [Departament 
Construcccions Arquitectòniques I, ETSAV]. 

Naredo, J. M. 1987. La economía en evolución: Historia y perspectivas de las categorías básicas del 
pensamiento económico. Madrid: Siglo veintiuno, Ministerio de Economía y Hacienda, Secretaría de 
Estado de Comercio. 

Naredo, J. M. & Valero Capilla, A. 1999. Desarrollo económico y deterioro ecológico. Madrid: 
Fundación Argentaria. 

OECD.Group on Environmental Performance 1993. OECD Core Set of Indicators for Environmental 
Performance Reviews: A Synthesis Report.: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 
Development. 

Zimmermann, M.; Althaus, H. J. & Haas, A. 2005. Benchmarks for sustainable construction - A 
contribution to develop a standard. Energy and Buildings, 37(11):1147-1157. 

 

Portugal SB13 - Contribution of Sustainable Building to Meet EU 20-20-20 Targets

496


	1
	2
	3



