

























































COOLING ROOF


A daytime passive cooling radiation system 

Marín, J.A; Isalgué, A; Roset, J; Coch, H and Serra, R. 
Architecture, Energy and Environment Group. School of Architecture of Barcelona, Spain 
 

 
 

 

 
 
 
 

ABSTRACT  
 

There is a broad consensus that the lack of solar radiation at night provides a good opportunity for 
the passive cooling of buildings in climates with frequently clear skies. The idea is to design surfaces 
angled towards the sky that cool during the night due to infrared radiation and are sufficiently robust 
against solar radiation during the day. However, the possibility of also taking advantage of a clear 
sky’s cooling potential during the day is rarely considered. Perhaps due to the brightness of a clear 
blue sky, it is not easy to comprehend that its radiant temperature is very low, sometimes even lower 
than that of a clear night sky in the same place. Evidently, this low temperature occurs in the part of 
the sky – the largest part – where the sun is not present at that time. The movement of the sun leads 
us to think that it covers the whole sky, whereas in reality it only covers a tiny portion at any 
moment. The rest of the sky has a very low radiant temperature. Taking a preliminary geometric 
study as the starting point, designs have been developed that will take advantage of the cooling 
potential of the sky. The inherent advantage of such a technique is that the movements of the sun are 
precise and well known, thereby increasing the possibilities of success. In this paper, we present the 
results of a small sky-powered cooling device. Specifically, it consists of a box in a high place – in 
this case the roof of an eight-storey building – that contains a predetermined quantity of water. The 
exterior weather conditions – our study took place in Barcelona in July – and the conditions inside 
the box were measured and compared. We aimed to assess whether it was possible to maintain a 
temperature inside the box that was lower than the external temperature. Here, we present the 
experimental results and the conclusions, as well as several potential applications in architecture. 

 
1. INTRODUCTION 
 

In Mediterranean countries, it is common to feel discomfort inside buildings on hot days. The excess 
heat indoors is usually attributed to the air conditions (temperature and humidity). Experience shows 
that if we go outside a building and stand in a position sheltered from direct radiation (in the shade), 
the feeling of discomfort diminishes and is rapidly replaced by a sensation of thermal comfort. The 
usual explanation for this improvement is that the air temperature is lower, the humidity has dropped 
or there is a breeze outside. However, we can prove that when the conditions outside a building are 
the same as those inside it in terms of temperature, humidity and a lack of air movement, the feeling 
of greater comfort outside is still notable. This effect can only be attributed to the mean radiant 
temperature. According to the Stefan-Boltzmann law and common considerations, very little cooling 
of buildings can be attained in the infrared spectrum. However, with an appropriate design of 
systems to take advantage of radiation, significant and useful results can be achieved in the field of 

 1



architecture. The cooling effect of radiation towards a clear blue sky may have a considerable impact 
on thermal comfort (Isalgué, 1997). The capacity of nocturnal radiative cooling has been studied in 
Parker (2005), and the cooling capacity of special surfaces has been examined in Tazawa (1996 and 
1997), Tanemura (1999) and Jaffer (2007). This is of interest to us, due to the daytime cooling 
capacity under clear skies (and sun), using low cost materials.  

 
2. PRINCIPLES 
 

The first principle to consider is that the “blue sky is cold”. Although there is notable short-wave 
radiation in the visible spectrum, the intensity of radiation is low from a clear sky, when taken as a 
whole, and equivalent to that of a surface at a temperature at 240 - 280 K (approximately between –
33 and 7 ºC).  

If the sky is cloudy, the temperatures are higher and close to that of the air at the altitude of the 
clouds. Logically, the clearer the atmosphere, the lower the equivalent radiation temperature of the 
sky will be.  

The second principle to take into account is the vision of the sky for a specific surface. In the case 
of a horizontal surface with no obstructions above the horizon, there will be full correspondence 
between the surface and the sky. Thus, the radiation exchange will therefore be independent from the 
rest. However, the presence of the sun in the sky has a considerable impact on this exchange, as it 
sheds a high intensity of radiation on the surface, to the order of 1000 W / m².  

In addition, it can be shown that a specular reflective surface, with high reflectance of infrared 
radiation, captures the image of the sky and maintains its radiation characteristics almost completely. 
Thus, a geometric device that screens the vision seen from the receiving surface of everything except 
the clear sky, and even screens the sun, is practically equivalent to a surface that is totally exposed to 
this sky (solid angle of 2π steradians).  

 
3. DESCRIPTION OF THE SYSTEM  
 

a. Surface collection via a metal plate that emits infrared radiation. This may be a cold selective 
surface (white paint, etc.). 
 
 
 
 
 
b. A system of screens that reflect infrared and hide both the passage of the sun (in summer) and the 
land surfaces (buildings, trees, mountains, etc.) that are visible from the plate. These screens, which 
are covered on the inside with a specular reflective surface, reflect the image of the sky onto the 
absorbent surface, so that this surface sees (directly or by reflection) a total solid angle of 2π.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Angle of 
incidence of the 
sun in summer 

Specular reflectors 
of radiation 

 2



 
On the basis of these concepts, specific designs can be proposed: 
For the latitude of 42º (as in Barcelona, Rome, New York, etc.): 
 
 

 
82º angle of incidence 
in summer at midday, 
+ 10º 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

The cooled surface represents approximately 40% of the total cover.  
Depending on the latitude, the geometry of the screen and reflection system should have different 

characteristics. 
 
c. Exchange of the plate with the air that flows below it by conduction through the thin metal and 
surface convection. The surface-air contact area can be increased by corrugating the plate.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Together this would result in: 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Reflective surfaces 

With the addition of lateral screens to 
reduce the incidence of sun at dawn 
and dusk (25º)

Cooled surface  

 3



d. Circuit of air to the premises by creating a difference in height that facilitates the flow of air by 
thermal convection from the hotter air in the premises, which comes from its highest point (thermal 
stratification).  
 
 
 
 
 
 Δ
 
 
 
 
 
 

4. EVALUATION OF COOLING POWER  

4.1 Flow of heat from the plate to the sky  

If we assume that the temperature at the surface of the plate is 18ºC, i.e. (Tp= 291 K) (which is 
essential to maintain sufficient flow of cooling to the interior), the emission of radiation from the 
plate can be evaluated as: 

Stefan Boltzmann for the black body:   M(n) = 5.67 · 10-8 · T4   (W/m²)           (1) 

If we take a reduction factor of ~ 0.9 for the emission of the plate and the sky: 

          In the plate (cold selective body):  M ~ 5 · 10-8 ·  Tp
4   (W/m²)      (2) 

          In the sky (equivalent temperature Tcc)):   M ~ 5 · 10
-8 ·  Tcc

4  (W/m²)      (3) 

Thus, in our case:  ΔM ~  5 · 10-8 ·  (Tp
4 -  Tcc

4) (W/m²)                             
For a sky temperature of – 20ºC (Tc  c ==  225533ººCC)):    ΔM ~ 160 (W/m²)              

4.2 Flow of heat form the plate to the air circulating below  

If we assume that the temperature of the air circulating below the plate is 23ºC, the surface energy 
exchange for a flat plate could be:  

  q = h · ΔT = 6.2 · (23 – 18) = 31 (W/m²)                                 (4) 

If we assume that the plate is corrugated in 1.45 to 1:  q = 31 · 1.45  ~  45 (W/m²) 
If the useful cooled surface is 40% of the cover, for a section 1 m wide and 4 m long, the results 

are: 

 q = 45 · 0.40 · 4  ~  72 W   (for 1 m width of the system) 

It is assumed that the remaining flow of energy, with respect to that collected by the plate, will be 
transferred to the outside air with a higher coefficient of surface transfer (due to the possible 
presence of the wind), in the order of 15 – 20 (W/m²/ºC). If there is no wind, the temperature of the 
plate will be lower and the system will perform better. 

4.3 Capacity of the air flow to cool the premises  

If we assume that the air temperature in the premises is 26ºC and the circulation of air below the 
plate that returns to the premises is at 20ºC (corresponding to the mean temperature of 23ºC that was 

 4



considered previously), a heat transfer of 67 (W/m²) requires a flow of air (C) per unit of the surface 
of the cooled plate of: 

  C · svh · ΔT = 72 (5) 

                       C = 72 / 6 / 0.33  ~  36 m3 / h / m² 

  (where svh = specific volumetric heat of the air in Wh per m³)  

This assumes a flow of air through a 0.1 m-wide chamber at a velocity of: 

  V = 36 / 0.1 / 3600  ~ 0.1 m/s  (which is low enough, as shown below) 

4.4 Thermal circulation in the air circuit  

We assume that the air circuit functions by natural convection for a metre of width of the premises. 
The induced pressure will be: 

ΔP = Δδ · g · Δh  (6) 

where:    ΔP: pressure difference  
    Δδ: difference in density of air between 23 and 26ºC,  ~ 0.012 kg/m³ 
    g: acceleration of gravity: 9.81 (m/s²) 
    Δh = difference in height in the air circuit ~ 1.07 m 

then:    ΔP = 0.12 · 1.07 = 0.128 Pa 

If we apply a hydrodynamic calculation to the circuit, with a velocity V and an approximate 
resistance factor of f = 0.075, the result is a loss of pressure due to friction in the conduit: 

ΔP = f · (L / D) · δ · V² / 2    (7) 

Where:   L = length of the path ~ 4.4 m,  
              D = height of the conduit ~ 0.1 m and 
   δ = air density ~ 1.27 kg/m³) 

then: ΔP = 0.075 · (4.14/0.1) ·1.27 · (0.1)² / 2  ~  0.019 Pa 

The effect of resistance at certain points to flow (narrowed sections, bends, etc.) is not considered 
in the previous calculation. To take this into account, an approximation is used in which the point 
losses in this type of circuit are much higher than the linear losses, which results in total in: 

  ΔP = 0.019 · 4 = 0.076 Pa  (lower than the available pressure) 

If we assume the above, the flow of transported heat, Q, is: 

Q = v · A · D · ΔT · sh          (8) 

When:   A = 1 m width of the conduit,  
             ΔT = 6 ºC      
             sh = specific heat ~ 1000 J 

then:     Q = 0.11 · 1 · 0.1 · 6 · 1000 ~ 66 W  (for 1 m width of the system) 

The approximate value of energy that is transferred to the interior environment for premises that 
are 3 m wide, with 4 m of depth considered and a surface of 12 m² is: 

Ptotal = 66 · 4 = 264 w  

Sufficient cooling power to compensate for heat gains in a well isolated room protected from solar 
radiation. 

 
 

       

 5



5. GENERAL DIAGRAMS OF THE PROPOSED SYSTEM  

 

 
Figure 1. Longitudinal section of the proposed system.  
 
 

 
Figure 2. Cross-section of the proposed system. 

 6



 

 
Figure 3. Diagram of a perpendicular view of the cover of the proposed system.  
Note: if it rains, a slight separation between the screens and the surface of the plate allows the water to flow off the plate.  

 
 
Figures 4-5. Diagram of the longitudinal and transverse screens.  

 
 
 
 

 7



6. EXPERIMENT 

6.1 Description of the experiment  

To verify the effectiveness of the general system described above, we built a prototype with a 
chamber that is approximately 0.5 m * 0.5m * 0.5 m, and a cover designed for the latitude of 
Barcelona. 

The walls and base of the chamber are made from 5 cm-thick expanded polystyrene, and are stuck 
to the chamber with glue and tape. Inside the chamber, we placed 3 bottles of mineral water, with a 
total volume of 1.5 l, to include a certain thermal mass and prevent rapid fluctuations in temperature. 
The cover, which is angled to the North, is made up of a 0.3 mm-thick copper sheet, painted on the 
outside with a water-based paint. In this prototype, the screens are made from cardboard and stuck 
with tape to the chamber. They are covered on the inside with commercial aluminium foil, such as 
that used in kitchens, with the shiny side out.   
 

    
Figure 6. View to the SW from                    Figure 7: View to the SE from the  
the site of the experiment.                                 site of the experiment.           
 
 

    
Figures 8-9. Model of the proposed system. 
 

Data acquisition was carried out with 5 Testo (model) temperature and humidity sensors. These 
were positioned and programmed to take the temperature every ten minutes for several hours, as a 
control. Then, two sensors (no. 1 and 2) were placed inside the chamber and the other three were 
placed outside on the West (no. 4), North (no. 3) and East (no. 5) of the chamber, which was placed 
on the roof of a building in Barcelona, as shown in the above figures. The results of the recordings on 
23 to 25 July 2007 are shown in Figure 12. 
 
 
 

 8



   

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

40 cm 

  20 cm 

40 cm 

50 cm 

  4 cm 

 55 cm 

30 cm 

                                                           

C 

B 

 
Figures 10-11. Diagram of the model of the proposed system and a diagram of the position of the thermal sensors. 
 

A, cooled surface; B, lateral screens covered in aluminium; C, surface covered with aluminium, 
which stops solar radiation from reaching the cooled surface, and, together with the lateral screens 
and the protection to the North, ensures that higher heat exchange occurs by radiation between the 
cooled plate and the high atmosphere. D, isolated space to cool.  

 

 
                
Figure 12. Graph of the interior/exterior temperature in July 2007. 
 

A

D

 9



 10

The results of the test show a clear drop in the interior temperature of the model compared to the 
exterior temperature. 

Due to the small size of the model, there is a high ratio between the covering surface/volume, 
which means that the cooling performance will be much less than that of premises with architectural 
dimensions and a similar shape. 

7. CONCLUSIONS 

In hot climates and periods, the proposed system takes advantage of the cooling radiation of the sky 
in daytime hours, with notable efficiency and no consumption of artificial energy. 

Logically, the system continues to work during the night, which generates more efficient cooling 
that can be regulated by controlling the air circulation system. 

The system can be adapted to different latitudes by changing the geometry of the reflective 
screens. Thus, it could be used on much of the planet. 
The cost of incorporating the system into buildings could be relatively low if it is included in the 
architectural plans. Obviously, it costs nothing to run. 

REFERENCES 

Isalgué, A.; Scudo, G. (1997) Scambi energetici terra-cielo. Built Environment 3, p. 17-22.   
Jaffer, A. (2007) Radiative Cooling in Hot Humid Climates. Project Status December 2007. 

htpp://swiss.csail.mit.edu/~jaffer/cool/ 
Parker, D.S. (2005) Theoretical Evaluation of the Night Cool Nocturnal Radiation Cooling Concept. U.S. Department of 

Energy. FSEC-CR-1502-05. Florida Solar Energy Center. 
Tanemura, S.; Tazawa, M.; Jing, P.; Miki, T.; Yoshimura, K.; Igarashi, K.; Ohishi, M.; Shimono, K.; Adachi M.(1999) 

Optical Properties and Radiative Cooling Power of White Paints, ISES 1999 Solar World Congress. 
Tazawa, M.; Jin, P.; Tanemura S.(1996) Thin film used to obtain a constant temperature lower than the ambient, Thin 

Solid Films 281-282, 232-234. 
Tazawa, M.; Jin, P.; Yoshimura, K.; Miki T. and Tanemura S. (1997) New material design with V1-xWxO2 film for sky 

radiator to obtain temperature stability, Solar Energy 64, 37.  
 


