










































FICUP 
An InternationalConference on 

Urban Physics 
B. Beckers, T. Pico, S. Jimenez (Eds.) 

Quito – Galápagos, Ecuador, 26– 30 September2016 
 
 
 

Sky Access versus Shading for Pedestrian Comfort in the Hot 
Tropical Climate of Jeddah 

BadiaMasoud1, BenoitBeckers2, and HelenaCoch3 
1,3 Architecture energy and environment Group, School of architecture Barcelona UPC,Spain  

Av. Diagonal, 649-651, 08028 Barcelona 
Badia_masoud@hotmail.com, helena.coch@upc.edu 

 
2Compiègne University of Technology – Sorbonne University 

Rue Roger Couttolenc, CS 60319 
60203 Compiègne – France 

benoit.beckers@utc.fr 

Keywords:Pedestrian Comfort, Urban Morphology, Compact City, Solar Radiation, Urban 
Climate. 

Abstract: Many urban studies have been done to demonstrate that urban sprawl is not the 
right approach in hot climate cities. On the contrary, a compact design is recommended to 
enhance human thermal comfort. This research aims to clarify the relation between  urban 
morphology and outdoor thermal comfort of Jeddah, Saudi Arabia. The aim is to develop an 
outstanding future strategic compact morphology that would facilitate a dynamic 
development of the city. 

Jeddah city will soon have a subway that is expected to radically change the habits of its 
inhabitants. Our idea is to consider the main stations of the future metro as nodes, creating 
more densely inhabited localities and also defining transitional spaces for pedestrian 
activities.  Microclimates generated in and around these activity nodes must be particularly 
studied to encourage residents and visitors to reclaim a pedestrian life that was clearly 
noticeable in the old city, but has virtually disappeared in most recent neighborhoods, 
entirely devoted to automobile transport. Services and facilities around metro nodes should 
become the transitional thermal comfort areas of the metro station exits. 

This paper will provide numerical modeling simulations that are used to assess the solar 
radiation in the urban layout (the old compact area and the modern sprawl area) by the 
software "Heliodon 2" (direct shortwave, Sky View Factor) and "Heliodon plus" (climatic 
data) to clarify the differences between the old and the new layout and why the change to 
compactness needs to be put into effect.  

168 FICUP 2016



Badia Masoud, Benoit Beckers and Helena Coch 

1 Introduction 
Every year, the Saudi Arabian population is increasing by about 2% and the energy 

demand by 4–5% [Al-Hadhrami 2013]. Due to a rapidly escalating population and a high 
level of economic growth, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia is experiencing a strong 
infrastructure expansion [Taleb 2015]. However, more than half of the country’s energy 
demand has been created by the increased urban density together with the rise of 
consumerism, and these have not only led to an increase in environmental degradation locally, 
but they have also meant that the country’s traditional primary energy is under used and 
consequently carbon emissions are set to rise and to play a larger role in global climate 
change. Electricity generation in Saudi Arabia is completely dependent on the unsustainable 
practice of burning fossil fuels, which has  major environmental consequences. 

However, when compared to other countries, the issue of energy efficiency is not generally 
given serious consideration with regard to Saudi urban building designs. In addition, the 
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia is one of the driest regions in the world and is facing serious 
challenges relating to a rapid growth [Kamal 2014]. Last, but not least, there are no 
regulations, or compulsory building codes, that incorporate the principles of sustainable 
architecture in the country [Taleb 2015]. It has been argued by many scholars that setting a 
coherent set of these codes and standards is one of the most important and cost-effective ways 
to promote the widespread of sustainable practices [Awawdehl 2014].  

The government has adopted concepts and solutions from western nations in its 
architecture and physical planning. Rapid changes have taken place in the Kingdom of Saudi 
Arabia following the discovery of oil in  commercial quantities and the country's opening up 
to the western world. The speed with which development has occurred and the rapid advance 
in technology experienced in the seventies, in every field, including construction, planning, 
industry, education, etc., have affected all aspects of living in the country. One aspect of life 
which has suffered most has been the traditional environment. The attraction of the western 
way of life and the western concept of development have drawn Saudi attention away from 
the development of a clear understanding of their traditional residential environment, and 
away from the value of its continuity.  

With the introduction of automobiles, new building techniques and materials, the whole 
urban fabric of the city has been changed. A completely new form of housing has emerged 
and new physical communication networks have become necessary to accommodate the new 
mechanical means of transportation, with different housing types, wide dual carriageway 
roads, street intersections, flyovers and large areas of car parking spaces. Moreover the 
indigenous society has changed from being a highly traditional Islamic society into a semi-
cosmopolitan environment of the twentieth century [Alharbi 1989]. 

According to [Brown 2010], many outdoor urban environments, especially in hot countries, 
tend to be poorly regulated and not thermally comfortable. [Lin 2009] indicated that few 
people visit squares or other public spaces in hot and humid regions when the thermal index is 
high. 

During the day, the incoming solar (short-wave) radiation increases the surface and air 
temperatures. At night the surface is cooled due to the net outgoing long-wave radiation. This 
outgoing long-wave radiation diminishes with lower SVF, (higher H/W ratio). In concise 
terms, the narrower a street is, the less heat will be gained during the day, and less heat will be 
lost at night. [AL-Asir  2009] 

From ancient times, a key strategy for thermal comfort and pollution dispersal in hot 
climates has been to maximise airflow and thereby achieve maximum ventilation. However, 
the low levels of wind speeds in the tropics during the passing of the inter-tropical 

169 FICUP 2016



Badia Masoud, Benoit Beckers and Helena Coch 

convergence zone twice a year make it necessary to carefully map out the ventilation strategy 
at a citywide level to induce sufficient air movement, both for pollution dispersion as well as 
thermal comfort. It will also enhance the cooling potential of naturally ventilated buildings 
(which is the common approach to indoor cooling in the warm, humid tropics)[AL-Asir  2009, 
Beckers 2012]. 

[Dalman, 2011] evaluated the microclimate principles of two different fabrics, one 
traditional and the other modern in the South East of Bandar Abbas. The study  affirms the 
important following findings: canyon orientation, with effective shade and ventilation, was 
found to be the main contributor to thermal comfort in the selected area. In this regard, the  
usual wind and sea breeze, in combination with canyon orientation, play a significant role in 
providing a thermally comfortable situation. The streets height to width ratio (H/W ratio) in 
traditional fabrics is higher than in the modern one, and  the traditional fabric was found to be 
more thermally comfortable. Hence, Shading and ventilation factors are not embedded in the 
design process in the modern fabrics of Bandar Abbas, which reveals scant consideration for these 
factors. The calculated values of thermal comfort indices (Physiological Equivalent 
Temperature (PET), Predicted Mean Vote (PMV), Standard Effective Temperature (SET) and 
Mean Radiant Temperature (MRT)) show a lower ratio in modern fabrics than in traditional 
areas; this is the effect of the lower H/W ratio and inadequate wind circulation and shading.  

[Radhi2013] Investigates urban expansion in Bahrain over the last few decades and 
assesses its impact on atmospheric urban heat islands. The results show that network grids 
with structure and high density building developments that increase shelter and reduce wind 
velocity can lead to higher levels of stored heat on surfaces. 

One of the most important urban parameters which affect solar access is urban density 
[Sanaieian 2014]. [Johansson 2006] examined the influence of urban geometry on outdoor 
thermal comfort by comparing an extremely deep street canyon and a shallow one in Fez, 
Morocco, making  a comparison between an old and a new area. Continuous measurements 
during the hot summer and cool winter seasons show that, by day, the deep canyon was 
considerably cooler than the shallow one. The results indicate that, in hot dry climates, a 
compact urban design with very deep canyons is preferable. 

2 Jeddah and its Climate 

2.1  Jeddah: 
The city of Jeddah is located in the western part of Saudi Arabia, where it overlooks the 

east coast of the Red Sea. With 3.9 million of inhabitants, Jeddah is considered the second 
largest city in Saudi Arabia in terms of population after Riyadh city. Jeddah is the most 
important seaport of Saudi Arabia on the Red Sea.  

The history of Jeddah as a place of pilgrimage contributed to the development of its urban 
pattern. The rapid growth in population (natural and transient) in the last four decades 
coincided with the Kingdom’s huge increase in wealth. This resulted in Jeddah City 
expanding physically at an unprecedented rate. This expansion was in part due to the limited 
success of spatial planning and regulatory frameworks that attempted to constrain 
development to certain areas of the city.  

Without effective regulation and a coordinated, strategic approach, the urban area of 
Jeddah grew beyond the capacity of its infrastructure, leading to structural problems in the 
provision of water, sewage and roads. This growth also left the city with a number of 
structural challenges, including large quantities of vacant land and a dependency on the 
private car. Insensitive development, pollution, high energy consumption and lack of 
awareness damaged Jeddah’s marine environment, while the relics of Jeddah’s remarkable 

170 FICUP 2016



Badia Masoud, Benoit Beckers and Helena Coch 

heritage, in particular Albalad (la Medina) fell into decline [Khan 2012, Habibullah 2014, 
Fatta 2014]. 

2.2  Climate: 

The city is located at latitude 21° 32' North, 39° 10' East. It has a hot climate, the Average 
Low/High temperatures usually vary between 18°C and 39°C, rarely going below 16°C or 
above 41°C. There are almost only clear skies, with cloud cover varying between 2% and 
18%; the relative humidity varies between 30% and 89%, so the air is mostly humid. Rainfall 
in Jeddah is generally sparse, and usually occurs in small amounts in November and 
December, According to the Holdridge life zone system of bioclimatic classification, Jeddah 
is close to the tropical desert scrub biome (Khan 2012).  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
Figure 1: stereographic and isochronal solar diagrams for Jeddah 

 
 
 
 
 
 

Table 1: Sunrise, Sunset and solar height at noon for 21st June and 21st  December. 
 

Jeddah is very close to the Tropic of Cancer. As shown in Table 1, the sun almost reaches 
the zenith in the summer solstice, reaching 45° at the winter solstice. The difference in day 
length between the two solstices is two hours and forty minutes. As shown on the isochronal 
projection of Figure 1 [Beckers, 2006], solar height is up to 40° between 10:30 and 13:30 
during the entire year, and the direct radiation is then up to 800 kW/m2 in sunny hours, 
reaching 1000 kW/m2 in summertime.  

[Khan & Duris, 2012] Studied Jeddah, Saudi Arabia urban structure and the amount of 
solar energy registered at ground level. Results have shown that the values of solar energy 
tend to be higher in the modern urban fabric than in the old one because of the significant 
differences between these two areas. These results show that modern districts with straight 
streets and large avenues receive more energy than the old city with its curved and narrower 
streets. The wider the street is, the easier it is for the sunlight to penetrate it. The fact that the 
modern city has almost only straight streets and avenues allows solar radiation to penetrate, 

 Sunrise Sunset Solar height 
at noon 

21 June 05:20 18:40  88° 
21 December 06:40 17:20 45° 

171 FICUP 2016



Badia Masoud, Benoit Beckers and Helena Coch 

whilst the old city has narrower and more curved streets that cast enough shadow to 
considerably reduce direct sunlight. 

3 Case studies: 

3.1 Description: 
Two areas of Jeddah have been chosen for the analysis, according to their contrasting 

morphology. The first one is in the south part of Jeddah, which is the old area (Albalad). The 
second area is in the north part of Jeddah, which represents the modern urban layout of the 
city (Al Salamah district).  

As shown in Figure2, both chosen urban patterns have distinctive characteristics, related to 
density, H/W ratios and building organization. 

The old area is characterized by its narrow streets, with a width varying between 2m and 
5m. Building heights are from one to six levels. It is a mixed use urban area (residential and 
commercial). The old area has a dense, compact and irregular pattern. 

The selected case in the modern area is residential. The housing in Al Salamah district 
consists of two storey detached villas and apartment buildings ranging from five to seven 
stories. The typical lot size is 20 x 30 meters and most blocks are 60 x 180 meters. The 
district was laid out in a rectangular grid system, with rectangular and square lots. Such 
development consists of parallel alignments, simple geometrically shaped patterns of streets 
designed for adequate vehicle movement, with width ranges from 10 to 20 meters. The 
architecture is distinctly American in style and built according to zoning regulations that 
stipulate distances from the street, detached rather than attached buildings.  

The simulation and analysis will be done on two intersecting streets on the two layouts (the 
old and new)The analysis in the modern area will take place in the apartment building zone, 
which has been selected because it is denser than the villa areas. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

Figure 2: The 3D modeled on Rrvit Autodesk 2016 on the old area (Al Balad) and the modern area 
of Jeddah (Al Salamah) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Figure 3: The 3D modeled on Rrvit Autodesk 2016 on the old area (Al Balad) and the modern area 
of Jeddah (Al Salamah) with the chosen intersection streets  

 
172 FICUP 2016



Badia Masoud, Benoit Beckers and Helena Coch 

3.1 Methodology: 
The main analysis is realized with the Heliodon 2 software [Beckers 2006]. The program 

performs calculations in theoretical cloudless conditions, without taking into account the 
diffuse radiation emitted by the sky, nor the radiation reflected from nearby surfaces. It is 
completed by computations with the Heliodon Plus tool [Nahon 2016], which allows taking 
into account the climatic data. 
4 Results:  
4.1Case study 1: old city urban layout: 
 

The old area, as shown in Figure 4, has a mean sky view factor of 10.3%. Moreover, 
in Figure 5, we have a mean radiation value of three hours of sun in summer at street ground 
level, and only half an hour in winter.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

4.2 Case study 2: modern city urban layout  
The modern area, as shown in Figure 6, has a mean sky view factor of 23.5%. 

Moreover, in Figure 7, we have a mean radiation value of six hours of sun in summer at street 
ground level, and only one hour in winter.  

Mean Solar period in summer 3h09 (429m2) 
Mean Solar period in winter 0h31 (429m2) 
Mean Sky view factor (SVF) 10.3% 

Figure 4: Mean SVF.  Figure 5: Mean Solar radiation value on 21st June and 21st December 

Figure 6: Mean SVF.  Figure 7: Mean Solar radiation value on 21st June and 21st December 

Table 2: Old area Heliodon calculation (Mean Solar period on 21st  June (Summer) and 21st Dec 
(Winter) and Mean SVF) 

 

173 FICUP 2016



Badia Masoud, Benoit Beckers and Helena Coch 

Mean Solar period in summer 6h18 (1702.9 m2) 
Mean Solar period in winter 0h54 (1702.9 m2) 
Mean Sky view factor (SVF) 3.5 % 

 

5   Discussion: 

We investigated sky Access versus shading for pedestrian comfort in the hot tropical 
climate of Jeddah. Our results show that 10% SVF at street level could be a good compromise, 
and that it could be a target for the new transition areas in the metro nodes.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Table 3: Modern area Heliodon calculation (Mean Solar period on 21st  June (Summer) and 21st Dec (Winter) 
and Mean SVF) 

 

Figure 9: Solar Evolution Modern area (al Salamah) done by: Heliodon plus. 

Figure 8: Solar Evolution Old area  done by: Heliodon plus. 

174 FICUP 2016



Badia Masoud, Benoit Beckers and Helena Coch 

The study of the presence of clouds was obtained from the meteorological station, the 
theoretical energy data obtained are compared with Heliodon with actual data measured by 
the local weather station and a correction factor is established. Seeing the difference between 
the theoretical values and means of direct radiation, it proceeds to establish a correction factor 
with the following formula [Nahon 2016]. 

 
Solar radiation calculated from the measured value 

 Correction factor =    _________________________________________ 
 Solar radiation calculated by Heliodon 

 

Table 4: Heliodon plus correction factor of each month. 

6  Conclusion: 

Our demonstration of the analysis of solar penetration, in both layouts in Jeddah city 
indicates and confirms the existence of the urban sprawl problem.Therefore, shading and 
densifying Jeddah city is essential, but a balance must be maintained.The idea is to consider 
the main stations of the future metro as nodes, creating more densely inhabited localities and 
also defining transitional spaces for pedestrian activities. Therefore, in continuing the study, 
we will model the extra extrusions on the facades of the old area, to evaluate their 
participation to shading.  

7   References: 
[AL-Asir  2009]  AL-Asir, Hala Shaker, Awadallah, Tala. Climate Conscious 
Architecture and Urban Design in Jordan,Towards energy efficient buildings and improved 
urban microclimate. Housing Development & Management and the Royal Scientific Society 
and the authors,2009.  
 
[AL-Hadhrami 2013] L. M. Al-Hadhrami, Comprehensive review of cooling and heating 
degree days characteristics over Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, Renewable and Sustainable 
Energy Reviews, vol. 27 (2013), p. 305–314. 

[Alharbi 1989]  Alharbi, T.H. The development of Housing in Jeddah, changes in built 
form from the traditional to the modern. Doctorial Study  (1989), p.392. 

[Ali-Toudert 2005] Ali-Toudert, Fazia. Dependence of Outdoor Thermal Comfort on Street 
Design in Hot and Dry Climate. Berichte des Meteorologischen Institutes der Universität 
Freiburg,(2005). 

[Awawdehl 2014]  Awawdehl, Siba Adel and Tweed, Aidan Christopher. Buildings’ 
energy efficiency and building energy codes: International Journal of Applied Science and 
Technology Vol. 4 (2014). p. 37–46. 

[Beckers 2006]  Benoit Beckers, Luc Masset, Heliodon 2, software and user’s guide, 
http://www.heliodon.net. 

 Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec 
Correction 0.64 0.76 0.82 0.83 0.72 0.57 0.55 0.52 0.68 0.81 0.75 0.66 

175 FICUP 2016



Badia Masoud, Benoit Beckers and Helena Coch 

[Beckers 2012] Benoit Beckers, Worldwide Aspects of Solar Radiation Impact, in 
Solar Energy at Urban Scale, chapter 5, Ed. B. Beckers, John Wiley and Sons, Inc., 2012. 

[Dalman, 2011]  Dalman, Salleh, Elias, Sapian, Abdul Razak, Tahir, Osman Mohd, 
Dola, Kamariah and Saadatian, Omidreza. Microclimate and thermal comfort of urban forms 
and canyons in traditional and modern residential fabrics in Bandar Abbas, Iran. Modern 
Applied Science. Vol. 5, no. 2 (2011) p. 43–56.  

[Fatta 2014]    Fatta, Ghadi. The Effect of Land Speculation on the Housing in the 
City of Jeddah, A research paper submitted to the graduate school Ball university,Munich , 
Master of urban planing. (2014). 

[Habibullah 2014]  Habibullah, Amir Mohammed. . Sustainable strategies for urban water 
management for arid region: the case study of Jeddah city Saudi Arabia .Submitted in partial 
fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Master of Landscape Architecture in 
Landscape Architecture in the Graduate College of the University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign (2014). 

[Johansson 2006]  Johansson, Erik. Influence of urban geometry on outdoor thermal 
comfort in a hot dry climate: A study in Fez, Morocco. Building and Environment. Vol. 41, 
no. 10,(2006) p. 1326–1338.  
 
[Kamal 2014] Kamal, Mohammad Arif. The morphology of traditional architecture of Jeddah, 
Climatic design and environmental sustainability,global built environment . Vol. 9, (2014). 

[Katzschner  2006]  Katzschner, Lutz. Microclimatic thermal comfort analysis in cities for 
urban planning and open space design.Institute of Environmental Meteorology, University 
Kassel, Department of Architecture and Urban Planning, Kassel, Germany, (2006) p. 31–36. 

[Khan& Duris 2012]   Khan, Ahmed and Duris, Kevin. The impact of the urban pattern on 
solar radiations.International Scientific Journal Architecture and Engineering(2012). 

[Lin 2009]   Lin, Tzu-Ping, De Dear, Richard, Matzarakis, Andreas and Hwang, 
Ruey-Lung. Prediction of thermal acceptability in hot-humid outdoor environments in 
Taiwan. The seventh International Conference on Urban Climate,29 June - 3 July 2009, 
Yokohama, Japan (2009), p. 3–6 . 

[Nahon 2016]   Raphaël Nahon, David Muñoz, Benoit Beckers, Heliodon Plus, 
software and user’s guide, http://www.heliodon.net. 
[Radhi 2013]   Radhi, Hassan, FIKRY, Fayze and Sharples, Stephen. Impacts of 
urbanization on the thermal behavior of new built up environments: A scoping study of the 
urban heat island in Bahrain. Landscape and Urban Planning, Landscape and Urban Planning 
Vol. 113, (2013), p. 47–61. 
 
[Sanaieian  2014]  Sanaieian, Haniyeh, Tenpierik, Martin, Linden, Kees Van Den, 
Mehdizadeh Seraj, Fatemeh and Mofidi Shemrani, Seyed Majid. Review of the impact of 
urban block form on thermal performance, solar access and ventilation. Renewable and 
Sustainable Energy Reviews. Vol. 38, (2014) ,p. 551–560. 
 

176 FICUP 2016



Badia Masoud, Benoit Beckers and Helena Coch 

[Taleb 2015]  Hanan Taleb, Mousa Musleh, Applying urban parametric design 
optimization processes to a hot climate: Case study of the UAE, Sustainable Cities and 
Society, Vol. 14 (2015), p. 236–253. 

[Wei Zhang & Sarkar 2010]  Zhang, Wei and Sarkar, Partha P. Influence of 
surrounding buildings on the flow around a low-rise building in ABL and tornado-like winds. 
The Fifth International Symposium on Computational Wind Engineering, (2010). 

 

177 FICUP 2016

View publication statsView publication stats

https://www.researchgate.net/publication/315292796

