












































Microsoft Word - wrecxi-682.docx


World Renewable Energy Congress XI 

 25-30 September 2010, Abu Dhabi, UAE 

LEA: Low Energy Architecture   

 

Proposals to improve the conditions of outer space. The environmental comfort  

of the pedestrian circulation in the coastal line. 

 
Mireya Alicia Rosas Lusett

1
; Helena Coch Roura

2
. 

 

1
Academic Board for Sustainable Design and Building, Universidad Autónoma de Tamaulipas, México;  

2 
Lecturer. School of Architecture. Universidad Politécnica de Cataluña. Architecture, Energy and Environment. 

 

e-mail: mire.rosas@gmail.com 

Abstract 

 

With the climatic change, the conditions of outer spaces have had a major change, therefore 

developing new research needed to make it more habitable. The study of coastline comfort gives 

special interest for its possible marine relationship and its differences with the inner area, for which 

we have classified the pedestrian circulation defining the influence of its limits both vertical (facades, 

walls and vegetation) and horizontal(deck, vegetation and floor). It is important to determine how the 

cover of the pedestrian circulation influences the comfort of the pedestrian as well as the various 

materials with which they are formed, the distance to the coast, the shape of the first front, speed and 

wind direction. To have a deeper understanding of the possibilities of comfort and design, this will 

implement other developments that may arise in similar climatic and cultural areas to the 

Mediterranean climate. 

 

Keywords: thermal comfort; pedestrian circulation; urban areas. 

 

1. Presentation 

 

The sustained growth of traffic in European cities resulted in circulatory congestion, a high rate of 

accidents, and a lack of parking, which has transformed the urban environment, creating 

environmental conditions different from the originals in profoundly altering the physical environment 

of its territory. Thus, the heat produced by the increase in the vehicle fleet and consequent burning of 

fossil fuels in cities has reached significant levels, giving rise to local climate changes. 

As a result of the above, the morphological characteristics typical of a city, and the plot and the 

different characteristics within cities where it is located, determine the thermal comfort of a town, 

reacting differently to the wind and solar radiation. 

The study of the typology of elements that relate to passive cooling in outdoor spaces, such as 

boulevards, arcades, awnings, porches, gardens, pergolas, create a deep and thorough knowledge of 

the possibilities of control and design of urban spaces, in this case, analyzing the pedestrian circulation 

in the coastal belt.  

To perform this research work the following questions were made: What happens in outdoor spaces in 

front of the coastline? To achieve a comfortable place for pedestrians, how does the breeze influence 

on comfort? Is there a difference in the spaces with or without vegetation? In summer, are shadowless 

spaces comfortable? Do they depend on the materials? The answer to all these questions was found in 

a study of Villa Icaria located in Barcelona, Spain. 

 

2. Methodology 

 

Studying the behavior of the urban environment requires measuring the effect of key variables 

involved in the energy balance of the outdoor spaces, being these variables, the climate, the context 

and the user. 

• The microclimate of the place is where we get the parameters of air temperature, radiation, 

humidity and air movement. 

• The context refers to physical and space characteristics, which are the location, shape, and 

boundaries, they contain. 

• The user is the person who carries out its activities in outer space, such as slow or hurried 

walking, jogging, biking, skating and sitting, among others. As a result of these activities there 

792



World Renewable Energy Congress XI 

 25-30 September 2010, Abu Dhabi, UAE 

LEA: Low Energy Architecture   

 

is an exchange of energy, being its metabolic activity one of the factors affecting the comfort 

of the person in outer space. 

 

For this study the pedestrian circulation in the district of Icaria in the Olympic Village, Sant Marti 

district was chosen. Formerly, it was an industrial zone, which had little relationship with the city. 

With the approval of the Olympic project, this zone disappeared and was renovated and fitted out as 

the athletes’ residences during the Olympic Games in Barcelona in 1992. It is now a residential 

neighborhood, its urban structure consists of five successive strips parallel to the sea and integrated 

park system: 

 

• First strip: beaches and piers with a 

length of over 1 km of the waterfront. 

• Second strip: a broad walk was drawn 

30 feet wide.  

• Third strip: formed by the towers that 

make up the waterfront on a large scale, 

concentrating many activities (hotels, 

offices and recreational spaces clustered 

on the ground floor around the towers). 

• Fourth strip: Ronda del Litoral, is a 

segment of the circulatory system of the 

city belts. 

• Fifth row the urban strip: integrates the 

traditional morphology of the new 

residential typologies. 

 

The study is divided in two tracks, which 

are in front of the first marine facade. These 

tracks are named Track One Port Olímpic 

and Track Two Nova Icaria. Both tracks 

reach the beach. Track One is opposite to a 

closed block and Track Two is opposite to a 

concave shape block. This study was 

conducted in the spring and fall equinoxes, 

and in the summer and winter solstices.  

 

 
Figure 1. Olympic Village District of San Marti 

 

 
 

 
Figure 2. Track One Port Olímpic and Track Two 

'ova Icària. 
Track One is formed for the following pedestrian circulations: 

A. The front porch circulation is SW 

B. Pedestrian and cyclist circulation along groups of trees is SW 

C. Circulation under a tiled roof, open laterally is NE - SW 

D. Circulation on sandy soil, along a row of trees is NE - SW 

E. Circulation between two rows of trees is SE - NW 

F. Circulation along a row of trees is SE - NW 

G. Circulation between two rows of palm trees is NE - SW 

 

For Track Two, points D, E, F and H, were omitted because they lack vertical boundaries. 

 

Track Two is formed by the following pedestrian circulations: 

A. Circulation in front of the NE facade is NW - SE 

B. Circulation in front of the SW façade is NW - SE  

C. Circulation in front of the SE façade is NE - SW  

G. Circulation between two rows of streets is NE - SW 

793



World Renewable Energy Congress XI 

 25-30 September 2010, Abu Dhabi, UAE 

LEA: Low Energy Architecture   

 

 

The program called COMFORT-EX was used for the calculation of comfort in outdoor spaces, which 

was designed by Dr. Jose Manuel Ochoa in 1999.  

 

The process for analysis of comfort of the pedestrian circulation was performed as follows: 

• Each track was grouped and analyzed according to the season, giving the result of the energy 

balance of a person in each pedestrian circulation per hour. 

• To determine the pedestrian circulation of comfort or discomfort, we used the following 

criteria: 

o It was conducted by adding each gain or loss of a person's energy during the day. 

o The total value of gains or losses of energy of pedestrians in pedestrian traffic was 

conclusive to determine the most comfort or discomfort on each track. 

 

Analyzing generally and particularly the variables: 

a) Air temperature and radiation temperature 

- The movement of shadows, according to the horizontal and vertical boundaries. 

- Determining how different materials behave on pavements in terms of radiation making an 

analysis of their albedo and emittance. 

- According to the type of vegetation its transmissivity was determined. 

b) Wind 

- The site plan drawn in the direction of winds at different times of day, given the dominant 

direction. 

- We analyzed the speed and the direction of the wind according to the urban obstacles and 

vegetation. 

c) Humidity 

-We analyzed the percentage of moisture, in relation to the proximity of green areas, trees, and 

walls without vegetation, and how the change of materials influence the percentage of 

humidity. 

 

3. Results 

 

Track One Port Olympics  

The following table shows the most comfort and discomfort during the seasons of the year. 

 

Track One, in 

Port Olímpic 
Comfort 

Warm 

Discomfort 

Spring 

B 

 

Summer 

C G 

Autumn 

E G 

Winter 

B G 

Table 1. Comfort - discomfort in Track One, Port Olimpic. 
 

 

 

From Nova Icaria’s Track Two: 

On table 2, we can see that the pedestrian circulation “G” has the greatest comfort in summer, autumn 

794



World Renewable Energy Congress XI 

 25-30 September 2010, Abu Dhabi, UAE 

LEA: Low Energy Architecture   

 

and winter. The features that make this circulation most comfortable are: 

• Its vegetation filtering the solar radiation, 

• The constant sea breeze, 

• Clay soil, being a porous material allowing water permeability. 

Pedestrian circulation “A”, in front of the northeast facade presents discomfort in two seasons: 

summer and fall. 

In spring all circulations were found in heat discomfort, the most critical of pedestrian circulation is 

letter “B”, in front of the southeast facade. In winter, the pedestrian circulation in front of the southern 

facade was found with the highest heat discomfort. 

 

Track Two, in 

'ova Icaria 
Comfort Warm Discomfort 

Spring 

 

  B  

Summer 

   G   A 

Autumn 

   G   A 

Winter 

   G   C 

Table 2.  Comfort – discomfort in Track Two, 'ova Icària. 
 

4. Conclusions 

 

All this research work answers in a timely manner the questions posed at the beginning, and serves as 

framework for the election of the study in Villa Icaria Barcelona, Spain. 

 

What happens in outdoor spaces in front of the coastline to achieve a comfortable place for 

pedestrians? 

 
Pedestrian circulation on Track One Port Olímpic has as vertical limits, groups and lines of deciduous 

and evergreen trees, which leaves change depending on the time of the year. In summer time when 

solar radiation is higher, the trees protect the pedestrian, generating shadows throughout the day. The 

porch is the circulation of most comfort next to a building with six levels, which makes the energy 

balance of a person, more homogeneous. 

 

How does the breeze influence in comfort? 
 

Breeze is constant during the day; at a distance of 150 mt from the coastline its speed is 1 m/s, and 

increases as we approach the beach, reaching speeds of up to seven m/s. This speed is annoying 

sometimes. This speed of the wind decreases as we move away front the coast. In summer this breeze 

is normally appropriate, due to the temperatures recorded in summer between 22 ºC and 25 ºC. In the 

fall, the pedestrian circulation where the roof is solid, it presents cooler comfort. 

The breeze decreases as we move away from the coast, and is modified by the existing vegetation, 

topography, and shape of the facade, as in the case of the Track Two Nova Icaria’s concave block. 

Wind speed on this route has decreased up to 70% compared to the coastal breeze. Red brick is the 

dominant building material used on floors and walls. It loses moisture quickly and the breeze 

evaporates. 

Is there a difference in the spaces with or without vegetation? 

 

795



World Renewable Energy Congress XI 

 25-30 September 2010, Abu Dhabi, UAE 

LEA: Low Energy Architecture   

 

There is a big difference of discomfort, where there is no vegetation on the three front facades of 

Track Two Nova Icaria especially from 10 in the morning during all the seasons of the year. 

 

    
A B C G 

Figure 3. Pedestrians circulations. Track Two 'ova Icaria. 
 

On Track One Port Olímpic, in the spring as it can be seen on figure 4, it was observed that all 

circulations have comfort because pedestrian circulations “B”, “D”, “E” and “F” have rows or groups 

of different kinds of deciduous and evergreen trees. 

 

  

B. D. E.  F.  

Figure 4. Pedestrians circulations in spring, Track One Port Olímpic. 
 

In the summer, when trees have the highest density of their foliage, as shown on image 4, all 

pedestrian circulation covered with vegetation presented comfort during the day. However, pedestrian 

circulation “C” under a tiled roof presented the most comfort of all during the day. 

 

     
B.  C.  D. E.  F.  

Figure 5. Pedestrian circulation in the summer, Port Olímpic’s Track One. 
 

During the day, because of the high solar radiation and high temperatures, people usually look for 

shady places, depending on the activity being performed, they prefer areas where solar radiation is 

direct, as in the case of the beach area. 

 

   

Figure 6. Sunny and shadow areas, facing the costal line. 
 

 

 

 

In winter, people look for sunny areas, as shown on figure 7. 

 

796



World Renewable Energy Congress XI 

 25-30 September 2010, Abu Dhabi, UAE 

LEA: Low Energy Architecture   

 

   
Figure 7. Pedestrian circulations in winter. 

 

Are the materials affecting the comfort of the pedestrian? 

 

Designing exterior spaces, the choice of materials is of great importance. The ones with low albedo 

like red brick, stone and concrete are a great heat storage. Asphalt street pavement has the greatest 

effect on air temperature. These facts increase the air temperature in outdoor spaces, as a result of 

radiation from the irradiated surface that heats the air by convection. The colors of the facades, walls 

and floors, should be usually clear as they reflect solar radiation. For cold climates it is advisable to 

use dark pavement. 

 

Recommendations 

 
For a coastal temperate climate, it’s recommended to leave at least a distance of 150 meters from the 

construction area to the coastline; this will allow the pedestrians to enjoy the breeze, the alternation of 

the landscape and climate in all seasons. It is very important to seek appropriate vegetation cover for 

the best protection outdoors, considering the physiological and structural changes of the season. 

 

Textile covers are another option to manipulate the projection of shadows and transmissivity. Solid 

covers allow protection from the rain. In summer, they also provide comfort.  

 

Finally, these recommendations, give an opportunity to continue doing more research on: 

 

a. Studying the urban mobility of pedestrians in accordance with local customs, housing, 

restaurants, bars, shops, as well as time spent in outdoor locations. 

b. To determinate the influence of the coastal climate in interior spaces. 

c. Analyzing the urban furniture: such as benches, lampposts, and recreation areas. 

d. Analyzing the pedestrian coastal comfort in other latitudes. 

 

Bibliography 
 
[1] J. Fariña. La ciudad y el medio natural. Ediciones Akal, S.A., Madrid, 2001. 

[2] J.R. García, V. Fuentes. Viento y arquitectura. El viento como factor de diseño arquitectónico. Editorial 

Trillas, S.A. De C.V. México, 2005.  

[3] B.Givoni. Climate considerations in building and urban design. John Wiley & Sons, Inc. United States Of 

America. 1998. 

[4] J. Guerra, J. Cejudo, J. Molina, S. Alvarez, R. Velázquez y R. Vila. Control climático en espacios abiertos. 

Evaluación del Proyecto Expo’92. Junta de Andalucía y Ciemat. Sevilla, 1995. 

[5]J. López de Asiain. Espacios abiertos. Seminario de Arquitectura y Medio Ambiente. Sevilla, 1997. 

[6] J.M. Ochoa. La vegetación como instrumento para el control microclimático. Tesis doctoral. Universidad 

Politécnica De Catalunya. Barcelona, 1999. 

[7] V. Olgyay. Design with climate, bioclimatic approach to architectural regionalism. Princeton University 

Press, Nueva Jersey, 1963. (ed. orig). Edición en español: Arquitectura y clima. Manual de diseño bioclimático 

para arquitectos y urbanistas. Editorial Gustavo Gili. Barcelona, 2006. 

[8] R. Serra y H. Coch. Arquitectura y energía natural.  Ediciones UPC. Barcelona, 2001.  

797


