












































KEYNOTES


3-D GEOMETRICAL MODELLING AND SOLAR RADIATION AT 
URBAN SCALE - MORPHOLOGICAL OR TYPOLOGICAL DIGITAL 

MOCK-UPS? 
Alessandra Curreli; Helena Coch Roura 

Architectural Building Department, School of Architecture of Barcelona - Polytechnic 
University of Catalonia (UPC), Av. Diagonal 649, 08028 Barcelona (Spain)  

ABSTRACT  

Studies regarding solar energy at the neighbourhood scale always have to deal with the size 
and the complex geometry of a real built context. Three-dimensional modelling techniques 
allow visual reproduction of formal features and solar performance of a city portion. 
Nevertheless, the definition of the right level of detail (LOD) is always a crucial point when 
creating digital mock-ups.   

On the one hand, currently available computational resources are not totally able to support 
the exact representation of a building cluster and the simulation of environmental phenomena 
is often based on parametrical analyses. On the other hand, a drastic geometrical abstraction 
could discard important information and affect the reliability of solar predictions.  

This study aims to identify the most suitable LOD to simulate the solar performance at the 
mesoscale of the city. To do this, the direct radiation access within a building cluster is 
assessed by employing virtual models with different approximation degrees.  

This comparison allows assessing the margin of error between different levels of detail and 
discussing about benefits and inconveniences of the two approaches. The results might be 
elaborated to define a rank of deviation factors, useful to evaluate the margin of error 
provided by generic models with regard to solar predictions.  

Keywords: geometrical 3-D modelling, mesoscale, morphological and typological mock-ups,
LOD, solar potential predictions, roughness

INTRODUCTION  

The development and application of three-dimensional virtual models in the field of 
environmental studies offer great facilities to the research regarding solar access at the scale 
of the city district [1]. Traditional graphical methods [2] impose, in fact, a high degree of 
abstraction and provide information that is often limited to a schematic or two-dimensional 
representation of the urban context. Digital tools permit, instead, to handle large amounts of 
data and reproduce the complexity of a real urban structure considered as a whole system.  

The employment of digital mock-ups for solar simulation allows for simultaneous evaluation 
of energy gains on different surfaces and ensures more accurate results. However, currently 
available hardware and software resources still have some limitations in exactly reproducing 
the complex interaction between the solar phenomenon and the extremely heterogeneous 
geometry of an urban portion. Therefore, a certain approximation degree is necessarily 
required by mesoscale modelling. 

At the same time, applying drastic simplifications and assimilating the irregular urban fabric 
structure to a continuous array of identical blocks might cause the loss of relevant information 
and seriously affect the reliability of final outputs. 

CISBAT 2013 - September 4-6, 2013 - Lausanne, Switzerland 1029



What is, therefore, the correct level of detail (LOD) for 3-D digital mock-ups at the 
neighbourhood scale? What is the relevant geometrical information to enclose, in order to get 
the right balance among calculating time, processing power and confidence of solar results? 

Previous research was developed about the effectiveness of generic models for environmental 
analyses [3, 4] and about techniques for a simplified spatial representation of complex urban 
scenes [5, 6]. Outcomes of those studies commonly demonstrate the significant influence of 
morphological specificities on the amount and distribution of solar energy collected. 
Nevertheless, the possibility to exploit simple and synthetic models is not rejected at all, but it
asks for some specifications. 

The definition of a correct LOD for virtual models is firstly related to the final purpose of the 
solar analysis. Furthermore, it should be considered that the effects of any simplification 
action might differently affect solar predictions, depending on the uniformity of the original 
configuration and on the position of the exposed surfaces.  

This paper deals with the assessment of solar potential on building façades and roofs by 
means of digital mock-ups with different levels of detail. The main purpose is to establish the 
most suitable LOD of 3-D models for solar simulation at the district scale. More specifically, 
it aims to evaluate the extent to which an identical simplification process might affect the 
solar potential of horizontal and vertical surfaces with regard to different degrees of 
morphological roughness. This kind of approach shall permit to identify the variable 
deviation factor associated to the application of generic models to different urban contexts.  

METHOD 

This study is based on the comparative analysis of solar predictions provided by the use of 
morphological and typological models. The former class keeps relevant geometrical 
specificities of the real urban form; the latter consists of a homogeneous simplified pattern, 
shaped according to the general and average spatial features deduced from experimental data.  

Two urban fabric samples with very dissimilar formal structures were selected in the 
metropolitan area of Barcelona (Spain): the Eixample district (Case 1) is the result of a 
specific design and stands out for its ordered network; the Barri Gotic area (Case 2) keeps the 
typical features of an old city centre with narrow streets and irregular blocks (Figure 1).  

Figure 1: Aerial view of the selected urban fabrics: Eixample (left) and Barri Gotic (right). 
Source: https://maps.google.es/

Morphological modelling 
The morphological models (class A) were built on the basis of the cadastral plans which 
contain data about the number of floors, patios, courtyards and staircases of every block. 
Direct observation and photographical surveys were employed to complete and validate the 
available information. By assigning a height of 3m to each floor and extruding the plot 
footprint by computer-aided design techniques (software AutoCad), a 3-D reproduction of the 
existing buildings was therefore obtained.  

1030 CISBAT 2013 - September 4-6, 2013 - Lausanne, Switzerland



The level of detail of these models is similar to level LOD2 of the CityGML official OGC 
Standard [7]. This means that the positional and height accuracy is about 2m and objects with 
a footprint of at least 4m x 4m are included (Figure 2). 

Figure 2: Morphological models of the Eixample (left) and Barri Gotic samples (right) 

Typological shaping
The construction of the two typological models (class B) was based on the average 
dimensions determined by means of the SpaceCalculator method [8]. This tool allows 
calculating a series of indicators which express the abstract spatial properties of an urban area 
by mutually relating empirical data through mathematical functions (Fig. 3).  

In order to reproduce the right proportion of full and empty spaces, the overall volume and the 
coefficient of porosity [9] were set equivalent to those of the morphological mock-ups (with a 
margin of error of about 2-3,5%); the proportions and distribution of voids were arranged 
according to the prevailing distinctive characteristics of the real urban fabric. The level of 
detail of typological models can be assimilated to LOD1 (see [7]), where the accuracy is 
about 5m and only major-scale objects are represented (Figure 3). 

Figure 3: Typological models of the Eixample (left) and Barri Gotic samples (right) 

Assessment of solar potential and deviation factor 
The solar potential is defined as the ratio of solar gains to exposure surface area of roofs and 
façades, independently. Horizontal (SPh) and vertical solar potential (SPv) were assessed in 
samples 1 and 2 with regard to the classes of model A and B, during the months with the 
highest and lowest level of irradiation: July and December, respectively. The solar simulation 
was implemented by means of the software Heliodon 2 [10]. 

The deviation factor (df) is computed as the percentage variation between solar potential 
values provided by the typological approach and solar potential values referred to the 
corresponding morphological method.   

CISBAT 2013 - September 4-6, 2013 - Lausanne, Switzerland 1031



RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 

Roofs 
As a general tendency, the employment of typological mock-ups enhances the assessment of 
horizontal solar gains (Table 1). In fact, the flattening of height variations and the elimination 
of any protruding volumes considerably reduces the presence of obstructions on the roofs and 
improves their exposition to solar rays. The only surfaces that nearly do not receive any direct 
radiation are the covers of the minor patios located at a very lower level, but they do not 
affect the overall results, tahnks to their very limited extension. 

In both case studies, the deviation factor between A and B in the month of December is more 
than double with respect to July (59% vs 23% in Eixample and 48% vs 21% in Barri Gotic),
due to the greater impact of obstructions and of their cast shadows during the winter months.   

Comparing the performances of the two urban patterns, it is observed that the values of df are 
slightly lower in Case 2 than in Case 1 (48% vs 59% in December and 21% vs 23% in July). 
This means that, when dealing with morphological models, the weight of shadowing on SPh is
more notable in the Eixample than in the Gotic district. This performance is attributable to the 
major presence of vertical projections on the roofs, that is to say to the higher level of 
roughness in the former case with respect to the latter. 

Finally, it has to be noticed that the utter amounts of SPh, are always higher in Case 2 than in 
Case 1. In other words, the simplification process does not modify the general tendency of 
behaviour: both morphological and typological models, in fact, evidence that covers in the 
Barri Gotic area have a bigger solar potential with respect to those in the Eixample district. 

Table 1: Horizontal solar potential (SPh) in kWh/m2: December (left) and July (right) 

Façades 
Vertical surfaces show a more complex functioning with regard to the use of different LOD 
models, but some points in common with the performance of roofs can be found. The results 
confirm that the influence of actual geometry on solar potential is more important during the 
cold season: in absolute values, df decreases from 72% to 51% in Case 1 and from 34% to 4% 
in Case 2, in December and July, respectively (Table 2).   

Once more, the deviation factor is more elevated in the Eixample than in the Barri Gotic
neighbourhood and the difference between the two cases is more considerable than before: df
is 72% vs -34% in the cold period and 51% vs -4% in the warm one. These data verify the 
tendency that was previously identified, that is to say the greater impact produced by the 
simplification process on SPv in the sample 1 with respect to the sample 2.  

However, while in the case of roofs the divergence was entirely attributed to the height 
variations, the performance of vertical surfaces is also affected by the horizontal roughness,
that is understood as the presence of folds, protrusions and indentations with respect to the 
hypothetical “straight line” of a façade. Looking at the spatial distribution of the SPv, the main 
differences between models A and B are effectively detected on internal fronts of the block, 
which show a very fragmented geometrical structure. 

Case studies Model A Model B df (%) Case studies Model A Model B df (%)
1_Eixample 17,40 27,61 59 1_Eixample 155,00 191,07 23
2_Gotic 23,25 34,42 48 2_Gotic 165,09 199,82 21

1032 CISBAT 2013 - September 4-6, 2013 - Lausanne, Switzerland



The most remarkable and probably unforeseen result is that the employment of typological 
models leads to an under-estimation of the solar potential on Barri Gotic façades, namely: -
34% in winter and -4% in summer. This one constitutes the only case, among those which 
were studied, where the homogenization of irregularities (i.e. the inner outline and cavities of 
the block) improves possibilities for solar access. 

Despite the contrasting results obtained in cases 1 and 2, it is important to point out again that 
the overall qualitative trend is not altered by the application of simplified models: in both A 
and B, in fact, the results display that the Eixample configuration supplies a higher vertical 
solar potential than the one provided by the Barri Gotic domain.

Table 2: Vertical solar potential (SPv) in kWh/m2: December (left) and July (right) 

CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE DEVELOPMENTS

This paper examines and compares the application of variable level-of-detail digital mock-ups 
with regard to the assessment of solar potential within different urban patterns.   

In general terms, the results of the analysis demonstrate that the same LOD might produce 
changeable margins of error in evaluating possible solar gains, depending on the roughness 
and on the spatial characteristics of the urban pattern, on the period of the year and on the 
relative position of surfaces which are considered. It is, therefore, not possible to define an 
optimal LOD for solar simulation at urban scale nor identify a univocal deviation factor to be 
indistinctly applied to all classes of typological models. Nevertheless, some general 
considerations can be done: 

- The simplification process mostly affects the three-dimensional virtual models of those 
urban fabrics which display a high degree of geometrical roughness.  

In the present analysis, the highest deviation factor is detected in the case of the Eixample.
The apparent morphological homogeneity that characterizes this pattern is actually limited to 
the street network and the external perimeter of the blocks, but the effective distribution of 
volumes is jagged. In fact, both the compactness and the porosity coefficients (see [9])
confirm that the Eixample sample has a lower level of mass concentration and a denser 
distribution of empty spaces with respect to the Barri Gotic one, which exhibits, instead, a 
smoother envelope. 

- The employment of typological digital mock-ups might have dissimilar effects on 
quantitative predictions of solar potential, according to the vertical or horizontal position and 
to the openness of a surface. 

In the case of roofs, the flattening of vertical projections generally produces an over-
estimation of the energy collected. In the case of façades, the influence of roughness enhances 
or reduces the SPv according to the greater or lesser spaciousness of the block internal 
surfaces. In fact, the deviation factor assumes positive values in wide and unobstructed spatial 
surroundings (i.e. the central courtyard in the Eixample block), but becomes negative when 
close and narrow spaces are considered (i.e. the resulting room within the Barri Gotic block).
From the historical point of view, this performance might be related to the fact that the 
unplanned growth of the Gotic district probably allowed for an “instinctive” and spontaneous 
exploitation of available space, in order to get optimal solar exposure conditions.   

Case studies Model A Model B df (%) Case studies Model A Model B df (%)
1_Eixample 11,42 19,65 72 1_Eixample 32,67 49,45 51
2_Gotic 7,07 4,64 -34 2_Gotic 24,65 23,67 -4

CISBAT 2013 - September 4-6, 2013 - Lausanne, Switzerland 1033



- For both horizontal and vertical surfaces, the incorporation of specific details within the 
morphological 3-D modelling is definitely more impacting during the cold season because of 
the lower altitude of the sun in the sky vault and the greater impact of cast shadows. 

In summary, it must be recognized that, in all the cases that have been studied, a lower 
approximation degree (from LOD2 to LOD1) does not modify the tendential relative solar 
performance of roofs and façades within a particular layout. Therefore, the employment of 
simplified models appears particularly suitable and helpful in comparative analyses aimed at 
evaluating the qualitative solar potential of different urban fabric archetypes. This kind of 
approach might be useful during the early decision steps of the design process, in order to fit 
urban design solutions and predicted daylight and thermal requirements.  

However, specific attention should be paid to the simplification process, particularly to the 
definition of proper criterions and tools to regulate and implement the transition from a 
morphological reproduction to a typological representation of the city at the mesoscale. The 
manual method applied in this study proves to be valid and reliable, but displays some 
restrictions in the simultaneous handling of several dimensional and formal parameters. For 
this reason, the typological modelling necessarily requires a certain approximation degree. 

A parametrical approach, supported by appropriate computational and modelling software, is 
strongly recommendable for further investigation about 3-D digital mock-ups and solar 
potential assessment. This kind of method would ensure a greater rigorousness with regard to 
the consistency between different level-of-detail models and to the assumption of generally
applicable results. Furthermore, it would enable systematic processing of digital mock-ups 
and solar comparative analyses extended to a wider series of urban cases.

REFERENCES  

1. Peckham, R.J.: Shading evaluations with three-dimensional models. Computer-Aided 
Design, Vol. 17, Issue 7, pp. 305-310, September, 1985.  

2. Littlefair, P.: Passive solar urban design: ensuring the penetration of solar energy into the 
city. Renewable and sustainable energy reviews, Vol. 2, Issue 3, pp. 303-326, Sept., 1998. 

3. Rasheed, A. et al.: On the effects of complex geometries on mesoscale modelling. ICUC-7 
7th International Conference on Urban Climate, Yokohama, Japan, 29 June–3 July, 2009. 

4. Beckers, B. et al.: About solar energy simulation in the urban framework: the model of 
Compiègne. 3rd International Congress Bauhaus Solar, Erfurt, Germany 10-11 Nov., 2010. 

5. Adolphe, L.: A simplified model of urban morphology: application to an analysis of the 
environmental performance of cities. Environmental and Planning B Planning and Design, 
Vol. 28, Issue 2, pp. 183-200, 2001. 

6. Ratti, C. et al.: Building form and environmental performance: archetypes, analysis and an 
arid climate. Energy and Buildings, Vol. 35, Issue 1, pp. 49-59, January, 2003. 

7. Gröger, G., et al.: OpenGIS® City Geography Markup Language (CityGML) Encoding 
Standard. Open Geospatial Consortium Inc., 2008. www.opengeospatial.org

8. Berghauser Pont, M., Haupt, P.: Spacematrix. Space, density and urban form. NAi 
Publishers, Rotterdam, 2010. 

9. Serra, R., Coch, H.: Arquitectura y energía natural. Edicions UPC, Barcelona, 1995.
10. Beckers, B., Masset, L.: Heliodon2. www.heliodon.net, 2011. 

1034 CISBAT 2013 - September 4-6, 2013 - Lausanne, Switzerland


