






























































































pu_730.docx


 

 CHARACTERIZATION OF SOLAR ACCESS IN MEDITERRANEAN CITIES: 
ORIENTED SKY FACTOR 

 
Garcia-Nevado, Elena School of Architecture of Barcelona elena.garcia.nevado@upc.edu 
Pagès-Ramon, Anna School of Architecture of Barcelona anna.pages@upc.edu 
Coch, Helena School of Architecture of Barcelona helena.coch@upc.edu 
Beckers, Benoit Compiègne University of Technology benoit.beckers@utc.fr 

 

 
Fig 1: Barcelona urban fabrics. From left to right, basis for typological street models A, B and C  

 

WHICH ARE YOUR ARCHITECTURAL (R)SOLUTIONS TO THE SOCIAL, ENVIRONMENTAL AND ECONOMIC 
CHALLENGES OF TODAY? 
Research summary  
The link between city morphology and urban energy consumption, although proved, requires further 
research. In that sense, the analysis of parameters describing the urban texture may be a useful 
approach for energy assessment at a city scale. Some geometrical parameters have been used to 
study urban energy aspects related to the radiative phenomena, such as heat island or even a rough 
indicator of solar energy availability in locations where direct radiation is not determining. This paper 
aims to explore the correlation between one of these parameters -the Sky Factor (SF)- and direct solar 
radiation over facades, as a characterization tool of solar access within an urban context. Barcelona, a 
Mediterranean city where direct sunlight and the built environment density are deciding factors, has 
been chosen as case study. At different points of the facade for several urban canyons, SF value and 
direct solar radiation for different orientations and times of the year have been computed using 
Heliodon software. Both results have been related one to another and it has been found that, for a 
specific latitude, it is possible to define a smooth dependence between these parameters, if the 
orientation is taken into account. This paper shows that, beyond the SF threshold of 0.42, direct solar 
radiation on the facade reaches an almost asymptotic value for all orientations and times of the year.  
 
Keywords: Sky Factor, Solar Radiation, Urban morphology, Mediterranean environment 



 

1. Introduction  
 
Cities are responsible for about two thirds of 
the total global energy consumption and 
greenhouse gas emissions worldwide. In the 
current context of ecological crisis, improving 
the understanding of their energy performance 
should be a main environmental concern.  
Urban morphology has been highlighted as one 
of the significant factors regarding the energy 
behaviour of cities (Ewing, 2010; Ratti et al., 
2005; Steemers, 2003). Unfortunately, no 
"standard recipe" exists for a sustainable urban 
layout and this subject requires further 
research based on local features. The 
discussion about urban compactness, which is 
a widely accepted strategy for sustainable 
developments, and the needed solar gains in 
passive design may be a recurrent example of 
this complex balance (Gordon & Richardson, 
1997; Neuman, 2005).  
Parameters characterizing the urban geometry 
can be useful tools to describe how energy 
exchanges happen within a built environment. 
Nevertheless, more research in this regard is 
needed in order to analyse accurately the 
energy demand of urban patterns.  
Some features of city morphology can be 
explained through the analysis of the visible 
sky fraction seen by urban surfaces. This 
geometrical approach has been intensely used 
in urban research and planning due to its 
strong relationship with radiation balance of a 
particular location and, accordingly, to its 
energy budget (Johnson & Watson, 1984; Oke, 
1987). Several of these applications have been 
the study of heat island intensity (Unger, 
2004), daylighting possibilities (Cheung & 
Chung, 2005) or even, as a rough indicator of 
the solar energy received by the urban surfaces 
in some locations where direct radiation is not 
determining (Robinson, 2006). However, the 
assesment of solar potencial based just on the 

portion of visible sky is not accurate enough in 
locations where direct radiation is a deciding 
factor, as Mediterranean cities.  
The amount of visible sky at a particular urban 
spot is calculated using several techniques (Gál 
et al., 2008; Matuschek & Matzarakis, 2010; 
Matzarakis et al., 2010; Watson et al,  1987). 
This geometrical concept has been assessed 
through two dimensionless parameters, sky 
view factor (SVF) and sky factor (SF) (Beckers, 
2009; Capeluto et al, 2006). The difference 
between them lies on the way of weighting sky 
depending on their zenith angle, resulting in 
the presence or absence of a cosine weighting 
factor respectively (Hämmerle et al., 2011; 
Szegediensis, 2011).  
The aim of the present contribution is to 
characterize Mediterranean urban canyons 
through exploring the relationship between 
the Sky Factor (SF) and direct radiation over 
facades, as an indicator of solar access in a 
dense built environment (Beckers, 2013).   
 
 
3. Method  
 
Two parameters have been taken into 
consideration in this research: Sky Factor (SF) 
and direct solar radiation.  All the calculations 
are conducted using Heliodon software, a 
computer application suitable for calculating 
and visualizing both of them (Beckers & 
Masset, 2006).  
Regarding solar radiation, this computer tool 
runs its calculations taking into account clear 
sky conditions and only considering the direct 
component.  
Both parameters will be accounted on vertical 
surfaces of an urban canyon at different 
heights. In this study, the midpoints of each 
floor facade are assessed and only the  
obstructions of an endless street have been 
considered.  



 

On the previously specified points, direct solar 
radiation impinging on the facade (kWh/m2) 
will be calculated for particular days and 
different orientations.  
Finally, both results will be related one to 
another appropriately for drawing exportable 
conclusions.  
 
4. Case study description  
 
To study the correlation between SF and direct 
solar radiation, Barcelona (41o 23' N), an 
example of Mediterranean compact city, has 
been chosen as location for the present work.  
The study case comprises three street models 
defined as a typological simplification of real 
canyons, which are selected according to an 
increasing level of urban density (Fig 1).  
Geometrical configuration of the three models 
is depicted in Fig 2. Based on the Eixample 
District, model A consists of a 20-meters wide 
street with 20 meters height, i.e., a width-to-
height ratio of 1. In the two other models, B 
and C, the height remains unchanged while the 
width decreases to 12 and 6 meters 
respectively, thereby generating more critical 
scenarios regarding to solar access.  
The 20 meters height of the building models a 
standard six-storey building with five regular 
floors and a commercial ground floor.  
Along a vertical column of the facade, at 
midpoint of each level, six points of calculation 
(P0-P6) have been defined for accounting SF. 
Solar radiation has been tested on the same 
points of each model for the main eight 
orientations (N, S, E/W, NE/NW, SE/SW) and 
on solstice days.   
 
5. Results and discussion 
 
5.1. Sky Factor over facades 

As all the analyzed spots belong to facades, the 
highest possible SF value is 0.50 (a point on   

Fig 2: Urban canyon model; Points (P0-P5) for SF 
and direct solar radiation calculations  



 

vertical plane just can see a half of sky vault). 
Inside   the   urban   canyon  model,   the  lower  
height of the calculation point, the lower SF is 
accounted, reaching values of 0.10 (Table 1). 
SF value is a geometrical issue, just dependent 
on the relative position between the 
calculation point and the obstacles which 
prevent it from seeing the sky. Therefore, the 
same "sky view situation" appears in streets 
with different aspect ratios, just modifying the  
height. For instance, the midpoint of the 4td 
floor in a canyon with 0,3 aspect ratio (i.e., 
model C-P4), sees almost the same sky fraction 
(0,30) that a spot located at the ground level of 
a street with a ratio of 1 (i.e., model A-P0). 
 
5.2. Solar radiation 
Regarding to solar radiation, not only the 
street geometry but also orientation combined 
with time of the year are determining 
parameters, as shown Table 2 and 3.   
Winter maximum value of solar radiation is 
reached in the south facade and rises up to 
2,73 kWh/m2, whereas in summer case,  this 
maximum is located in east and west facade 
with 2,70 kWh/m2.  
Energy consequences of considering deeper 
points within the canyon are more significant 
the narrower the street and the lower the sun 
elevation are. In summer solstice, maximum 
differences between the highest and lowest 
floor can be founded in NE/NW and E/O 
orientations. In winter, this effect is further 
accentuated by lower sun positions and the 
most extrem changes shift towards S and 
SE/SW orientations, passing from a partially 
sunlit floor facade to a completely shaded one.   
 
5.3. Correlation between SF and Radiation 
Figures 3 and 4 show the relationship between 
the sky fraction seen by the selected facade 
points and the direct solar radiation which is 
received on the solstice days.  

 
 

Table 1:  SF at calculation points of facades 
 

 
 

Table 2: Direct solar radiation on summer solstice 
day (kWh/m2) 
 

 
 

Table 3:  Direct solar radiation on winter  solstice 
day (kWh/m2) 

 

Point Height Model A   
W/H = 1 

Model B  
W/H = 0.6 

Model C  
W/H = 0.3 

P5 18,50 0,48 0,46 0,42 
P4 15,50 0,44 0,39 0,30 
P3 12,50 0,40 0,32 0,22 
P2 9,50 0,37 0,27 0,17 
P1 6,50 0,34 0,23 0,13 
P0 2,50 0,30 0,19 0,11 



 

 
Fig 3: Direct solar radiation (kWh/m2) by Sky Factor 
in summer solstice 

 
 

 
 
Fig 4: Direct solar radiation (kWh/m2) by Sky Factor 
in winter solstice  
 
As expected, meaningful solar radiation 
differences are accounted for equals SF, due to 
the strong dependence between the solar 
energy and the facade orientation. Therefore, 
predicting direct solar radiation from SF 
without further consideration, can lead to 
significant under and overestimations between 
the average values and the calculated ones.  
However, a deeper analysis by classifying the 
outcomes according to orientation may be 
more revealing, as shown below. Figures 5 and 
6 reflect a dependence between SF and direct 
radiation, which can be approximated as a 

branch of hyperbolic tangent function.  
Variations in SF due to the urban canyon 
obstructions have uneven impacts over solar 
access depending on the time and orientation. 
This fact is evident from the sharp change in 
winter radiation over the south facade - 
detected around a SF value of 0,37-  
contrasting to the more gradual trends for 
other orientations.   
In addition, it can be observed that, the 
amount of incident solar radiation remains 
stable beyond a specific SF threshold, for each 
orientation and time of the year. This value 
marks the height limit above which the 
partially shaded facade fraction turns into a 
completely sunlit surface, not being affected by 
the cast shadows of its built environment. At 
any time of the year and orientation, direct 
solar radiation approaches an almost 
asymptotic value (deviation <5%) beyond a 
0,42 SF value. 
Concerning the winter case, two aspects 
should be highlighted regarding the link 
between solar radiation and SF for the case 
study. On one hand, almost negligible direct 
solar energy is received below a SF value of 
0,23 for all the orientations. Therefore, this 
23% of SF should be considered as the 
minimum amount of visible sky needed to have 
quantifiable solar loads in winter case. On the 
other hand, it is remarkable that, within the SF 
span between 0,23 and 0,37, no solar radiation 
impinges on a south facade yet, whereas those 
orientated to east, west, south-east and south-
west already receive a small fraction, even 
considering an endless street canyon.  
These results show that, although the 
maximum winter solar potential is traditionally 
associated to an unobstructed south facade, 
other urban layouts are more suitable 
regarding solar gains in narrower 
environments, characterized by facades with 
SF values lower than 0,37.  



 

 
Fig 5:  Direct solar radiation (kWh/m2) by Sky Factor and orientation in summer solstice   
 

 
Fig 6: Fig 4: Direct solar radiation (kWh/m2) by Sky Factor and orientation in winter solstice 
 
6. Conclusions  
 
This paper shows that it is possible to 
characterize solar access in Mediterranean 
urban canyons considering an Oriented Sky 
Factor.  
This research demonstrates that both relative 
height over the street and width-to-height 
ratio (W/H) are not significant parameters to 
estimate solar radiation if they are analysed 
separately. On the contrary, the SF value, 
whose calculation implies these two former 
concepts jointly, can be used as an accurate 

indicator of direct radiation over facades once 
the orientation is settled. 
The results of this work show that, for a given 
latitude, it is possible to find a smooth 
dependence between SF and direct incident 
radiation taking into account the orientation of 
the urban canyon facade.  
This relationship can be approximated as a 
branch of hyperbolic tangent function. A 
meaningful SF threshold (about 0,42) is 
detected beyond the impinging direct radiation 
shows an asymptotic trend for all orientations 
and time of the year.  



 

This approach can provide a better 
understanding of the urban energy behaviour, 
a necessary step towards a sustainable and 
resilient city. 
 
 
7. Acknowledgments 
 
This work has been supported by the Spanish 
Ministry of Economy under project code: 
BIA2013-45597-R, and a FPU fellowship from 
the Spanish Ministry of Education granted to 
Elena Garcia Nevado.  
 
 
8. References  
Beckers, B. (2009). Geometrical interpretation of 

sky light in architecture projects. Proceedings 
of the International Scientific Conference on 
Renewables in a Changing Climate: From 
Nano to Urban Scale. CISBAT. 

Beckers, B. (2013). Solar energy at urban scale. 
John Wiley & Sons. 

Beckers, B., & Masset, L. (2006). Heliodon 2. 
Software and User Guide. 

Capeluto, I. G., Yezioro, A., Bleiberg, T., & Shaviv, E. 
(2006). Solar Rights in the Design of Urban 
Spaces, (September), 6–8. 

Cheung, H. D., & Chung, T. M. (2005). Calculation of 
the Vertical Daylight Factor on Window 
Façades in a Dense Urban Environment. 
Architectural Science Review, 48(1), 81–91.  

Ewing, R. (2010). The Impact of Urban Form on U . S 
. Residential Energy Use, 19(April 2013), 37–
41. 

Gál, T., Lindberg, F., & Unger, J. (2008). Computing 
continuous sky view factors using 3D urban 
raster and vector databases: comparison and 
application to urban climate. Theoretical and 
Applied Climatology, 95(1-2), 111–123.  

Gordon, P., & Richardson, H. W. (1997). Are 
Compact Cities a Desirable Planning Goal? 
Journal of the American Planning Association, 
63(1), 95–106.  

Hämmerle, M., Gál, T., Unger, J., & Matzarakis, A. 
(2011). Comparison of models calculating the 
sky view factor used for urban climate 
investigations. Theoretical and Applied 
Climatology, 105(3-4), 521–527.  

Johnson, G. T., & Watson, I. D. (1984). The 
determination of View-Factors in Urban 
Canyons. Journal of Applied Meteorology and 
Climatology, 23(2), 329 –335. 

Matuschek, O., & Matzarakis, A. (2010). Estimation 
of sky view factor in complex environment as 
a tool for applied climatological studies. 
Berichte Des Meteorologischen Instituts Der 
Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg, 20, 534–
539. 

Matzarakis, A., Rutz, F., & Mayer, H. (2010). 
Modelling radiation fluxes in simple and 
complex environments: Basics of the RayMan 
model. International Journal of 
Biometeorology, 54, 131–139.  

Neuman, M. (2005). The Compact City Fallacy. 
Journal of Planning Education and Research, 
25(1), 11–26.  

Oke, T. R. (1987). Boundary layer climates. 2nd. 
Methuen, 289p (2nd ed.). London. 

Ratti, C., Baker, N., & Steemers, K. (2005). Energy 
consumption and urban texture. Energy and 
Buildings, 37(7), 762–776.  

Robinson, D. (2006). Urban morphology and 
indicators of radiation availability. Solar 
Energy, 80(12), 1643–1648.  

Steemers, K. (2003). Energy and the city: density, 
buildings and transport. Energy and Buildings, 
35(1), 3–14.  

Szegediensis, U. (2011). INTRODUCING A SCRIPT 
FOR CALCULATING THE SKY VIEW FACTOR, 
83–92. 

Unger, J. (2004). Intra-urban relationship between 
surface geometry and urban heat island : 
review and new approach. Climate Research, 
27, 253–264. 

Watson, I. D. and Johnson, G. T. (1987). Graphical 
estimation of sky view-factors in urban 
environments. Journal of Climatology, 7:(2), 
193–197.  

 


