












































cisbat11_proceedings_vol1.pdf


POTENTIAL FOR ENERGY SAVING IN TRANSITIONAL SPACES IN 
COMMERCIAL BUILDINGS

Alonso, C.; Aguilar, A.; Coch, H.; Isalgué, A. 

Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya / EtsaB, Edifici A, 7ª planta. Avda. Diagonal, 649. 
08028 Barcelona, Spain. Tel: (0034) 93.401.08.68 / email: carlos.alonso-montolio@upc.edu

ABSTRACT
As it is known, the energy consumption of buildings is directly linked to their energy demand. 
Therefore, the most direct strategy to reduce the energy consumption of a building is to 
minimise its energy demand. This can be done in two ways. On the one hand, the energy 
demand can be reduced by minimising the size of some energy consuming spaces in the 
building. It can also be reduced by minimising the requirements of their comfort conditions. 
This second strategy is especially effective in transitional spaces, where the comfort 
requirements have wider limits than in normally occupied zones so energy savings are 
possible by allowing for a modest relaxation of the comfort standards. This paper reports on 
an analytical study into the energy-saving potential associated with modifications in thermal 
comfort limits in transitional spaces in commercial buildings. Such transitional spaces may 
not require the same high level and close control as more fully indoor or fully occupied areas, 
and thus a wider variation in conditions and interpretation of thermal comfort may be 
permitted. They also take up a significant fraction of the total volume of these kinds of 
buildings and give rise to significant energy use to provide comfort by means of heating or 
cooling systems. Initial trial calculations have been conducted using standardised commercial 
building layouts in order to determine the potential for energy savings. Commercial buildings 
have been chosen not only due to the extensive presence of this kind of building in almost all 
cities, but also because of the considerable percentage of transitional spaces that these 
buildings have in a standard floor plan. The relationship between these transition al spaces and 
the indoor areas will also be considered in this study. Estimates are made of the energy-saving 
potential based on different commercial buildings located in the climate of the Barcelona area 
in Spain. 

INTRODUCTION

Transitional spaces 
There are spaces in architecture that cannot be classified as either indoor or outdoor and 
whose existence cannot be explained in terms of any precise or specific use [1]. We can find 
this kind of space between the indoor environment and the outdoor environment, without 
defined limits between inside and outside. They are the transitional spaces and they have 
existed across different cultures throughout the history of architecture. Moreover, although 
transitional spaces may not have any specific use, they are required to fulfil a function of 
transition between the outdoors and the internal constructed environment, so this is why they 
are such adaptable and comfortable spaces, as well as why they are found in such a diverse 
array of places. 

This paper deals with transitional spaces from an environmental point of view, due to the 
opportunity that such spaces provide for possibly modifying the comfort requirements. 



Strategies to lower energy consumption 
The energy consumption of buildings is directly related first to the efficiency of artificial 
energy systems and secondly to the energy demand of the buildings themselves. Due to the 
fact that the rise in the energy efficiency or performance of air conditioning and heating 
systems has its limits, and therefore there is little margin for reducing consumption, the 
challenge lies in reducing the energy demand without changing the users’ perception of 
comfort.

From the standpoint of architectural design, this drop in the building’s energy demand can be 
made both by minimising the size of some of the spaces inside the building that consume 
energy (which would have clear repercussions on the formal resolution of buildings and the 
consequent use and behaviour of the users), and by lowering the requirements in certain areas 
of the building, which would be more or less feasible depending on the kind of space in which 
we are acting. In this sense, the second strategy is particularly effective in transitional spaces, 
where we can allow greater variation in the thermal conditions and where the environmental 
needs have much broader limits than in the remaining spaces, leading to potentially 
quantifiable energy savings. Furthermore, in many cases transitional spaces bring added value 
to the architectural design regarding the users’ perception of thermal comfort, as they 
dynamically adapt to environmental conditions halfway between indoor and outdoor and thus 
are not as static as the unvarying interior conditions. 

Lowering the demand in transitional spaces 
As a direct consequence, according to the typology of the building being studied, this 
reduction in consumption can be more or less important. This study concentrates on all the 
transitional spaces in public buildings. Despite the fact that they might also show private 
transitional elements (such as galleries, balconies, etc.), most of their functional demands 
require them to have large communal transitional spaces (such as entry lobbies, hallways, 
etc.).

Within these public buildings, we can find a series of examples (such as schools, museums, 
markets, airports and commercial buildings) that are based on the routes the users take 
through the building. That is, they all share the common feature of possessing large 
transitional spaces. In these cases, the hallway is one of the transitional elements between 
outdoors and indoors, and it is also the element that joins the different service-providing units 
(such as classrooms, works of art, market stalls, shops or products for sale, etc.). 

By analysing the thermal needs of these transitional spaces, we reach the conclusion that they 
largely depend on the thermal needs of the different units to which the spaces lead, as well as 
on the relationships existing with these units. Furthermore, the thermal needs of transitional 
spaces also depend on the degree to which they are exposed to the outdoor environment 
(closely or loosely related) as well as on their own function, that is, how long the users are in 
them and these users’ expectations, adaptation time, etc.

Therefore, this study focuses specifically on commercial buildings since a priori they seem to 
be clear examples of transitional spaces with a vast potential for energy savings, associated 
first with the wide margin of their levels and environmental control limits and secondly with 
the high percentage of the total volume they occupy in the standard floor of this kind of 
buildings. What is more, there are extensive examples of this building model throughout 
history as well as in the majority of cities in the world today: from the Mediterranean Greek 
and Roman agorae and stoas to the bazaars and souks of the warm Islamic climates, and even 
the porticoed galleries found in rainy climates and today’s shopping malls.



METHOD

Existing environmental conditions 
This study is based on real examples and was calculated for the city of Barcelona, which is 
located at a latitude of 41º 20’ N and in a mild, humid Mediterranean climate which is hot in 
the summer (Csa), according to the Köpen-Geiger climate classification from the University 
of Melbourne. Regarding the temperatures, the winters are mild with average temperatures of 
9º C to 11º C, while the summers are hot, with average temperatures ranging between 23º C 
and 24º C and a moderate thermal amplitude and average yearly rainfall of around 600 mm. 

Study models 
Based on an analysis of the contemporary casuistic of shopping centres in the city, we 
generated three basic calculation models. The first is the traditional shop model, usually on a 
local scale and relatively small in size, rectangular-shaped and attached to other shops on the 
side facades and with a relatively permeable facade facing the street outdoors through which 
customers enter (model A). On the other extreme is the mall-type building, which usually has 
a large interior volume and is shaped compactly and hermetically as a building. This model 
usually has a percentage of opaque facade and slightly lower percentage of glass-encased 
facade. Furthermore, the circulation to reach the goods for sale takes place inside the building, 
so in this case the goods for sale and the transitional space have the same environmental 
conditions (model C). Between model A and model C are commercial buildings which, like 
bazaars or ancient porticoed galleries, contain a series of independent shops connected to a 
transitional space with its own environmental conditions, halfway between the indoor 
conditions of the shops and the outdoor conditions. Therefore, these are rectangular-shaped 
shops attached to each other on their side facades with a highly permeable main facade 
leading towards a transitional space with environmental conditions between indoors and 
outdoors and an opaque rear facade facing outdoors (model B).

Figure 1: From right to left, model A, model B and model C of shops used in the simulation. 

The top exponent of this kind of commercial building (model B) in Barcelona is Illa Diagonal, 
a building dating from 1993 designed by Rafael Moneo and Manuel de Solà-Morales. This 
building was taken as the reference for obtaining the initial values of volumes, surfaces, 
compactness, etc. Likewise, the shops near the city’s commercial arteries, such as Sants 
Street, and the shops in Barcelona’s Ensanche district were taken as references for model A. 
The El Corte Inglés department store in Francesc Macià Square was taken as a reference for 
model C.

Figure 2: Ground floor of the Illa Diagona. Heated/air conditioned shops (gray), semi-h./a.c. 
transitional spaces (dark squares) and not h./a.c. transitional areas (light squares). 



Calculations and simulation 
A simulation was planned of the three basic models using the Archisun v3.0 software [2] 
developed by the Architecture and Energy research group at the U.P.C. This programme 
calculates the energy behaviour of buildings in a natural scheme and provides climatic and 
consumption results for 15 days in the four seasons. A variety of general parameters are taken 
into consideration in the calculations, including the building’s location and its climatic data, 
those related to the definition of its immediate environment, as well as parameters related to 
the building’s shape (such as the orientation, compactness and porosity), the volume, internal 
contributions and how it is used. Other more specific parameters are also taken into account, 
related to the interior design of the model and the definition of its skin (with variables on its 
placement, attachment to other buildings, the average coefficients of its skin thermal 
transmission, the hermeticity of its practicable surfaces, reflectances and transparencies, 
weights, protective and obstructive factors, and many others).

Therefore, a simulation was performed based on the three. In all three models, we assumed 
average outdoor temperatures of 26.6º C in the summer and 8.1º C in the winter. 

Regarding model A, the standard volume was taken, and it was assumed that both the floor 
and ceiling and three of the four facades are attached to areas with the same environmental 
conditions (24º C in summer and 21º C in winter). To the contrary, the main facade, which is 
in contact with outdoor conditions, has a higher thermal transmission coefficient (U), since it 
is made of glass, and is also more permeable to the air. 

Regarding model B, the same standard volume was taken, and it was assumed that the floor, 
ceiling and two of the four facades are attached to spaces with the same environmental 
conditions described above. Likewise, the rear facade has a low thermal transmission 
coefficient (of a standard opaque closure) in relation to the outdoor conditions. In contrast, the 
main facade has a greater thermal transmission coefficient since it is made of glass, plus it is 
more permeable to the air. However, the main facade does not exchange with an atmosphere 
in outdoor conditions; rather it exchanges with the naturally controlled atmosphere of the 
transitional space.

Since the Archisun software only allows one outdoor atmosphere to be presented, we 
introduced a coefficient “α” which relates the outdoor temperature conditions with the 
temperature conditions of the transitional area, such that in model B the exchanges of the rear 
facade are calculated by relating the indoor atmosphere with the outdoor atmosphere, and the 
exchanges of the main facade are calculated by relating the indoor atmosphere with the 
atmosphere in the transitional area (outdoor atmosphere times coefficient “α”).

This coefficient “α” is obtained as follows:

- Assuming that the artificially heated or air conditioned shops will exchange energy primarily 
with the transitional space (due to the fact that the ground, ceiling and two facades in model B 
are attached to spaces with the same conditions and that the rear facade has a very small 
thermal transmission coefficient in relation to the large coefficient of the main facade and its 
extreme permeability to the passage of air). 

- Assuming as well that the transitional space exchanges energy primarily with the outdoor 
atmosphere (due to its permeability to the air and the presence of large glass-encased spaces). 

We conclude that the heat flow lost from the commercial spaces to the transitional space 
should be equal to the heat flow lost from the transitional space to the outdoor environment 
(bearing in mind in both cases the transmission, ventilation and internal contribution). 

Thus, if the heat flow is equal to 0: 



0Q
Therefore: 

.... outQtranstransQin ouQtra
............ outQcontoutQventoutQtransinQcontinQventinQtrans QQQQQ

In which: 

oncontributiinQcont
CeViQvent

TUiSiQtrans

..
··.

··.

in
V

TSi
C··

With this, we obtain a function with three unknowns: the indoor temperature, the temperature 
of the transitional space and the outdoor temperature: 

''''
''.)'·(.)·(

.
k

kTexkTink
Tpas

k(k(

Assuming the outdoor and indoor conditions described above for the summer and winter, the 
result is: 

..
..

.

.
TexTin

TpasTin
Tex
Tin

T
TpT

Te
Tin

Thus, we obtain the values: summer α = 0.4; and winter α = 0.26, in order to simulate with 
Archisun. 

Regarding model C, the standard volume was once again taken, but adding the proportional 
part of the transitional area which is integrated into the inside of the shop and in the same 
environmental conditions. We also assumed that the floor is attached to a space with the same 
environmental conditions. To the contrary, we assumed the same kind of attachment for the 
ceiling, but with the percentage of roof proportional to the total volume of the building (since 
in this case there are neither homes nor offices above it). The four side facades were assumed 
to be open to spaces in the same environmental conditions, but also with the corresponding 
percentage of glass-encased or opaque facade corresponding to the volume of the model in 
relation to the total volume of the building. 

RESULTS
The results of the simulations are as follows:

SUMMER Model A Model B Model C
Outdoor temp. (ºC) 26.6 26.6 26.6
Transitional area temp. (ºC) - 24.8 -
Natural indoor temp. (ºC) 27.1 27.1 27.6
Cooling energy consumption (kWh/m3·year) 0.59 0.60 0.85
Table 1: List of outdoor temperature, temperature of the transitional area and natural indoor 
temperature as well as energy consumption for air conditioning in the summer scenario. 

WINTER Model A Model B Model C
Outdoor temp. (ºC) 8.1 8.1 8.1
Transitional area temp. (ºC) - 17.6 -
Natural indoor temp. (ºC) 13.7 14.7 13.4
Heating energy consumption (kWh/m3·year) 3.99 2.76 4.36
Table 2: List of outdoor temperature, temperature of the transitional area and natural indoor 
temperature as well as energy consumption for heating in the winter scenario.



DISCUSSION
Based on the simulations, we can see that the natural temperature results and therefore 
consumption are not significantly different. However, we can conclude that there are two 
variables that are particularly influential when calculating the results and which therefore 
must also be particularly influential when designing commercial spaces. First, we found that 
the parameter of the renewals per hour that the space experiences is particularly influential, 
that is, whether it is a very hermetically sealed place or, on the opposite extreme, highly 
ventilated (and therefore with high accessibility, but also with a higher energy exchange with 
the contiguous space). Secondly, we also noted that the parameter of internal contributions 
from the shop is also particularly influential, that is, the amount of heat dissipated inside it 
due to the activity of people, lighting points, computers, etc. Thus, we can see how the 
influence of the energy exchange due to the thermal transmission of the walls is not a priority 
parameter in the commercial spaces, and therefore when designing them a sound study of the 
ventilation and internal contributions from the commercial space will be much more decisive 
than the thermal insulation itself. 

CONCLUSION
Finally, we should note that bearing in mind that the results of consumption are much more 
balanced than what might have been forecasted at first, model B does show an advantage 
regarding comfort, since it manages to achieve a more gradual thermal adaptation of the shop 
users with a higher adaptation time since they go from an outdoor to a fully heated and/or air 
conditioned indoor atmosphere through an intermediate atmosphere in environmental 
conditions that are halfway between indoors and outdoors. 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This paper was supported by the Spanish MICINN under project ENE2009-11540. 

REFERENCES
1. Coch, H.: La Utilitat dels Espais Inútils. Una aportació a l’avaluació del confort ambiental 

a l’arquitectura dels espais intermedis. PhD Thesis, Barcelona, 2003.

2. Rafael, S. and Roset, J.: Energy Conscious Design. World Renewable Energy Congress 
VI, 2000, p. 494-499.

3. Nicol, J. F. and Humphreys. M. A.: Adaptative thermal comfort and sustainable thermal 
standards for buildings. Energy and Buildings 34, p. 563-572.

4. Jentsch, M. F.; Bahaj, A. S. and James, P. A. B. Climate change future proofing of 
buildings – Generation and assessment of building simulation weather files. Energy and 
Buildings 40, p. 2148-2168. 

5. Palme, M.; Coch, H.; Isalgué, A.; Marincic, I.; Fanchiotti, A. and Rafael, S: Dynamic 
sensation of comfort in buildings: the temperature changes effects. 2nd PALENC 
Conference Proceedings, Crete, Greece 27-29 September 2007, p. 13-18. 

6. Palme, M.; Isalgué, A.; Coch, H. and Rafael, S: The possible impact of climatic change on 
the built environment: the importance of flexibility and energy robustness of the 
architecture. World Renewable Energy Congress XI, 2000, p. 544-549.


