












































Microsoft Word - WREF_paper judit.docx


1 
 
 

VISUAL COMFORT ASSESSMENT BASED ON PERCEPTION IN TRANSITIONAL 
SPACES BETWEEN INSIDE AND OUTSIDE: A MEDITERRANEAN CASE STUDY 

 
 

Judit López, Carlos Alonso, Isabel Crespo, Rafael Serra, Helena Coch 
Architecture & Energy 

School of Architecture of Barcelona. UPC 
Av. Diagonal, 649, 7th floor    08028 Barcelona 

e-mail: juditlb@yahoo.es 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

ABSTRACT 
 
Visual comfort is usually defined in terms of illumination 
level, with the consequent disparity of values found in 
publications. However, transitional spaces have different 
features, such as dynamism and adaptive process, 
compared to other static spaces in buildings. Therefore, 
other factors must be considered when assessing the 
visual response. This study focuses on the quality of light 
and atmosphere and their relationship to other features 
such as space design. With this aim, four parameters were 
determined to evaluate the visual perception in a case 
study, namely the entrance areas of Caixaforum in 
Barcelona. Data collection and analytical observation 
were performed, and later the response to visual comfort 
and space design was evaluated. Although this is a single 
case study, the scope of this method could be all kind of 
entrance halls in Mediterranean climate. The results make 
it clear that visual comfort depends on many perceptive 
and spatial factors. 
 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
 
The significance of transitional spaces between inside and 
outside lies in their unavoidability. There is a common 
feature to all kind of buildings: the continuous movement 
from inside to outside or vice-versa which poses an 
environmental gap to be solved. There are many kinds of 
building transitions, from simple doors and lintels to 
sophisticated solutions with articulated spaces. The fact is 
that when moving from the outdoors to an inner space or 
the opposite, there is a great chance for visual discomfort. 
In both cases, the luminous conditions in the origin and 
destination may be much different, causing a visual 
“shock”. In a simple door, the transition is instantaneous, 
while other complex solutions offer more time for the 
visual system to adapt. In addition, in Mediterranean 

countries clear skies are present most of the time, so the 
horizontal illuminance level rises to more than 100,000 lx. 
Apart from that, the high reflectance of the surfaces on 
the built environment, stemming from the attempt to 
avoid overheating in summer, makes the visual 
performance worse because of the high levels of 
luminance reached outside. With this illuminance and 
high reflection, levels of up to 20,000 – 30,000 cd/m2 can 
be reached. Nevertheless, in the interior of the buildings, 
where the light conditions are more controlled, the levels 
are lower, beneath 500 lx in most cases, which means 
luminance values of around 100 cd/m2 for medium 
reflectance coefficients, making the relationship between 
inside and outside luminance around 300:1. The function 
of transitional spaces is to deal with these conditions. 
Traditional architecture has solved the transition in the 
vertical plane with solutions like the Mediterranean blind, 
where the proper distribution of light, moving the higher 
luminance out of the field of vision, is the key to making 
interiors comfortable (1). Another example regarding 
light distribution is the traditional Islamic architectural 
façade, where a pattern of small holes is used instead of a 
single window so as to reduce glare and improve the 
visual performance inside (2).  
 
Nevertheless, transitional spaces are developed in a 
tridimensional space, and the mechanisms extend from 
the vertical plane to the entire space. Therefore, such 
spaces offer a potential for different ways of facing 
comfort research, which are not only visual. The reason is 
that, as circulation spaces, the users do not spend a lot of 
time in them and the expectations of comfort may not be 
as high as in other static spaces of the building. For 
example, thermal conditions in transitional spaces can be 
more flexible than they are in the rest of the building. In 
consequence, the range of temperatures accepted by the 
users could be wider and less energy could be used to 
reach thermal comfort (3). In fact, in transitional spaces 



2 
 
 

the comfort depends more on the conditions of the 
adjacent spaces, as we said before, than on the conditions 
in the space itself.  
 
Apart from thermal comfort, visual performance is also 
important in terms of visibility and visual comfort in 
transitional spaces. In general, the role of visibility has 
been the key to illumination design. Nevertheless, in 
recent years importance has also been attached to the 
quality of light and the atmosphere defined by the light 
(4). This is especially important in transitional spaces 
because they offer the first impression of the building and 
we spend little time there to adapt our visual system. The 
elements composing the space and the time spent 
covering it are also important (5) because they are directly 
related to the luminance contrast generated and the 
adaptation time. Some studies have focused on quality 
parameters such as the modeling factor index or MF. This 
index portrays the tridimensional performance of the 
space (6). The modeling factor index establishes the 
relationship between cylindrical and horizontal 
illuminance so as to provide an idea of the direction of 
light. Low MF values reflect higher light verticality while 
high MF values reflect the opposite, a variety on the 
distribution of light (reflection of surrounding surfaces). 
 
According to the above, there are two different 
approaches to visual comfort: from the point of view of 
either the quantity or the quality of light. A complete 
assessment of visual comfort in transitional spaces should 
necessarily contain other parameters apart from the 
amount of light in terms of illumination level to assess the 
quality of the light and the atmosphere generated. This 
study deals with other features of light closer to user 
perception. With this aim, four parameters were taken to 
assess the visual response in a transitional space. We 
started by measuring the levels of illuminance and their 
distribution in the space, then we related them to the color 
temperature of the light. Next we measured the 
illuminance levels along the entry paths and finally the 
luminance contrast in the visual field. 
 
 
2. METHODOLOGY 
 
As we mentioned above, four parameters were determined 
to assess visual response in the case study: 
 
- Illuminance levels distributed throughout the entire 

space. 
- Optimum color temperature related to the illuminance 

levels measured. 
- Illuminance levels in the entry paths in order to 

evaluate visual adaptation. 
- Luminance contrast in the visual field at different 

points inside and outside. 
 
In order to evaluate the visual comfort parameters 
mentioned above, a series of measurements were carried 

out in a case study.  The chosen case study is the 
Caixaforum building in Barcelona, a cultural center 
located in a restored historical building in the city center 
of Barcelona. The main building houses exhibition halls, 
conference rooms, an auditorium, a library and other 
services. The entrance spaces are adjacent to the main 
building and were designed by Arata Isozaki and 
Associates in 2002 to accommodate and organize all the 
circulation in the center. The public enters there through 
three stairways at street level located at the boundaries 
(Fig. 1) that lead to the main entrance located in the 
basement (Fig. 2).  The main entrance is composed of a 
courtyard and a great hall beyond the court, where all the 
public circulation is articulated. 
 

 
 
Fig. 1: Plan of ground floor (street level) 
 

 
 
Fig. 2: Plan of basement floor (entry level) 
 
There are several features that make up the space and 
influence the visual response. The whole is a perimeter-
defined space with white boundary walls, especially the 
ones in the courtyard, which are highly illuminated during 
part of the day. In general, the finishes on the ceiling, 
floor and walls are very light. There is also a central point 
of attention, a sculpture used as a light fixture located at 
the center of the space that draws the attention. Natural 



3 
 
 

light reaches the interior through a floor-to-ceiling glazed 
wall that separates the courtyard from the hall. 
 
The measurements were undertaken in the courtyard and 
hall of Caixaforum on August 9, 2010. They took a 
working day during opening hours. Three series of 
illuminance measurements were taken throughout the day, 
at 11:45 am, 5:30 pm and 9:00 pm. The points were 
arranged in a grid of 4 rows and 3 columns from the 
courtyard to the back of the hall, for a total of 12 points. 
The illuminance measurements corresponding to the entry 
paths were taken at 12:00 am at different points along the 
route. All the measurements of illuminance were taken in 
a horizontal plane at one meter off the floor with a MS 
6610 digital luxmeter. The values obtained were entered 
into the computer for further processing. The luminance 
distribution in the visual field was evaluated with HDR 
processed pictures showing the distribution of luminance 
and their values in a false color mapping. The pictures 
were taken with a Canon EOS 350D digital camera and 
were processed later by the web HDR software (7), which 
provides the luminance values in false color images. Two 
series of pictures were taken: at 1:00 pm and at 5:00 pm. 
The field study was made in sunny conditions with clear 
skies and the results can be extrapolated for a 
Mediterranean climate.  
 
 
3. RESULTS 
 
The results obtained in the field study shown below are 
organized into four sections corresponding to the four 
parameters studied. 
 
3.1 Illumination levels 
 
The measurement points in the entry spaces were 
distributed as shown in Figure 3. The values obtained in 
each sequence of measurements were extrapolated to a 
table and a graphic, as seen in Table 1 and Figure 4. 
 
The light distribution into the space decreases from the 
rows in the back of the hall (p. 10, 11, 12) to the ones in 
the courtyard (p. 1, 2, 3), as seen in the figures. The 
sequence of values taken in the morning shows the 
highest contrast between darker and lighter points. 
Simultaneous values were measured, from 109,000 lx to 
356 lx, which represent over a 300:1 ratio. In the 
afternoon, this ratio descends to 67:1. However, at night, 
artificial light makes the distribution more uniform. In 
fact, the values range from 500 lx to 98 lx, which 
represent a 5:1 ratio, much lower than during the day. 
Furthermore, we can see that the light in the back of the 
hall is quite stable all day long. The values at points p.10 
to p.12 range between 500 - 196 lx at any time of the day, 
which is a ratio of about 2,5:1. However, the first row of 
inner points (p.4 – p.6) shows the greatest variation in 
terms of absolute level, from 4,700 lx in the morning to 
133 lx at night, which is a 300:1 ratio. 

 

 
 
Fig. 3: Plan of basement floor with locations of 
measurement points  
 
 
TABLE 1: ILLUMINANCE LEVELS (lx) 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
Fig. 4: Graphic with illuminance levels 

Hour 11:45 17:30 21:00
p.1 105.000 6.420 550
p.2 109.000 14.500 490
p.3 6.700 3.600 198
p.4 2.950 1.020 139
p.5 3.100 1.050 233
p.6 4.700 1.235 133
p.7 1.088 510 168
p.8 1.240 620 435
p.9 910 570 98
p.10 456 215 196
p.11 500 315 389
p.12 356 225 226



4 
 
 

 
3.2 Kruithof’s diagram 
 
Using the illuminance measurements obtained in the 
previous section, these values were entered in a 
Kruithof’s diagram in order to deduce the most suitable 
values of light color temperature. In this diagram, the 
level of illuminance is related to the color temperature of 
the light, showing the comfort and discomfort zones 
according to the user’s perception. The shaded areas 
beyond the lines correspond to discomfort zones, while 
the area in the middle corresponds to the comfort zone. 
The illuminance value levels obtained in the interior rows 
in daytime sequences are overlapped with the diagram in 
Figure 5, and the same operation for the sequence with 
artificial light is shown in Figure 6. 
 

 
 
Fig. 5: Kruithof’s diagram with illuminance values from 
points 4 to 12, at 11:45 am and 5:30 pm 
 

 
 
Fig. 6: Kruithof’s diagram with illuminance values from 
points 4 to 12, at 9:00 pm 
 
The row immediately behind the glazed wall shows a 
suitable color light temperature up to 4,000 K, 
corresponding to the higher illuminance values. But when 
we move to the interior, the lower levels of light 
correspond with lower values of color temperature. This 
means that the artificial lighting in the inner part of the 
hall should perhaps use warmer lamps to produce 

comfort, even less than 3,000 K. We can see also that 
during the daylight hours, there is a single suitable color 
temperature value for all the points, which is 4,000 K on 
average. This corresponds to a medium neutral light, in 
which a light with a color temperature from 3,300 to 
5,300 K is regarded as neutral. However, the 
measurements made with artificial light show that the 
suitable color temperature for all the points falls to 3,000 
K. however, just as in the previous case, we could use 
lower color temperature values at the end of the hall, even 
around 2,500 K. 
 
3.3 Adaptation levels in the entry paths 
 
The level adaptation between inside and outside is likely 
to be one of the most important parameters for visual 
comfort. With this aim in mind, we took measurements in 
three entry paths from the street level to the interior of the 
hall, named r. 1, r. 2 and r. 3 (Fig. 7). The measurements 
were taken at various points: at street level, in the middle 
of the path, inside the courtyard and inside the hall. 
 

 
 
Fig. 7: Ground floor with entry paths 
 
The measurements along r. 1 start at street level, where a 
half-covered escalator leads to the courtyard running 
through a porch. The second path, r. 2, is totally outdoors, 
with stairs, landings and changes of direction until 
reaching the courtyard. The last path, r. 3, is also 
outdoors, but it is characterized by a staircase that runs 
between two high walls. 
 
As seen in all the figures, the most significant feature is 
the vast amount of light available in the courtyard in 
comparison with the values obtained along the rest of the 
path. The value obtained is somewhat similar to the value 
obtained at street level and very different from the 
immediate values in both directions. In the first case, the 
covered escalator yields lower levels of illuminance in the 
middle of the path compared to the other cases. But the 
influence of the obstruction of the sky until the courtyard 
is reached is important and offers low values in contrast to 
those obtained in the broad white space in front of the 
hall. Moreover, when we go out from the center, the level 
difference between inside and outside is significant in 
little time. Therefore, it is easy to deduce that there is a 
great chance for discomfort when reaching the courtyard 
from the street or from the interior of the cultural center. 
Once again, the courtyard is the most critical space in the 
building, and it would seem necessary to pay attention to 



5 
 
 

the visual comfort in this point because of its glare 
potential, as we shall see in the following section. 
 
TABLE 2: ILLUMINANCE LEVELS 
 

 
 

 
 
Fig. 9a: Bar chart with illuminance levels in r.1 
 

 
 
Fig. 9b: Bar chart with illuminance levels in r.2 
 

 
 
Fig. 9c: Bar chart with illuminance levels in r.3 
 
Besides the vast amount of light in the courtyard, the time 
spent walking the path is also important. Considering a 
normal pedestrian speed, such as 1.2 m/s, and the average 
length of the path (50-55 m), the visitors spend less than 
one minute (41-46 s) to cross the space. In accordance 
with Figure 10, to reach full visual system adaptation we 
would need approximately 15 minutes from a dark to a 
light situation. From light to dark, the time rises to 45 
minutes. 
 

 
 
Fig. 10: Visual adaptation time 
 
3.4 Luminance contrast 
 
The direct consequence of high levels of illumination is 
the strong contrast and the consequent high levels of 
luminance obtained on the surfaces in the space. It is very 
important to assess what will happen in critical situations 
because of the configuration of the space and the surfaces 
that make it up. The position of the luminance in the 
visual field must be controlled because it can be critical in 
terms of proximity to the center of vision. High values 
and high contrast between higher and lower luminance 
have to be controlled as well. In the pictures below 
(Figures 11 to 13), false color images show the values and 
distribution of luminance in the field of view at three 
points in the space: looking out from the hall to the exit 
door, looking to the front wall of the courtyard from the 
door, and looking from the courtyard to the entrance door. 
Two sequences of pictures were taken, one at midday and 
another in the afternoon. 

E (lx) Distance to inner hall (m)
r.1 112.000 50

80.000 45
7.500 35
5.600 25

115.000 10
3.800 0

r.2 76.000 55
127.000 45
32.500 35
23.800 10
115.000 5
3.800 0

r.3 112.000 50
33.000 40
23.800 10
115.000 5
3.800 0

112.000

80.000

7.500 5.600

115.000

3.800

50 m 45 m 35 m 25 m 10 m 0 m

E
 (l

x)

r.1

76.000

127.000

32.500

115000

3.800

55 m 45 m 35 m 10 m 5 m 0 m

E
 (

lx
)

r.2

112.000

33.000

115000

3.800

50 m 40 m 10 m 5 m 0 m

E
 (l

x)

r.3



6 
 
 

  
 

  
 
Fig. 11a, 11b: HDR photographs from hall to door at 1:00 
pm and 5:00 pm 
 
 

  
 

  
 
Fig. 12a, 12b: HDR photographs looking towards the 
courtyard wall at 1:00 pm and 5:00 pm 
 
 

  
 

  
 
Fig. 13a, 13b: HDR photographs from courtyard to door 
at 1:00 pm and 5:00 pm 
 
The first thing we should highlight is the different 
luminance distribution obtained in the morning and in the 
afternoon in the same picture due to the orientation of the 
building and the effects of sunlight. By looking at the 
points of attention in the pictures, we can see this 
difference. For example, in Figure 11a, the focus is on the 
wall in front of the door which has a luminance of around 
8,500 cd/m2 in the morning, while in Figure 11b, when 
the sun hits the wall, it increases to a value of around 
15,000 cd/m2, which is almost twice the former. Similar 
conclusions can be drawn from Figures 12 and 13. In 
Figure 12, the focus is on the front wall, and the relation 
is similar to Figure 11. In Figure 13, the focus is on the 
pavement and the entrance door instead. In the morning, 
the contrast between them is high while in the afternoon 
the shadow of the building improves the contrast, offering 
a better vision of the entrance. The position of the lighted 
surfaces changes from the morning to the afternoon, with 
the consequent changes in contrast. Another similar 
feature we can find in all the pictures is the contrast 
between the maximum and minimum luminance values. 
In all cases, the ratio is around 20:1. Notice as well that 
the maximum luminance values are distributed in the 
lower middle part of the space in most cases, which 
interferes with the central part of the visual field, causing 
discomfort. We can see that the sky is not always the most 
critical light source we have in the visual field; rather the 
clear surfaces are instead. 
 
 
4. DISCUSSION 
 
According to the measurements we took and a standard 
light assessment, we could state that there is enough light 
in the hall during all the day. There is no lack of visibility 
due to inadequate illuminance levels, thus the minimums 
are covered. However, the assessment based on quality 
reveals a different conclusion. Starting with the 
distribution of light, we noticed that there is a great 
difference in values throughout the space, especially if we 
compare the courtyard with the interior of the building 
during the day. This is even more evident when we see 
the vast amount of light available in the courtyard 
compared to the rest of the points along the entry paths. 
This marked difference is likely to produce discomfort. 
However, the key to comfort is not only the amount of 



7 
 
 

light. The conversion into lighting surfaces is also critical 
due to the high reflectance of all the surfaces in the 
courtyard. When moving from a medium reflective 
environment such as the urban surroundings or the hall of 
the center to the courtyard, reflectance from the surfaces 
appears to be a disturbing source of light during some 
daytime hours. Even though the luminance in the space is 
right, the contrast in the transition causes discomfort. 
Similar considerations can be made about the color 
temperature of the light. The light reflected off the 
courtyard walls becomes the main source of light to the 
interior and bathes the space, tinging it with its color. In 
the case study, the walls are white, and the color of the 
light is similar to the color of daylight. However, if the 
walls were colored, other considerations would have to be 
made. Apart from natural light, the artificial sources could 
provide a suitable color temperature according to the 
needs. The Kruithof’s diagram can help us to decide 
whether the characteristics of the lamps are appropriate 
depending on the most suitable color temperature, warm 
in the interior and cooler in the exterior. 
 
From the parameters analyzed, we have seen the 
importance that the configuration of the entry spaces has 
on the visual response. In the case study, the courtyard 
appears to be the most defining characteristic of the space. 
Placing the entrance with a courtyard on the basement 
floor carries the consequence that the perimeter wall 
becomes the user’s visual field. Thus, the material, color 
and reflectance of the wall are very important for visual 
performance because the quality of the atmosphere 
generated in the entrance is strongly related to it. 
Mediterranean countries, where high levels of illuminance 
are reached, are especially sensitive to this. In the case 
study we have noted that the materials used in the 
courtyard were too reflective in sunny conditions and 
caused discomfort at certain times of day. On the other 
hand, the glazed wall that separates the inside from the 
outside facilitates the entry of natural light in the hall but 
does not diminish the effects of the front wall. In parallel, 
it causes a gradient of light in the interior, not a regular 
distribution. 
 
 
5. CONCLUSIONS 
 
To summarize, to take into account the user’s visual 
perception of a space, the illuminance assessment turns 
out to be too restrictive. As we have seen above, the 
amount of light is important, but it is even more important 
to determine how this light is distributed and reflected and 
how it works. Transitional spaces have a temporary use, 
and this is an advantage, because they do not have to be 
as restrictive as other standing spaces, but this is also a 
disadvantage because the visual adaptation has to be 
quick and there is a greater chance for discomfort. In 
Mediterranean countries, discomfort is likely to be 
produced when moving through transitional spaces 
because of the different conditions we find inside and 

outside, as we have seen in the previous sections. 
Therefore, special care has to be taken when designing the 
space and the light. A complete assessment should 
consider the typological analysis of the configuration of 
the space: the geometry and the morphology of the space, 
as well as a visual analysis of the light and ambient based 
on perception containing other parameters apart from 
those seen in the previous sections. 
 
 
6. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
 
This paper is supported by the Spanish MICINN under 
project ENE2009-11540. 
 
 
7. REFERENCES 
 
(1) Coch H., Serra R., Isalgué A. The Mediterranean 
blind: Less light, better vision, Renewable Energy 15 431-
436, 1998 (2) Ruggiero F., Serra R., Dimundo A. Re-
interpretation of traditional architecture for visual 
comfort, Building and Environment, 2009 (3) Pitts A., 
Bin Saleh J., Potential for energy saving in building 
transition spaces, Energy and Buildings, 2007 (4) Lam 
W., Perception and lighting as formgivers for architecture, 
McGraw-Hill Inc., 1977 (5) Araji M.T., Boukebri M., 
Chalfoun N.V., An Examination of Visual Comfort in 
Transitional Spaces, Architectural Science Review, 2011 
(6) Lasagno C.M., Pattini A.E., Rodríguez R.G., Colombo 
E.M., Developing a modeling factor index for transition 
spaces: a case study approach, Architectural Science 
Review, 2011 (7) 
http://www.jaloxa.eu/webhdr/index.shtml 


