





































































































pu_438.doc


 

URBAN MORPHOLOGY AND ENERGY PERFORMANCE: THE DIRECT AND 
INDIRECT CONTRIBUTION IN MEDITERRANEAN CLIMATE 

 
Agnese Salvati Sapienza University of Rome agnese.salvati@uniroma1.it 
Helena Coch Roura Universitat Politècnica de 

Catalunya.BarcelonaTech (UPC) 
Co-author1 Email (optional) 

Carlo Cecere Sapienza University of Rome Co-author2 Email (optional) 
 

 
Fig 1: Urban textures and digital models 

WHICH ARE YOUR ARCHITECTURAL (R)SOLUTIONS TO THE SOCIAL, ENVIRONMENTAL AND ECONOMIC 
CHALLENGES OF TODAY? 
Research summary  
The combined effects of urban heat island (UHI), urban population growth and energy 
overexploitation are undermining the safety of urban areas. Urban morphology plays a prominent 
role in this context, because it affects building's energy demand and local climate at urban scale. 
However, this contribution is recurrently neglected. The present contribution seeks to investigate the 
direct and indirect effect of urban morphology on buildings energy performance in the Mediterranean 
climate. Urban morphology affects energy demand by modifying two relevant variables: outdoor air 
temperatures and incident radiation. The relevance of these effects were studied on a sample of 
urban textures of Rome and Barcelona. The study is parametric in approach. The textures were 
modelled and parameterized and their performances were compared. The UHI in different urban 
textures was calculated, by Urban Weather Generator tool. Then a sensitivity analysis of the building 
energy demand to the outdoor air temperatures and the incoming solar radiation was carried out, by 
EnergyPlus engine. Results confirm the relevance of urban morphology to the UHI intensity. Warmer 
temperatures lead to an average increase of energy demand from 10% to 35%, according to different 
urban densities. At the same time, the incident radiation reduction due to urban obstruction is 
desirable in Mediterranean climate; it allows a reduction of annual energy demand up to the 19% 
compared to an unobstructed environment. Therefore, relevant errors may occur if urban 
morphology’s contribution to energy demand is neglected, approximately 89% for space heating and 
131% for space cooling calculations, depending on the texture density and the building orientation. 
Keywords: Urban Morphology, urban textures, energy performance, Urban Heat Island 



 

1. Introduction  
 
Urban Heat Island and energy overexploitation 
are, nowadays, one of the major threats to the 
safety and the sustainability of European cities. 
It is well known that buildings are responsible 
for a large proportion of global energy 
demand, approximately 40% of energy end-
use, of which 50% is due to the growth in HVAC 
systems (Pérez-Lombard, Ortiz, & Pout, 2008). 
At the same time, urban areas experience a 
substantially different climate than their rural 
environment, for the so-called Urban Heat 
Island (UHI) phenomenon. In a context of 
climate change and urban population growth, 
these issues are extremely relevant, especially 
in Mediterranean basin. Urban morphology 
plays a prominent role in this context, as it 
directly affects energy demand and urban 
climate. The topic of the relationship between 
urban form and energy consumption has been 
long debated. Some preliminary attempts to 
face the issue in mathematical and measurable 
terms has been introduced by Martin and 
March (1972). Nowadays, by different 
modeling approaches, several studies have 
investigated the effect of urban block 
geometry on the thermal behavior inside and 
outside the building, to highlight the variation 
in energy performance induced by different 
urban textures (Morganti, Coch, & Cecere, 
2012; Ratti, Baker, & Steemers, 2005; Rode, 
Burdett, Robazza, & Schofield, 2014; Salat, 
2009; Zhang et al., 2012). Almost none of these 
theoretical investigations took into account the 
UHI effect and its spatial variability in relation 
to urban geometry. In a densely built area, the 
UHI is enhanced through three processes: the 
solar radiation absorption is increased because 
of multiple reflections; the turbulent sensible 
heat transfer out of the canyon is reduced due 
to shelter; the long-wave radiation loss from 
within the canyon is reduced due to the 

screening by the flanking buildings (Oke, 1988). 
Moreover, urban warming has relevant impact 
on energy consumption at urban scale 
(Santamouris, 2014), especially in hot climates. 
Different works have investigated the 
relevance of urban morphology on UHI, 
focusing on two variable: the ratio height to 
width of the canyon or the surfaces' Sky View 
Factor (Oke, 1988; Stewart, Oke, & Krayenhoff, 
2014; Theeuwes et al., 2014). Outcomes 
cannot be easily compared, because of 
different approaches and climatic condition in 
which the studies have been conducted (Res & 
Unger, 2004). The effect of urban morphology 
on energy demand and Urban Heat Island is 
strictly climate-dependent and both effects 
should be carefully investigated as part of the 
major challenge of achieving more sustainable 
urban environment.  
 
 
2. Research objectives and method 
 
The present work starts from the hypothesis 
that urban morphology affects the building 
energy demand by a direct and an indirect 
contribution; the direct one is the obstruction 
of the incoming radiation, the indirect one is 
the UHI induced by different urban densities, 
which results in a variation of the energy 
demand. The present study aims at highlighting 
the effect of these two energy processes in 
Mediterranean climate, in particular:
1. The relevance of urban morphology to 
the UHI intensity and the consequence on 
building's thermal behaviour  
2. The consequence of incoming radiation 
reduction on building's thermal behaviour. 
The study is parametric in approach. Five 
building configurations were identified in 
Rome and Barcelona (figure 2), which share the 
same latitude and Mediterranean climate. The 
chosen fabrics represent a typical range of 



 

recurrent urban densities (Morganti et al., 
2012). A digital model for each fabric was built, 
based on “normalization and replication” 
approach (Zhang et al., 2012). The models 
were thus theoretically homogenous urban 
textures, composed of the same type of built 
form, in an urban grid structure similar to that 
of the existing one and average-oriented 
(45°N). The models were the basis for the 
textures’ morphology parameters calculation. 
The reference urban textures were Centocelle 
and Don Bosco districts in Rome and Borrel y 
Soler, Gracia and Raval districts in Barcelona.  
 
2.2 Urban Heat island calculation 
The urban heat island intensity in the different 
urban textures was calculated by means of 
Urban Weather Generator (UWG) tool (Bueno, 
Norford, Hidalgo, & Pigeon, 2013). The UWG 
calculates hourly values of urban air 
temperature given the weather data measured 
at an operational weather station located 
outside the city. The model is based on the 
town energy balance scheme (Masson, 2000), 
including a building energy model (Bueno, 
Pigeon, Norford, Zibouche, & Marchadier, 

2012). The solar radiation received by walls 
and road is calculated by assuming an average 
urban canyon orientation. The longwave 
radiation among walls, road, urban canyon air 
and the sky is computed by linearization of the 
Stefan–Boltzmann equation, accounting for the 
transmittance of the urban canyon air and 
assuming only one bounce of radiative heat 
fluxes between surfaces (Bueno et al., 2013).  
The reference weather data for the calculation 
were those of Ciampino airport (Rome). The 
UHI intensity was estimated keeping constant 
all the parameters, except the morphological 
ones, which were changed according to the 
different urban textures. The morphological 
parameters involved in the calculation were 
(Bueno et al., 2013):  
- Average Building height (hbld): the average 
building height in the urban area, normalized 
by building footprint 
- Site coverage ratio  
building footprint to the site area.  
- Façade to site ratio (VHurb): ratio of the 
vertical surface area (walls) to the urban plan 
area  
 

 
Fig 2: Reference urban textures and corresponding models  
 



 

2.3 Sensitivity analysis of the energy demand to 
air temperature and incoming solar radiation 
In order to quantify the effect of the outdoor 
air temperature and the incoming solar 
radiation on the building’s energy demand, a 
sensitivity analysis was carried out. Several 
simulations were performed by means of 
EnergyPlus engine and Design Builder interface 
(v 2.2.5). Ciampino’s weather data were used 
as reference weather file; To test the 
sensitivity of the building energy demand to 
the above-mentioned variables, the hourly air 
temperatures were increased from +1 to +4°C 
and both the direct and indirect normal 
radiation were decreased from the 80% to the 
20% of the available radiation. The test for the 
energy demand calculation was a 70mq 
dwelling, double exposed, in four possible 
orientations (NE-NW, NW-SW, SW-SE, and SE-
NE) and with the following model assumptions: 
- Wall transmittance: 1.6 W/mq K 
- Window transmittance: 4.5 W/mq K 
-  Façade glazing ratio: 30 % 
- Ventilation rate: 2 vol/h 
- Infiltration rate: 0.2 vol/h 
- Winter set Point: 20°C 
- Summer set point: 26 °C  
- Store Height : 3.3 m 
- Internal gains: 5 W/mq 
- Occupancy: Family type 
As a basis for comparison, another set of 
simulations was performed. In this further 
analysis, the air temperatures range were the 
different urban weather files calculated by 
UWG according to each urban texture, and the 
incoming radiation range was simulated by 
modelling the different urban morphological 
environment according to the chosen urban 
textures.  
 
 
3. Results  
 

 
Fig 3: Summer and winter average air temperature 
increase in different urban textures 

 
Fig 4: Monthly average temperature increase in 
different urban textures  
 
3.1 Urban heat island in different urban 
textures 
Results show a consistent variation of the 
average UHI intensity according to different 
urban morphologies (fig 3 and fig 4). Here, the 
average UHI intensity is defined as the monthly 
average difference between the temperatures 
calculated by UWG and those of Ciampino 
weather station. The difference in the average 
UHI intensity between the most favourable and 
unfavourable urban morphology comes up to 
2.6 °C in February and 1.9 °C in August. In both 
winter and summer, higher average 
temperatures were predicted in Raval, the case 
with higher Site coverage ratio  and Façade 
coverage ratio value. Tuscolano's morphology, 
the case with greater average height among 
the others, presented a variable behavior 
during the year, with much higher UHI intensity 
in summer than in winter. The lowest UHI 



 

intensity was predicted in the low-density 
texture of Borrel y Soler.

3.2 Sensitivity analysis of the building energy 
demand to the air temperature increase  
Figures 5 and 6 show, respectively, the heating 
and cooling demand outcomes for each 
orientation and for each degree of the outdoor 
air temperature increase. Unfilled points 
represent the results for a progressive constant 
increase of air temperature (from +1 to +4); 
filled points represent outcomes for the 
simulations performed with the urban weather 
files calculated by UWG, which takes into 
account the daily variability of the UHI 
intensity.  
 

 
Fig 5: Temperature increase and heating demand: 
theoretical approach and urban textures 
 
As expected, heating demand decreases when 
outdoor temperatures increase (figure 5). 
Moreover, the trend was roughly the same for 
all the studied orientations. Among the studied 
urban textures, the maximum decrease 
occurred in NE-NW orientation with Raval’s 

weather file, where the heating energy 
demand decreased of 9,2 kWh/mq, 38% less 
than the one calculated with the Ciampino
weather file. On the contrary, the effect of 
warmer temperatures on the cooling demand 
was clearly detrimental (figure 6). 
 

Fig 6: Temperature increase and cooling demand: 
theoretical approach and urban textures 

 
Fig 7: UHI effect on annual energy demand for 
different urban textures 
 
What deserve to be highlighted is that the 
overall energy demand rises because of UHI 



 

effect, because the increase in the cooling 
energy demand was always more onerous than 
the heating energy saving (fig 7). As an 
example, the SW-SE oriented dwelling with 
Raval’s temperatures reached an increase up 
to 18,9 kWh/mq on the cooling demand, with 
respect to a winter saving of only 6.7 kWh/mq. 
Finally, no substantial differences were 
observed between the results for the constant 
temperature increase and the hourly variable 
UHI intensity calculated by UWG. 
 
3.3 Sensitivity analysis of the building energy 
demand to the incoming radiation  
Figures 8 and 9 show the variation of the 
building energy demand with respect to a 
theoretical radiation reduction (from 80% to 
20% of the total radiation available). Figures 10 
and 11 show the results for runs performed 
with the different urban morphological 
environments surrounding the dwelling test, 
according to the studied urban textures. In that 
case, the percentage of the incoming radiation 
reduction has been indirectly obtained 
considering the difference in the solar gains of 
the test model with or without the urban 
environment. In both winter and summer, the 
effect of radiation obstruction on energy 
demand was quite different among the four 
studied orientations. SW-SE orientation was 
largely the most affected, because it receives 
the maximum passive thermal gains when 
unobstructed. As an example, the SW-SE 
oriented dwelling in the Raval’s morphological 
context reached an increase in heating energy 
demand from 12.94 kWh/mq up to 
24,4kWh/mq, if compared to an unobstructed 
environment. In effect, the dense urban 
structure of Raval district produces a decrease 
of the incoming radiation up to the 80% at the 
lower floors, which entails a relevant increase 
in heating energy demand. In the NW-NE 
expositions, the variation in incoming radiation 

Fig 8: radiation obstruction and heating demand: 
theoretical approach 

Fig 9: radiation obstruction and cooling demand: 
theoretical approach 
 
did not produce substantial variation, since it 
almost never receives direct solar radiation in 
winter in the latitude of Rome. Results were 
reverse for what concern the cooling demand; 
in summer the reduction of incident radiation 
was desirable for each orientation and it 
allowed a reduction of energy demand from 
12% (Borrel y Soler, SW-SE orientation) to 70% 



 

(Raval, NW-SW) if compared to the 
performance in an unobstructed environment. 

Fig 10: radiation obstruction and heating demand: 
urban textures 

 
Fig 11: radiation obstruction and cooling demand: 
urban textures  
 
At the light of the results, the overall direct 
effect of urban morphology on energy demand 
is thus positive in Mediterranean context: it 
allows a decrease of annual energy demand in 
all the orientations up to the 19 % if compared 
to an unobstructed environment (figure 12). 

Fig 12: Urban Morphology direct effect on annual 
energy demand  
 
 
Conclusions 
 
Results confirm that urban morphology does 
matter to urban energy issues in 
Mediterranean climate, both in winter than in 
summer. The relevance of urban morphology 
on UHI intensity was confirmed. Warmer 
temperatures, due to UHI effect, led to an 
average increase in energy demand from 10% 
up to 35%, according to different urban 
densities. The energy rise is especially 
concerning in summer in the densest urban 
textures, where an increase up to 131% of the 
cooling load is estimated with respect to rural 
environments. Temperature mitigation 
strategies should be highly recommended in 
the denser neighborhoods of Mediterranean 
cities. At the same time, the obstruction of 
solar radiation induced by surrounding urban 
morphology is desirable in these latitudes, 
because it allows a consistent reduction of the 
cooling load, especially for southern 
orientations. Even if during winter the effect is 
opposite, the overall effect of radiation 
obstruction allows a reduction of the annual 



 

energy demand up to the 19% if compared 
with an unobstructed environment. Therefore, 
the omission of these two contributions may 
entail relevant errors in the energy assessment 
at city scale, up to the 89% for the heating 
loads and the 131% for the cooling loads, 
depending on urban texture’s density and 
building orientation. Future implementations 
should deeper the relationship between 
morphology, microclimate and energy 
performance (thermic and lighting); The direct 
and indirect effect of urban morphology should 
be evaluated as a whole, in order to develop 
useful tools of energy analysis and design 
which could steer the actions of urban 
planners and stakeholders toward more 
energy-sustainable cities. 
 
 
5. Acknowledgments  
 
This work has been supported by the Spanish 
Ministry of Economy under project code: 
BIA2013-45597-R. 
 
 
6. References  
 
Bueno, B., Norford, L., Hidalgo, J., & Pigeon, G. 

(2013). The urban weather generator. Journal 
of Building Performance Simulation, 6(4),  

Bueno, B., Pigeon, G., Norford, L. K., Zibouche, K., & 
Marchadier, C. (2012). Development and 
evaluation of a building energy model 
integrated in the TEB scheme. Geoscientific 
Model Development, 5(2), 433–448. 

Masson, V. (2000). A physically-based scheme for 
the urban energy budget in atmospheric 
models. Boundary-Layer Meteorology, 94, 
357–397 

Martin, L., March, L., (1972). Urban space and 
structure. Cambridge University Press 

Morganti, M., Coch, H., & Cecere, C. (2012). The 
effect of urban obstruction in Mediterranean 

climates: built form typology, density and 
energy. Architecture, City and Environment, 
19, 13–26. 

Oke, T. R. (1988). Street design and urban canopy 
layer climate. Energy and Buildings, 11, 103–
113. 

Pérez-Lombard, L., Ortiz, J., & Pout, C. (2008). A 
review on buildings energy consumption 
information. Energy and Buildings, 40(3), 394–
398.  

Ratti, C., Baker, N., & Steemers, K. (2005). Energy 
consumption and urban texture. Energy and 
Buildings, 37(7), 762–776.  

Res, C., & Unger, J. (2004). Intra-urban relationship 
between surface geometry and urban heat 

Climate 
Research, 27, 253–264. 

Rode, P., Burdett, R., Robazza, G., & Schofield, J. 
(2014). Cities and Energy: Urban morphology 
and heat energy demand. LSE cities. London. 

Salat, S. (2009). Energy loads, CO 2 emissions and 
building stocks: morphologies, typologies, 
energy systems and behaviour. Building 
Research & Information, 37(5-6), 598–609.  

Santamouris, M. (2014). On the energy impact of 
urban heat island and global warming on 
buildings. Energy and Buildings, 82, 100–113.  

Stewart, I. D., Oke, T. R., & Krayenhoff, E. S. (2014). 
Evaluation of the “local climate zone” scheme 
using temperature observations and model 
simulations. International Journal of 
Climatology, 34(June 2013), 1062–1080.  

Theeuwes, N. E., Steeneveld, G. J., Ronda, R. J., 
Heusinkveld, B. G., van Hove, L. W. a, & 
Holtslag, a. a M. (2014). Seasonal dependence 
of the urban heat island on the street canyon 
aspect ratio. Quarterly Journal of the Royal 
Meteorological Society, (October), 2197–
2210.  

Zhang, J., Heng, C. K., Malone-Lee, L. C., Hii, D. J. C., 
Janssen, P., Leung, K. S., & Tan, B. K. (2012). 
Evaluating environmental implications of 
density: A comparative case study on the 
relationship between density, urban block 
typology and sky exposure. Automation in 
Construction, 22, 90–101.  


