












































Microsoft Word - wrec2010-paper-Ganem-Coch2.doc


World Renewable Energy Congress XI 
 25-30 September 2010, Abu Dhabi, UAE 

LEA: Low Energy Architecture 

 
Envelope characterization and self-climatic regulation assessment for a winery  

in the province of Mendoza, Argentina. 
 

Carolina Ganem1,2* and Helena Coch1  
 

1 AiEM – ETSAB – UPC. Barcelona, Spain.  
2 INCIHUSA – CONICET. Mendoza, Argentina  

 
* Corresponding author: cganem@mendoza-conicet.gov.ar 

 
Abstract 
On naturally fermented beverages production, such as high quality wine, the use of auxiliary non-
renewable energy for hygro-thermal conditioning of building and barrels, today is almost mandatory. 
Field research studies on a winery in Argentinas’ main wine productive region -the province of 
Mendoza, famous for the excellent Malbec among other delicate varietals- have been conducted. The 
winery is situated in the Uco Valley near the Andes Mountains (33º76’SL, 69º03’WL, 1200 
m.a.s.l.)with a continental dry-temperate climate with hot summers and cold winters. Daily 
temperature differences reach 10ºC to 18ºC. This paper presents results in envelope characterization 
by amount of exposed surface and materiality and the assessment of its possibilities of self-climatic 
regulation. A first approach to strategies, as thermal inertia, in order to reach specific indoor 
temperature requirements for temperature stability for the three main production stages (fermentation, 
breeding and storage) by using passive architecture are also presented. 
 
 Keywords: envelope, thermal inertia, energy flux, hygro-thermal conditions, wineries. 
 
 
1. Introduction  
Wine production consists of different stages that go from grape harvesting until its bottling and client 
distribution. This process has evoluted significantly since its known beginnings in middle east, where 
there are manuscripts that relate wine existence in 5000 b.C. For a long time, wine production was 
made in a routinely way, been the case that from excellent  quality grapes it could be obtained a poor 
to a prime wine. Wine was drunk within the year of harvest; and when the new vintage approached, 
the price of the “old” wine decreased. 
 
In 1714, a Parisian merchant demanded to its Burdeos colleague “good wine: high quality, old, black 
and velvety.” Naturally it was already known how to breed and ameliorate the wine. It was beginning 
the quality wine’s era. To Alfonso Herrera, in its work “General Agriculture” edited on the 16th 
century: ... every winery, to be a good one, must be profound, cold, dry, dark, with thick walls and a 
good roof... [1] At the time, usually it was recommended that constructions were subterranean to avoid 
alterations in the alcoholic compounds of wine with high temperatures.  
 
In Mendoza, Argentina, first wineries were documented in the year 1600, buildings were simple and 
almost without measures of protection and conservation of grape fruits. Small and middle size spaces 
on the ground. It is supposed that grape juices exposed to temperatures over 25ºC corrupted rapidly. 
Mendoza’s wines were of poor quality and easy alteration of initial properties. [2] 
 
For hundreds years, knowledge on chemical processes and technology used in wine production 
advanced notoriously. But it is only from the second half of the 20th century that an important 
evolution on wine elaboration takes place, therefore in 30 to 40 years there was more progress than in 
all the previous centuries. Fermentation phenomena are precisely known and they can be controlled 
with modern systems, that most of the time through mechanical conditioning. Nevertheless the energy 
crises of the ’70 –the moment we took conscience of our excessive dependence on conventional non-
renewable energies and its associated consequences–, there have not been significant advances related 
with environmental technologies in wineries dwellings.  

573



World Renewable Energy Congress XI 
 25-30 September 2010, Abu Dhabi, UAE 

LEA: Low Energy Architecture 

Human beings have become an increasingly powerful environmental force over the last 10,000 years. 
With the advent of agriculture 8,000 years ago, we began to change the land.[3] And with the 
industrial revolution, we began to affect our atmosphere. The recent increase in the world's population 
has magnified the effects of our agricultural and economic activities.[4] Along with the specialization 
of wine production, and with the need of specific and constant microclimatic conditions, wineries 
buildings became more and more energy-dependant. Industrial sector is one of the most intensive 
systems that humanity has created. It consumes substantial proportions of natural resources for its 
construction and operation, and also participates in the disposals to the biosphere. The industry should 
of been conceived as a energy resources and materials management, as a part of constant fluxes and 
exchanges of energy and materials within the biosphere cycles. 
 
Interior – exterior exchanges happen through the skin or envelope of the building that separates 
“interior” from “exterior”. The envelope is a dynamic border that interacts with external natural 
energies and internal building environment. It is a fertile field to the development of layers and 
flexible control spaces that would facilitate the adaptation to the changing climatic characteristics. 
 
This paper presents results in envelope characterization of Salentein winery, in Mendoza, Argentina, 
by amount of exposed surface and materiality and the assessment of their possibilities of self-climatic 
regulation. A first approach to strategies, feasible to be used on each case studied, in order to reach 
specific indoor temperature and humidity requirements for the three main production stages 
(fermentation, breeding and storage) by using passive architecture are also presented.  
 
2. Methodology 
 
2.1 Case study 
The winery in study is situated in the Uco Valley in the Province of Mendoza near the Andes 
Mountains (33º76’SL, 69º03’WL, 1200 m.a.s.l.). It has a continental dry-temperate climate with hot 
summers and cold winters. Mean daily temperature differences reach 10ºC to 18ºC. , that result an 
excellent Malbec grape among other delicate varietals.  
 
The winery was designed for both form and function in the shape of a cross (Figures 1 and 2), allows 
for customized gentle hadling of the grapes, reducing the distance wine needs to be moved between 
winemaking steps. Each of the wings is a small winery with two levels –a ground level that houses 
stainless steel tanks and French wooden vats for fermentation and storage, and an underground level 
for aging wine in oak casks. The two levels allow wine to flow from the tanks to the barrels by a 
traditional gravity transfer system. The four wings converge in a circular central chamber which 
resembles an amphitheatre and was inspired by ancient classical temples. The subterranean stone floor 
of the cellar is a striking feature. Viewed from the ground level above, the floor of the central chamber 
reveals an important formal and symbolic design. The design is based on a modern compass whose 
tips are oriented towards the cardinal points as a means of relating this winery to the rest of the world. 
(Figure 4). Natural stone from the Cuyo Regions was used, including yellow quartzite sandstone, 
green chlorited type schist, and red limolite sandstone. [5] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Fig. 1

Fig. 2

North 
(Equator) 

Fig. 3 Fig. 4 

Ground Level            Underground Level

Fig.1 Main East Entrance.                   Fig.2 Winery’s ground and underground level plans. 

574



World Renewable Energy Congress XI 
 25-30 September 2010, Abu Dhabi, UAE 

LEA: Low Energy Architecture 

There will be compared three spaces within the winery following the three main stages in wine 
production: 
 
A- Ground level fermentation. (Figure 3) 

Wine starts its fermentation process in temperature-controlled stainless steel tanks. Natural light 
comes from a transparent dome located on the axis intersection of the crossed morphology. 
Artificial lightning completes the illumination of the space attached to columns and the exposed 
structure of the roof.  

B- Underground level breeding / storage: (Figure 4)  
In the undergroung cellars, wine is aged in small (225 liter) French oak casks with a capacity of 
5000 barrals. Subterranean space is naturally maintained at a constant 12ºC temperature and 80% 
humidity. Natural light comes from the ground level through an oculus that connects visually and 
thermally both levels. Notice that the photograph has been taken with a very sensitive lens for a 
long time of exposure to enable to “see” within the darkness of the space. 

C- Ground level premium breeding / storage (“Primus room”). (Figure 5) 
This ground cellar houses 12 temperature-controlled French wooden vats with capacity of 7.600 
liters each. Notice in Figure 5 that 10% of the façade is glazed and therefore the room presents 
higher levels of natural lighting. Aslo take into account the use of individual artificial illumination 
of vats and the great contrast of luminances in the interior space. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2.2 Wine climatic needs on each production stage  
Optimal environmental conditions on different sites in the wineries, vary according to the needs of 
workers and the better settings for breeding and keeping wines. Temperature and humidity regimes 
and the principal environmental factors that need to be precisely controlled in the different sites of 
wineries. Nevertheless, on some spaces, there have to be taken into account illumination levels to be 
adequate to work and the total absence of estrange odours; sometimes evacuated with the correct 
ventilation, and other times controlled by construction materials.[6] 
 
A-Fermentation: on metallic double-skinned tanks. 

- Temperature is more important in the containers than in the total dwelling. Between the double 
skin of the casks where fermentation is performed, tubes are placed, in which hot or cold water 
circulate depending of what is needed at the time.  
- As these casks have a superior opening, CO2 generated by chemical reactions, that has a higher 
density than air, descend and accumulates in the inferior part. Therefore inferior ventilation is 
needed to renovate the air.  
- As light can also affect fermentation, therefore it has to be controlled in order to allow workers to 
perform their tasks attending to the wine production process. 

B- Breeding: on wooden (American or French oak) barrels and casks. 
In this stage stability within the following reference ranges is very important: 
- Air temperature between 12-16 ºC and relative humidity between 70-82 %. 
- To eliminate bad odours and other air volatile substances that can filtrate through wooden barrels.  
- Minimal light. Only when it is absolutely needed. 

Fig.3 Fermetation: Groung Level.      Fig.4 Breeding: Underground Level.    Fig.5 Breeding: Ground Level 

575



World Renewable Energy Congress XI 
 25-30 September 2010, Abu Dhabi, UAE 

LEA: Low Energy Architecture 

C-Storage: on glass bottles in cellars.  
Of all stages, in this last one inside the building, stability is also a priority. To keep the four 
microclimatic parameters (temperature, humidity, illumination and ventilation) controlled is 
essential to obtain the expected result. At this moment the wine is bottled and it will not be moved 
until it is ready. 
- Very low illumination levels are here more important than in previous stages because the wine is 
bottled on glass that lets the light in, specially on the ultraviolet range of the spectrum, that can 
affect the most the final quality of the wine. 

 
2.3 Envelope analyses:  
In a winery thermal inertia is crucial due to the constant need of stabilized temperatures. A thermal 
abrupt change can put the hole process in jeopardy. Therefore, the analyses will start with the 
characterization of the envelope of the winery by amount of exposed envelope and materiality. Then, 
thermal inertia of the different materials of the envelope will be calculated with Eduardo Torroja 
Institut Equations (Eq. 1 and 2), and its possibilities of self-regulation from the comparisson of the 
heat flux by using Fouriers Law Equation (Eq. 3). Finally, all these data will enable to relate building 
performance to the climatic needs in each of the three selected spaces: (A- Ground level Fermentation, 
B-Underground level breeding and storage and C-Ground level premium breeding and storage (Primus 
room).  
 
I = R*S24                                                         (1)                                 
S24 = 8.48*10 -3 √ λ *ρ *Cρ             (2) 
Where: 
I  =   thermal inertia adimensional parameter  
R =   thermal ressistance (thickness “e” / λ) (m2.K/W) 
S24  = twenty four hour factor 
Cρ  =  specific heat at a constant pressure (J/ kg.K)      
ρ  =   material density (kg/m3) 
λ  =   thermal conductivity (W/m.K) 
 
Q = U * S * (Te – Ti)                  (3) 
Where: 
Q =   flux (W) 
U =   heat transmission coefficient (W/m2.K) 
S =   Envelope surface (m2) 
Te =  Exterior temperature (K) 
Ti =  Interior temperature (K) 
 
3. Results 
 
3.2 Envelope Characterization 
 
3.2.1 Amount of exposed envelope [7] 
The winery presents 70% of the envelope is exposed to the exterior and therefore is located over the 
surface, and 30 % of the envelope is subterranean. Figure 6 shows an scheme and the section. Also see 
Figure 2 for the building plan to compete the graphical information of ground and underground 
dimensions.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Figure 6: Scheme and section of the winery showing the spaces analyzed on both levels. 

A70%
 

30% B

C

576



World Renewable Energy Congress XI 
 25-30 September 2010, Abu Dhabi, UAE 

LEA: Low Energy Architecture 

 
3.2.2 Materiality 
Table 1 presents a description of the main materials of the envelope classified by level and amount of 
layers. Heat transmittance or U, that depends of the particular thickness used in the building, is shown 
to point that materials such as stone and reinforced concrete present different thermal conductivities 
but equal U values. Also notice that stone and hermetic double glazing that have the same thermal 
conductivity due to the thickness present extremely different U values. 
 
Table 1. Envelope materials 

 Layers Density      
(Kg/m3) 

Specific 
Heat   

(J/Kg.K) 

Thermal 
Conductivity 

(W/m.K) 

Thickness 
(m) 

U or Heat 
Transmittance 

(W/m2.K) 
Earth 1800 1460 2.10 1 2.12 
Stone 2400 800 2.50 0.30 8.33 

 
Underground 

Level Reinforced 
Concrete 

2400 805 1.63 0.20 8.33 

Hermetic 
Double 

Glassing 

---- ---- 2.50 6+6       
0.012 

208  
Ground 

Level Single 
Layer Reinforced 

Concrete 
2400 805 1.63 0.20 8.33 

Zinc  7200 390 110 0.012 5524 
Fibreglass  25 1500 0.04 0.10 0.40 

 

Roof        
Multi-Layer 

Ceiling  770 2383 0.44 0.012 3.7 
 
 
3.2 Self-climatic regulation assessment 
 
Thermal inertia of the different materials that compose the envelope of the building are: 

- Earth (1m thickness) = 93.53 
- Stone (0.30 m thickness = 22.20 
- Reinforced concrete (0.20 m thickness) = 18 

Therefore, it will always be preferable for production stages that require thermal stability, that is 
breeding and storage (Cases B and C) to have a subterranean space that regulate by its own 
characteristics the stability in temperature and humidity parameters. 
 
To calculate energy fluxes for the three studied spaces and compare their possibilities self-climatic 
regulation by reducing the amount of watts exchanged between interior and exterior,  there will be 
established two fixed parameters: 

S =   Envelope surface = 100 m2 
∆T (Te – Ti) =  10 K 

 
The following results were obtained. They show a tendency of the amount of energy flux that will be 
exchanged in a fixed circumstance.: 

A –  Ground level fermentation: Q = 8330 W  
B –  Underground level breeding / storage: Q = 2120 W 
C –  Ground level premium breeding / storage: Q = 19164 W 

 
4. Discussion 
The envelope influences greatly how the interior spaces will behave naturally. If we take into account 
that: 1) DD (base 16ºC) are near 2000 in the Uco Valley, 2) mean exterior temperatures for summer 
are 29.7ºC, 3) differences between the optimal interior temperature and the exterior temperature can 
reach 14ºC to 18ºC in summer; in order to produce wine without the use of auxiliary cooling, will be 
highly recommended to have a good thermal inertia that will maintain stable temperatures in the 
desired ranges and prevent the use of auxiliary cooling devices. A traditional passive estrategy is the 
use of underground cellars. 

577



World Renewable Energy Congress XI 
 25-30 September 2010, Abu Dhabi, UAE 

LEA: Low Energy Architecture 

 
In the analyzed winery, Case A (fermentation) is located on the ground level. Its temperature 
requirements (under 20ºC) are more flexible than for cases B and C. Nevertheless stainless steel tanks 
have incorporated an interior temperature regulation system to regulate the temperature of the fluids. 
The possibility to accelerate or slow the fermentation process at will by the enologist is also a 
requirement of this production stage. It is also important to take into account that the displacements of 
wine fluids during the elaboration process also takes energy and therefore it is a great decition to use 
gravity to perform most of them. This is why it is important that the fermentation space (A) is located 
over the breeding and storage space (B/C).  
 
For breeding and storage, temperature requirements are very strict and allow a narrow variation. On 
this stages enologist do not need to change fluids temperature at will, but thermal stability is crucial, 
therefore thermail inertia is very important. Even though Cases B and C have the same requirements, 
they are located on the ground (C) and underground (B). As a result space B functions naturally and 
space C (Primus room) need auxiliary energy to maintain the wine within the desired micro-climatic 
characteristics. Even more, space B presents 10% of the envelope glazed increasing notoriously the 
flux exchanges between interior and exterior and diminishing greatly its possibilities of self-climatic 
regulation. Therefore, wooden vasks have an interior cooling system similar to the ones used in 
stainess steel tanks. As a conclusion, Table 2 shows as a conclusion the winery evaluation Check-list.  
 
Table 2. Winery evaluation Check-list 

 Temperature  
(ºC) 

Humidity    
(%) 

Ventilation Illumination  
(lux) 

Production 
requirements 

< 20           
Can change 
gradually  

60 – 90       
Can change 
gradually  

Strong 
ventilation 
Placed low 

300 – 500       
All types of 

lightning 

 
Fermentation 

Analysed space - A Ok Ok X Ok 
Production 
requirements 

12 – 16   
Constant 

78 – 82  
Constant 

Slow    
ventilation 
Placed high 

150 – 200       
Not fluorescent 

or UV 

 
Breeding / 
Storage 

Analysed space - B Ok Ok Ok Ok 
Production 
requirements 

12 – 16   
Constant 

78 – 82  
Constant 

Slow   
ventilation 
Placed high 

150 – 200       
Not fluorescent 

or UV 

 
Breeding / 
Storage 

Analysed space - C X X X X 
 
 
5. References 
[1] Eizmendi, J. M. y Rodriguez, M. (1996) “Lagares rupestres en Labastida de Alava” in La Rioja, el vino y el 
camino de Santiago. (Yanguas, J. S. ed.) Vitoria-Gasteiz: Fundación Sancho el sabio.  
[2] Rivera Medina, A. M. (2006) Entre la Cordillera y la Pampa: la Vitivinicultura en Cuyo, Argentina. San 
Juan: EFU. Tesis Doctoral Universidad de Sevilla (1987). 
[3] Gordon Wolman, M. (1993) “Population, Land Use, and Environment: A Long History” in Population and 
Land Use in Developing Countries. (Jolly, C. L. and Boyle Torrey, B. ed.), Committee on Population, 
Commission on Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education, National Research Council. Washington, DC: 
National Academy Press.  
[4] Boyle Torrey, B. (2004). Urbanization: An Environmental Force to Be Reckoned With. Population Reference 
Bureau. www.prb.org 
[5] Bormida and Yanzón Architects (1999) Project Memory Salentein Winery. Uco Valley, Mendoza, Argentina. 
[6] Moreno, J. (2008) La bodega: modelo de arquitectura sostenible. Tesina de Maestría. Barcelona: Universidad 
Politécnica de Cataluña. 
[7] Ganem, C. and Coch, H. (2004) Building envelope design for a zero energy response. Proceedings of the 21st 
Conference on Passive and Low Energy Architecture. (PLEA 2004). Eindhoven. The Netherlands. 

578


