














































Barcelona a … de …


ACE 32 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

URBAN HEAT ISLAND PREDICTION IN THE 

MEDITERRANEAN CONTEXT: AN EVALUATION 

OF THE URBAN WEATHER GENERATOR MODEL 

 

 

 

Agnese Salvati, Helena Coch Roura y Carlo Cecere 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Cómo citar este artículo: SALVATI, A.; COCH ROURA, H. y CECERE, C. Urban heat island 

prediction in the mediterranean context: an evaluation of the urban weather generator model [en 

línea] Fecha de consulta: dd-mm-aa. En: ACE: Architecture, City and Environment = 

Arquitectura, Ciudad y Entorno, 11 (32): 135-156, 2016. DOI: 10.5821/ace.11.32.4836. ISSN: 

1886-4805. 



 

 

135 

ACE©  AÑO 11, núm.32, OCTUBRE 2016 | URBAN HEAT ISLAND PREDICTION IN THE MEDITERRANEAN CONTEXT: AN 

EVALUATION OF THE URBAN WEATHER GENERATOR MODEL 

Agnese Salvati, Helena Coch Roura y Carlo Cecere 

URBAN HEAT ISLAND PREDICTION IN THE MEDITERRANEAN CONTEXT: 
AN EVALUATION OF THE URBAN WEATHER GENERATOR MODEL 
 

 

SALVATI, Agnese
1
 

COCH ROURA, Helena 

CECERE, Carlo 

 

 
Remisión inicial: 05-04-2016          Remisión final: 13-10-2016 

 
Key words: Urban climate; climate model; energy simulation, urban context 

 

Palabras clave: Clima urbano; modelo de clima; simulación energética; contexto urbano 

 

Structured Abstract 

 

The lack of urban-specific climate data is, today, one of the major limits for an accurate 

estimation of the building energy performance in the urban context. The urban climate is 

substantially modified by the “heat island” effect that determines an increase of the air 

temperature compared to the surrounding rural areas. By contrast, the weather data used to run 

the energy simulations normally refer to rural or suburban weather stations, causing relevant 

errors in the energy assessment, especially in hot climates. 

 

This study aims at evaluating the accuracy of the "Urban Weather Generator" (UWG), a model 

developed for generating urban weather files from rural weather data in order to improve the 

accuracy of the building energy simulations in the urban context. 

 

To this purpose, the model predictions have been compared to actual observations in different 

urban sites in Rome and Barcelona. The comparisons have been conducted for one year of 

observations for each site, focusing the analysis on summer and winter months. The model 

accuracy has been assessed through statistical analysis of the average error.  

 

Results show that the UWG model is able to capture the general trend of the urban 

temperature. The accuracy of the prediction increases for urban sites located in a rather 

homogeneous urban fabric in terms of building density and vegetation coverage. In these 

situations, the model allows a good prediction of the urban air temperatures with low 

computational requirement and it can be a useful tool to improve the accuracy of urban energy 

analysis. 

 

                                                     
1
 Agnese Salvati: Sapienza University of Rome DICEA Department – SOS_UrbanLab, Faculty of Engineering, via 

Eudossiana 18, 00184 Roma, Italy. Contact email: agnese.salvati@uniroma1.it 



 

 

136 

ACE©  AÑO 11, núm.32, OCTUBRE 2016 | URBAN HEAT ISLAND PREDICTION IN THE MEDITERRANEAN CONTEXT: AN 

EVALUATION OF THE URBAN WEATHER GENERATOR MODEL 

Agnese Salvati, Helena Coch Roura y Carlo Cecere 

1. Introduction 

 

Cities are complex physical systems, whose functioning affects large scale phenomena, such 

as global climate change, and local scale phenomena, as the urban heat island intensity and 

the building energy performance or the thermal comfort in indoor and outdoor spaces. 

 

As the main source of greenhouse emissions and energy consumption, cities are also the heart 

of the actual environmental issue. One of the clearest consequences of the indiscriminate 

urbanization produced in the last centuries is the increase of the air temperature in the urban 

areas. This phenomenon is referred to as "Urban heat island" (UHI) and it has been 

documented for cities all over the world (Dorer and Allegrini, 2012). Many studies have been 

conducted in the Mediterranean zone, in Greece, Italy, Spain, Portugal and Turkey 

(Santamouris, 2007). In this context the UHI is found to range between 1°C and 10°C.  

 

The intensity of the UHI in Barcelona (Spain) has been firstly investigated by Moreno-Garcia 

(1994), who reported an average annual temperature difference between the city centre and the 

airport site of 1.4 °C and a temperature gap with respect to the minimums of 2.9 °C. 

 

Several studies have been carried out also in Rome, Italy (Bonacquisti et al., 2006; Colacino 

and Lavagnini, 1982; Pelliccioni et al., 2012). According to Bonacquisti et al. (2006), the 

average UHI intensity in Rome is about 3 °C, with a maximum of 4,2 °C in August. 

 

The temperature increase in the urban areas is mainly due to extensive soil sealing, building 

density and presence of anthropogenic heat sources which alter the water cycle, the wind 

regime and the radiative exchanges between the earth's surface and the atmosphere compared 

to a rural environment (Oke, 1987). As a consequence, the UHI exacerbates the effects of 

climate change and heat waves, posing a serious threat to the citizens’ health and comfort. 

Nevertheless, it also causes a relevant increase of the energy consumption for space cooling, 

above all in hot and temperate climates as the Mediterranean one (Akbari and Konopacki, 2005; 

Allegrini et al., 2012; Crawley, 2008; Kolokotroni et al., 2012; Santamouris, 2014). 

 

Urban heat island, comfort and energy performance are thus intimately related (Givoni, 1998; 

Moonen et al., 2012; Salvati et al., 2015). However, despite the evidence of the phenomenon 

and the seriousness of its consequences, the UHI effect is still regularly omitted in the practice 

of energy simulation. In effect, the standard weather files used to run the energy calculation 

normally refer to climate data gauged at weather station located outside the urban area, as the 

airports. This approximation entails relevant errors in the energy demand calculation, especially 

for residential buildings; according to Bueno et al. (2012), a typical 4 K daily-maximum UHI 

effect can determine a 20% error in the assessment of the cooling demand for residential 

buildings. The error can be even bigger when it comes to urban scale energy analysis.  

 

Given that the building sector is responsible for a substantial part of the global energy 

consumption and emissions (Pérez-Lombard, Ortiz, and Pout, 2008), a correct evaluation of the 

buildings’ performance in the urban context is a preliminary necessary requirement to reduce its 

environmental impact. To this aim, architects and planners must necessarily integrate their 

background with a wider body of knowledge and tools, able to describe the energetic and 

climatic dynamics that take place at urban scale, as the urban heat island effect. 



 

 

137 

ACE©  AÑO 11, núm.32, OCTUBRE 2016 | URBAN HEAT ISLAND PREDICTION IN THE MEDITERRANEAN CONTEXT: AN 

EVALUATION OF THE URBAN WEATHER GENERATOR MODEL 

Agnese Salvati, Helena Coch Roura y Carlo Cecere 

 

Thus far, established building energy models are commonly used to simulate the energy 

performance at building scale (Crawley et al., 2008). However, the climate data currently used 

to run the calculation are obtained from weather stations located in open areas and outside the 

city (airports). The major limitations for an adequate prediction of the energy performance in the 

urban context is thus the lack of urban specific climate data (Alexander et al.,2015; Bueno et al., 

2013).To fil this gap, recent studies have analysed the effect of the urban microclimate on the 

energy performance with computational fluid dynamic (CFD) models, coupled with energy 

models (Allegrini et al., 2012; Bueno et al., 2011; Yang et al, 2012). However, the level of 

computation required for these techniques is of much greater order and expense than the 

building thermal simulation and the procedure is difficult to repeat. 

 

By contrast, several urban surface energy balance models (or Urban Canopy Models) have 

been developed to describe the energy fluxes between the urban surface and the atmosphere 

with low computational requirement (Grimmond et al. 2010). Among them, the Town Energy 

Balance (TEB) scheme by Masson (2000) is one of the most established. Furthermore, 

simplified building energy models have been implemented in urban canopy models to capture 

the energy interrelationships between the buildings and the urban climate,(Bueno et al., 2012b; 

Kikegawa et al, 2003). Nevertheless, not even these implemented models are suitable for a 

direct application for architectural purpose, as they are targeted to disciplines such as 

climatology and their outputs are not compatible with current building energy models. 

 

An interesting implementation of the TEB scheme is the Urban Weather Generator (UWG) by 

Bueno et al. (2013). The UWG model creates urban weather files using rural temperatures as 

input. This model is especially useful to the architectural sector as its computational cost is on 

the same order of an energy simulations run, the output weather file is compatible with the most 

popular energy models and the most relevant input parameters can be derived from GIS 

databases available for many cities in the world. 

 

This paper presents an evaluation of the UWG accuracy regarding the urban air temperature 

prediction for different sites in two Mediterranean cities. Firstly, the model components and the 

data required for the simulation are described. Then the UWG prediction is compared to the 

actual air temperature observations obtained from urban weather stations in Rome and 

Barcelona. In particular, the model is evaluated for its ability to improve the energy simulation 

accuracy in the urban context. So the UWG prediction is compared to both the urban air 

temperature and the airports air temperature, which is normally used for standard climate 

databases. The statistical analysis of the model performance is thus presented and discussed. 

Finally, some recommendations for a proper use of the tool and the limits for its applicability are 

drawn as conclusion. 

 

2. Model description  

 

The UWG was developed by Bueno et al. to calculate hourly values of urban air temperature 

given the weather data measured at stations located in rural or sub-urban areas (Bueno et al., 

2013). The model is based on the Town Energy Balance scheme of Masson, including a 

building energy model derived from EnergyPlus algorithms (Bueno et al., 2011; 2012b). So far, 



 

 

138 

ACE©  AÑO 11, núm.32, OCTUBRE 2016 | URBAN HEAT ISLAND PREDICTION IN THE MEDITERRANEAN CONTEXT: AN 

EVALUATION OF THE URBAN WEATHER GENERATOR MODEL 

Agnese Salvati, Helena Coch Roura y Carlo Cecere 

the UWG has been evaluated against field data from Basel (Switzerland), Toulouse (France) 

and Singapore, showing an average error of about 1K (Bueno et al., 2013; 2014).  

The model consists of four calculation components: the “Rural Station Model", the "Vertical 

Diffusion Model", the "Urban Boundary-layer model" and the "Urban Canopy and Building 

Energy Model". Using the rural climate data as input, the model calculates the hourly air 

temperature in the urban canyon, given a parametric description of the urban area. The UWG 

calculation is based on the urban surface energy balance, taking into account for the reciprocal 

interactions between buildings and the urban climate. In particular, the urban canopy energy 

balance accounts for (Bueno et al., 2013): 

1. The heat fluxes from walls, windows and the road  

2. The sensible heat exchange between the canyon air and the upper atmosphere layer 

3. The heat fluxes due to the building cooling and heating systems (exfiltration, waste heat 

from heating, ventilation and air-conditioning equipment) 

4. Other anthropogenic heat sources 
5. The radiant heat exchange between the canyon air and the sky 

 

The solar radiation received by walls and road is calculated with the equations used in TEB 

scheme (Masson, 2000), considering an average oriented urban canyon. The longwave 

radiation among walls, road, urban canyon air and the sky is computed by linearization of the 

Stefan–Boltzmann equation, accounting for the transmittance of the urban canyon air and 

assuming only one bounce of radiative heat fluxes between surfaces (Bueno et al., 2013). 

To perform the calculation, UWG need two input files: 

1. A rural hourly weather file in EnergyPlus format (.epw) 

2. A xml file that describes the characteristics of the reference urban site. 

 

The xml file includes 4 categories of parameters, which refer to different scales: "Reference 

site", "Urban Area", "Building" and "Elements". 

The "Reference site" parameters describe the latitude, longitude and the radius of the reference 

city. The "Urban area" category includes the urban morphological parameters, the ratio of trees 

coverage and the amount of anthropogenic heat from traffic. The morphological parameters are 

very relevant on the energy balance calculation (Salvati, Cecere, & Coch, 2016), so they must 

be computed with particular attention. The morphological parameters are three:  

- Average building height: the average building height in the urban area, normalized by building 

footprint 

- Site coverage ratio: the ratio of the building footprint to the urban site area 

- Façade-to-site ratio: the ratio of the vertical surface area (wall) to the urban site area 

 

The "Building" parameters describe the typical features of the buildings in the urban area: the 

type, set points and efficiency of heating and cooling systems, the façade glazing ratio, the 

average floor height, internal gains, ventilation and infiltration. The most significant parameters 

in this category are the temperature set points, especially the cooling set point, as it determines 

the building energy consumption and, proportionally, the waste heat released into the 

atmosphere. Finally, the "Elements" parameters describe the thermal and radiative properties of 

the canyon's surfaces: vegetation coverage, albedo, emissivity, thermal conductivity, volumetric 

heat capacity and thickness. These properties are required for each element of the canyon 

(road, roof, wall) and for the rural station site. 

 



 

 

139 

ACE©  AÑO 11, núm.32, OCTUBRE 2016 | URBAN HEAT ISLAND PREDICTION IN THE MEDITERRANEAN CONTEXT: AN 

EVALUATION OF THE URBAN WEATHER GENERATOR MODEL 

Agnese Salvati, Helena Coch Roura y Carlo Cecere 

 

3. Model evaluation: methodology and data source 

 

The model evaluation is carried out considering different urban sites in Rome and Barcelona. 

The analysis is aimed at assessing the accuracy of the UWG prediction and its ability to improve 

the building energy assessment for the Mediterranean urban context. 

 

To this aim, urban and rural weather stations have been identified in the two cities in order to 

compare the observed urban air temperatures with the UWG predictions. The chosen urban 

sites in Rome and Barcelona are similar for what concern land use and building density and 

morphology. 

 

The validation methodology consists of three steps. Firstly, a “rural weather file” (epw format) is 

created from the hourly temperature data measured at the rural stations. Then the rural weather 

file is used as input for the UWG calculation, along with the xml file that describes the areas in 

which the urban weather stations are located. Finally, the estimated urban temperatures are 

compared to those measured at the urban meteorological stations and the statistical error  of 

the predictions is evaluated. The model is evaluated with the specific aim of identifying whether 

its prediction is able to improve the accuracy of the building energy performance assessment in 

urban areas. The object of the evaluation is thus the accuracy of the predicted monthly average 

diurnal cycle of the urban air temperature with respect to the urban actual observations and the 

rural temperature. The reference rural stations are located at the airports of the two cities, which 

are the sites from which meteorological data are commonly derived for energy simulation 

purpose. 

 

3.1 Reference weather stations  

 

Rome and Barcelona are classified in the map of Köppen-Geiger as temperate climate, with hot 

and dry summers. They are located at very close latitude, respectively to 41.9 ° N Rome and 

41.4 ° N Barcelona. The seasonal average trend of the temperature is very similar in the two 

cities, with a slightly bigger temperature range in Rome. The daily and yearly temperature range 

is smaller in Barcelona due to the direct thermoregulatory effect of the sea. Rome is about 20 

km distant from the coast, so the effect of the sea on the climate is weaker, but still significant. 

 

The reference rural weather stations are located at the airports, respectively Barcelona El Prat 

Airport for Barcelona and Rome-Ciampino GB Pastine Airport for Rome. Actually, these sites do 

not totally conform to Oke’s description of “rural site”, given the proximity to the sea in Barcelona 

airport and the presence of urbanization in both sites. However, as already mentioned, the 

standard weather databases normally refer to the airport weather stations. This choice is thus 

aimed at assessing how much the urban temperatures differ from those that are normally used 

for energy simulations purpose. The hourly values of air temperature, humidity, wind speed and 

direction are available for both stations from the web site www.wunderground.com (Code LEBL 

for El Prat Airport station and code LIRA for Ciampino airport station). 

 

Three urban weather stations are used as reference to carry out the comparison with UWG 

calculation: one in Barcelona, referred to as "Raval", and two in Rome, referred to as 



 

 

140 

ACE©  AÑO 11, núm.32, OCTUBRE 2016 | URBAN HEAT ISLAND PREDICTION IN THE MEDITERRANEAN CONTEXT: AN 

EVALUATION OF THE URBAN WEATHER GENERATOR MODEL 

Agnese Salvati, Helena Coch Roura y Carlo Cecere 

"Boncompagni" and "Arenula". All of them are located in the city centre and approximately at the 

same distance from the corresponding rural station. (Figure 1) 

 

The three weather stations differ for the sensor position, which is located at roof level in the 

case of Raval and Boncompagni and near the ground level in the case of Arenula. This is a 

substantial difference, because the roof level stations measure the air temperatures in the 

roughness sublayer, above the average heights of the buildings, while the street level station 

records the air temperatures at about 2 m from the ground, into the urban canopy layer. The 

thermic gradient from ground level to roof level is considerable, as a result of different radiative 

fluxes and wind regimes  (Di Bernardino et al., 2015; Xie et al, 2007), so we expect a different 

temperature trend from the two kind of stations. 

 

The UWG is a surface energy balance model, so it estimates the average homogeneous 

temperature into the canyon. The evaluation of the model using temperature data from roof 

level and ground level allows thus to identify whether the model predicts better the temperatures 

into the canopy layer or in the roughness sublayer. 

 

Figure 1. Weather stations localization in Barcelona and Rome  

 
Source: Self processing of BING maps images  

 

Table 1. Reference urban weather stations characteristics 

Weather station Dist. from 

Airport (Km) 

Dist.from sea 

(Km) 

Height of the 

sensor (m) 

Position  

Raval (BCN) 13 1.3 33 a.s.l. Roof top 

Boncompagni (RM) 13 25 72 a.s.l. Roof top 

Arenula (RM) 13 24 31 a.s.l. Ground level 

Source: METEOCAT data for Raval station and ARPA data for Boncompagni and Arenula stations 

A brief description of the main features of the three urban weather stations is reported hereafter. 

 

Raval station is located in the ancient core of the city (figure 3), quite near the sea. The 

structure of the district is very dense and compact, composed of irregular blocks and narrow 

streets, mostly pedestrian. The typical canyon aspect ratio (height/width) is about 3. Trees and 

vegetation are scarce in the area. The intended use is primarily residential, with the exception of 

the northern area, where universities and museums are concentrated. The district is very close 



 

 

141 

ACE©  AÑO 11, núm.32, OCTUBRE 2016 | URBAN HEAT ISLAND PREDICTION IN THE MEDITERRANEAN CONTEXT: AN 

EVALUATION OF THE URBAN WEATHER GENERATOR MODEL 

Agnese Salvati, Helena Coch Roura y Carlo Cecere 

to the sea, just 1.3 km from the port, and at 13 km distance from the airport. The weather station 

is part of the “Meteorological service of Catalunya” (METEOCAT) network and it is located on 

the top of one university building (Faculty of Geography and History). The hourly temperature 

data for Raval have been supplied by METEOCAT for the whole year 2013. According to 

Steward and Oke’s classification (2012), the district matches the Urban Climatic Zone 2. 

 

Boncompagni station is located in the city centre of Rome (figure 4). The structure of the area 

dates back to early twentieth century and it is composed of large and compact blocks on a wider 

street network compared to Raval texture. The buildings are quite tall (about 7 floors) and the 

canyon aspect ratio is about 1.5. The tree coverage is low near the weather station, but at 

approximately 500 m in North-West direction there is the big park of Villa Borghese. According 

to Oke and Steward's classification, the district matches the Urban Climatic Zone 2. The 

meteorological station belongs to the network of the “Regional Agency for Environmental 

Protection of Lazio Region” (ARPA Lazio) and it is located on the roof of ARPA building. The 

station is equipped with ultrasonic anemometer (USA1 SCIENTIFIC), Rain Gauge (VRG 101), 

Thermo-hygrometer (HMP 45AC) and Radiometer (CNR1). The hourly temperature data for the 

year 2013 were provided by ARPA. 

 

The Arenula station (figure 5) was located in Largo Arenula during the period of observation, in 

the old city center (the station has been moved in Piazza Cairoli later on). The neighborhood is 

mixed-use, with large presence of offices, retail spaces, accommodation facilities and 

institutional buildings along with residential buildings. The district is built on a dense medieval 

urban structure, mainly made up of courtyard buildings. The urban canyons are particularly high 

and narrow, with an average aspect ratio of 2.5. The district is one of the most compact and 

densely built area of the city. The vegetation is mostly concentrated near the Tiber river, at 

about 500 m distance from the point of measurement. Arenula station was part of the air quality 

monitoring network of ARPA. The temperature sensor was located at about 2 m above ground 

level. For Arenula station, the hourly temperature data refer to the year 2003. 

 

3.2 Model set up 
 

For each urban reference site, a UWG run has been performed, in order to compare the model 

prediction to the actual air temperature observations. To this aim, rural weather files were 

created (.epw format) from the hourly temperatures recorded at the rural weather stations. 

Then, for each reference urban site, the parameters required for the xml input file were 

calculated. 

 

The xml file describes all the features of the urban area that directly affects the weather station 

measurement. This “area” is known as “footprint” or “source area” of the weather station and it 

depends on the wind speed and direction and on the height of the sensor (figure 2). More 

precisely, quoting Oke: “The source area of a sensor that derives its signal via turbulent 

transport is not symmetrically distributed around the sensor location. It is elliptical in shape and 

is aligned in the upwind direction from the tower” (Oke, 2006, p.7).  

 

So the source area changes during the day and year, according to the variation of the wind 

direction. In the urban context, the circular area that most characterizes the wind regimes and 

the turbulent heat transport is equal to about 500m (Oke, 2006; Stewart and Oke, 2012). It is to 



 

 

142 

ACE©  AÑO 11, núm.32, OCTUBRE 2016 | URBAN HEAT ISLAND PREDICTION IN THE MEDITERRANEAN CONTEXT: AN 

EVALUATION OF THE URBAN WEATHER GENERATOR MODEL 

Agnese Salvati, Helena Coch Roura y Carlo Cecere 

highlight that this general situation may be substantially modified within the urban canopy layer, 

due to the complex geometry of the three-dimensional urban surface that causes blockage or 

channelling of the flows. In effect, the detailed calculation of the "footprint" area of a 

meteorological station is still an open problem, as it depends on the wind direction and speed 

that assume a very variable trend during the day and the year, especially in a urban context 

(Kljun et al., 2004; Schmid, 2002).  
 

Figure 2. “Footprint” or “source area” of the measurement 

 

Source: Oke, T. R. (2006). Initial guidance to obtain representative meteorological observations at urban sites 

 
The weather station footprint has been calculated in a simplified way in this study, considering 

the part of a 500 m radius circular area centered in the station and aligned in the dominant 

upwind directions (figure 3, 4 and 5). The dominant wind directions in Rome are from North in 

winter time and from South-West in summer, while in Barcelona the wind comes from North-

West in winter and from South-Southwest in Summer
2
. Only in the case of Arenula, given the 

sensor height of about 2m from the ground, all the 500 m circular area has been considered as 

footprint; because the wind speed and direction are substantially modified by the geometry and 

the density of the built environment. 

 

The calculation of the urban morphological parameters was performed through the construction 

of detailed digital models of the footprints areas with AutoCAD®, starting from GIS data 

elaborated with the open source software gvSIG (Asociacón GvSIG, 2015). The digital models 

have allowed the computation of all the vertical and horizontal surfaces and thus the calculation 

of the three morphological parameters required by UWG. 

 

The "tree coverage" has been computed on aerial images derived from Google Earth and 

elaborated with AutoCAD®. For the three urban sites, this parameter varies from 7 to 12%. 

 

For what concern the "anthropogenic heat from traffic", an average value has been identified in 

the work of Pigeon and Sailor (Pigeon et al., 2007; Sailor, 2011). In particular the anthropogenic 

                                                     
2
 The dominant wind directions in the urban areas refer to data from the meteorological observatory "Collegio Romano" 

in the centre of Rome and from the meteorological station of Raval in Barcelona. 



 

 

143 

ACE©  AÑO 11, núm.32, OCTUBRE 2016 | URBAN HEAT ISLAND PREDICTION IN THE MEDITERRANEAN CONTEXT: AN 

EVALUATION OF THE URBAN WEATHER GENERATOR MODEL 

Agnese Salvati, Helena Coch Roura y Carlo Cecere 

heat calculated for Toulouse (8 W/m2) has been chosen as reference for both Rome and 

Barcelona urban sites.  

 
Figure 3. Raval (Barcelona) weather station position and footprint 

 

Source: Self processing of GIS data by software gvSIG 2.2. 

 

Figure 4. Boncompagni (Rome) weather station position and footprint 

 

Source: Self processing of GIS data by software gvSIG 2.2. 



 

 

144 

ACE©  AÑO 11, núm.32, OCTUBRE 2016 | URBAN HEAT ISLAND PREDICTION IN THE MEDITERRANEAN CONTEXT: AN 

EVALUATION OF THE URBAN WEATHER GENERATOR MODEL 

Agnese Salvati, Helena Coch Roura y Carlo Cecere 

Figure 5. Arenula (Rome) weather station position and footprint 

S

ource: Self processing of GIS data by software gvSIG 2.2. 

 

The other source of anthropogenic heat, the buildings, is taken into account in the UWG 

calculation according to the typical characteristics of the buildings in the area (architectural 

features, building construction, technology and systems operation). The building construction 

type in the three urban sites is similar in terms of thermal behavior: masonry construction with 

high thermal inertia and low insulation (wall transmittance is considered about 1.5 W/mq K).  

 

A very important parameter of the "Building" category is the cooling set point, because it directly 

determines the amount of waste heat released into the canyon. The three urban sites are 

characterized by mix use: residential, offices and commercial. To take into account this 

heterogeneity in terms of air conditioning use, a quite high daily cooling set point has been 

chosen as input (26°C), while during the night the air conditioning has been supposed to be off. 

 

Other parameters of the "Building" category, which are less important on the urban heat island 

intensity, are the façade glazing ratio, the internal gains and the ventilation and infiltration 

values. For the three urban sites, the chosen values are 0.3 for the façade glazing ratio and 0.5 

ACH for ventilation and infiltration. For what concern the internal gains, a differentiation has 

been made according to the prevalent use of the area. For Via Arenula, which use is mainly 

commercial and offices, a value of 30 W/mq and 5 W/mq has been used for daytime and night-

time, respectively. For Via Boncompagni and Raval, which use is mainly residential, the chosen 

values are 2 W/mq for daytime and 5,8 W/mq for night-time. 

 

Finally, for the three urban sites, which are similar in terms of claddings and colors, the values 

of albedo and emissivity for the walls, roads and roofs have been identified according to the 



 

 

145 

ACE©  AÑO 11, núm.32, OCTUBRE 2016 | URBAN HEAT ISLAND PREDICTION IN THE MEDITERRANEAN CONTEXT: AN 

EVALUATION OF THE URBAN WEATHER GENERATOR MODEL 

Agnese Salvati, Helena Coch Roura y Carlo Cecere 

literature (Gartland, 2008). A more detailed description of the input parameters for each site can 

be found in table 2. 

 

The "vegetation coverage" parameter, that falls into "Elements" category, is significant only for 

the rural site. In this case a 500 m radius circular area centered in the weather station has been 

considered to compute the vegetation coverage ratio in the two airport sites (Figure 3). 

 

Figure 6. Rural Weather station’s source areas for the input parameters calculation 

Source: Self processing of GooglEarth image 

 
Table 2 Most relevant parameters used for the simulation

3
 

 Raval Boncompagni Arenula 

Reference Site    

Latitude [°] 41.4 41.47 41.47 

Longitude[°] 2.2 2.34 12.34 

Urban Area    

Average Building height [°] 16.7 20.1 19.9 

Site coverage ratio [--]  0.63 0.45 0.49 

Façade-to-site ratio [--] 2.19 1.66 1.44 

Tree coverage [%] 8 12 7 

sensible anthropogenic 

heat [W/m
2
] 

8.0 8.0 8 

Building    

Daytime cooling set point 

[°C] 

26 26 26 

Nighttime cooling set point 

[°C] 

35 35 35 

Daytime heating set point 

[°C] 

20 20 20 

Nighttime heating set point 20 20 20 

                                                     
3
 A complete definition of all the parameters involved in the calculation can be found here 

http://urbanmicroclimate.scripts.mit.edu/uwg_parameters.php 

 



 

 

146 

ACE©  AÑO 11, núm.32, OCTUBRE 2016 | URBAN HEAT ISLAND PREDICTION IN THE MEDITERRANEAN CONTEXT: AN 

EVALUATION OF THE URBAN WEATHER GENERATOR MODEL 

Agnese Salvati, Helena Coch Roura y Carlo Cecere 

[°C] 

Elements    

Wall albedo 0.25 0.25 0.25 

Wall materials and 

thickness 

Brick, plaster 

43 cm 

Brick, plaster 

43 cm 

Brick, plaster 

43 cm 

Roof albedo 0.25 0.25 0.25 

Roof materials and 

thickness 

Hollow-brick slab, 

screed, insulation, 

tiles, 38cm 

Hollow-brick slab, 

screed, insulation, 

tiles, 38cm 

Hollow-brick slab, 

screed, insulation, 

tiles, 38cm 

Road albedo  0.08 0.08  

Rural    

Albedo 0.25 0.15 0.15 

Emissivity  0.92 0.96 0.96 

Vegetation coverage [%] 20 48 48 

 

4. Results and discussion 

 

The analysis of the UWG performance has been carried out using two statistic measures 

commonly used to determine the accuracy of climate and environmental models: the Root Mean 

Square Error (RMSE) and the Mean Bias Error (MBE). The error measure is based on the 

comparison between the predicted temperatures and the observed temperatures for a reference 

year. In particular, the model accuracy has been evaluated with respect to the monthly-average 

diurnal cycle of the urban air temperature, considering summer and winter months. 

 

The Root Mean Square Error (RMSE) is calculated as the square root of the mean-square error, 

which is the sum of the "x" individual squared errors divided for "x". This measure, which 

removes the sign from the error, identifies the average magnitude of the error.  

 

The Mean Bias Error (MBE), instead, is given by the difference between the model-predicted 

mean and the observed mean, respectively. In this measure the sign of the error is not 

removed, so the MBE indicates the average over or under-estimation of the model predictions 

with respect to the observations. Both measurements have the same dimension of the variable 

of interest, °C in this case.  

 

In figure 7, the monthly average diurnal cycle
4
 of the urban temperature observed at Raval 

weather station is reported in comparison with the UWG prediction and the airport temperature. 

Statistical results of this comparison are presented in Table 3.  

 

                                                     
4
 The Coordinated Universal time (UTC) is used in the graphs; the local time zone is UTC+1 in winter and UTC+2 in 

summer for both Barcelona and Rome. 



 

 

147 

ACE©  AÑO 11, núm.32, OCTUBRE 2016 | URBAN HEAT ISLAND PREDICTION IN THE MEDITERRANEAN CONTEXT: AN 

EVALUATION OF THE URBAN WEATHER GENERATOR MODEL 

Agnese Salvati, Helena Coch Roura y Carlo Cecere 

Figure 7. Monthly-average diurnal cycle of urban air temperature calculated by the UWG 

and observed at Raval Station 

 
 

Source: Self-elaboration of the results 

 

Table 3. Statistical results of this comparison for Raval (Barcelona) 

 MBE RMSE Monthly Avg. Obs UHI 

December -1.3 1.42 2 

January -0.5 0.77 1.5 

February 0.7 0.86 1.4 

June 0.1 0.41 0.9 

July 0.4 0.56 0.6 

August 0.7 0.79 0.1 

 

Source: Self-elaboration of the results 

 

As shown in the graphs in figure 7, the UWG is able to capture the average daily trend of the 

urban heat island effect. The RMSE between the model predictions and the observations is 0.77 

in January and 0.56 in July, where the average daily-maximum UHI intensity is 2.2°C and 1.3°C, 

respectively. The model maximum error occurs in December, when the RMSE is 1.42 and the 

daily-maximum UHI intensity is 2°C (table 3). In the 2014, the maximum UHI intensity in Raval 

was recorded exactly in December, with a daily maximum of 2.8 C°. In this case, the model 

underestimates the urban temperature, as shown by the negative MBE in table 3.  

 

From the same table it can be seen a similar underestimation of the urban temperatures in 

January and an overestimation during February and all the summer months. It has to be 

highlighted that the most relevant error in the prediction is the one for August, when the monthly 

average UHI intensity recorded at Raval station is only 0.1°C, while the UWG prediction is 

0.8°C. This error highlights the inability of the model to capture the effect of the sea breeze, that 

is particularly beneficial on the air temperatures during summer period in the Spanish coastal 

city.  

 



 

 

148 

ACE©  AÑO 11, núm.32, OCTUBRE 2016 | URBAN HEAT ISLAND PREDICTION IN THE MEDITERRANEAN CONTEXT: AN 

EVALUATION OF THE URBAN WEATHER GENERATOR MODEL 

Agnese Salvati, Helena Coch Roura y Carlo Cecere 

Raval weather station, which is located on the top of one of the tallest building of the 

neighbourhood at only 1,3 Km distance from the sea, is particularly affected by the sea breeze; 

as a consequence, the air temperature is quite constant during the central part of the day 

(12:00-18:00 local time) and very close to the airport temperature. This phenomenon is 

underestimated by UWG, even though the input rural weather file used to run the simulation 

took into account the increase of the wind speed due to the sea breeze. However, this 

inaccuracy was predictable, as the UWG model does not take into account the proximity to 

water bodies or other geographical features that can affect the city climate at macroscale. 

Despite this, the model error ranges between 0.4 °C and 1.4 °C, in line with previous evaluation 

studies (Bueno et al., 2013, 2014). 

 

The same comparison has been conducted for the model predictions and the observations 

taken in Via Boncompagni (Rome) during 2013. The monthly average diurnal cycles of the 

urban temperature for February and August are reported in figure 8; the observations at 

Boncompagni weather station are compared to the UWG predictions and the airport 

temperature. Statistical results of this comparison are presented in Table 4. In this case the 

model accuracy is worse compared to Raval; the RMSE is high, ranging between 1.2°C and 2.1 

°C. 

 

Figure 8. Monthly-average diurnal cycle of urban air temperature calculated by the UWG 

and observed at Via Boncompagni Station 

 

Source: Self-elaboration of the results  
 

Table 4. Statistical results of this comparison for Via Boncompagni (Rome) 

 MBE RMSE Monthly Avg. Obs UHI 

December 0.87 1.51 1.1 

January 0.74 1.20 0.9 

February 0.17 1.36 1.8 

June 1.11 1.84 0.9 

July 1.51 2.10 0.5 

August 1.23 1.90 0.8 

Source: Self-elaboration of the results 



 

 

149 

ACE©  AÑO 11, núm.32, OCTUBRE 2016 | URBAN HEAT ISLAND PREDICTION IN THE MEDITERRANEAN CONTEXT: AN 

EVALUATION OF THE URBAN WEATHER GENERATOR MODEL 

Agnese Salvati, Helena Coch Roura y Carlo Cecere 

Figure 9. Villa Borghese park proximity to Boncompagni weather station 

 
Source: Self processing of GooglEarth image 

 

As in the case of Raval, the errors are more relevant for the summer predictions, in which the 

model systematically overestimates the urban temperature (table 4). This over prediction can be 

partially explained in the light of some features of the weather station area. As explained in 

paragraph 3.2, the weather station measurement depends on its "source area", or footprint, 

which is affected by the height of the sensor and the wind speed. The footprint areas in this 

study have been calculated as a portion of the 500 m circular area surrounding the weather 

stations, as suggested by the literature in this field.  

 

Using this procedure, the footprint of Boncompagni station turned out to be a completely built 

area (figure 4) on which the required parameters to run the simulation have been calculated. 

However, the 80 hectares park of Villa Borghese stands just beyond the 500 m distance from 

the weather station, in North-West direction (figure 9). It is thus reasonable to think that it could 

affect the measurement of the weather station, mitigating summer temperature. So, once again, 

the inability to take into account relevant geographic features in the proximity of the studied 

area, as water bodies or large parks, determines a significant error in the model predictions. 

These results suggest to pay particular attention when computing the input parameters, above 

all for non-homogeneous urban context in terms of building density and vegetation coverage. 

 

Finally, the model predictions have been compared to the measurements taken at street level in 

Via Arenula, during 2003. In figure 10 the monthly average diurnal cycles of the urban 

temperature for February and August are reported. Statistical results of the comparison 

between the model predictions and the observations are presented in Table 5.  

 

 



 

 

150 

ACE©  AÑO 11, núm.32, OCTUBRE 2016 | URBAN HEAT ISLAND PREDICTION IN THE MEDITERRANEAN CONTEXT: AN 

EVALUATION OF THE URBAN WEATHER GENERATOR MODEL 

Agnese Salvati, Helena Coch Roura y Carlo Cecere 

Figure 10. Monthly-average diurnal cycle of urban air temperature calculated by the UWG 

and observed at Via Arenula Station 

 
Source: Self-elaboration of the results 

 

Table 5. Statistical results of this comparison for Via Boncompagni (Rome) 

 MBE RMSE Monthly Avg. Obs UHI 

December -0.05 0.63 1.2 

January -0.10 0.56 1.1 

February -0.65 1.43 1.8 

June 0.56 1.56 1.8 

July 0.25 1.28 1.8 

August 0.08 1.25 1.9 

Source: Self-elaboration of the results 

 

In February the RMSE of the model is 1.43°C, with a monthly UHI intensity of 1.8 °C. The 

maximum daily UHI intensity is quite higher than the previous cases, reaching 4.1 °C at 15:00 

local time (UTC+1), as it can be seen from the graph in figure 7. Similarly, in August the RMSE 

of the model is 1.25 °C, with a monthly UHI intensity of 1.9 °C and a maximum UHI daily 

intensity of 4.4 °C occurring between 16:00 and 17:00 local time (UTC+2). In effect, as clear 

from the graphs, the magnitude of the error is very different for the hottest hours of the day 

compared to late afternoon and night. During the afternoon and the night, the urban 

temperature calculated by UWG is very similar to the actual observation, with an error near to 

zero in the time period from 16:00 to 10:00. Conversely, the maximum daily UHI intensity, which 

occurs between 14:00 and 15:00 UTC, is never detected by the model.  

 

Such systematic error for this time period suggests that the model does not adequately consider 

the contribution of the radiative trapping on the canyon air temperature increase. Nevertheless, 

the model prediction for Arenula site is quite good and very close to the average monthly UHI 

intensity during all the year. These results should be analysed in the light of the position of the 

temperature sensor in Via Arenula, which was at about 2 m from the ground. This means that 



 

 

151 

ACE©  AÑO 11, núm.32, OCTUBRE 2016 | URBAN HEAT ISLAND PREDICTION IN THE MEDITERRANEAN CONTEXT: AN 

EVALUATION OF THE URBAN WEATHER GENERATOR MODEL 

Agnese Salvati, Helena Coch Roura y Carlo Cecere 

the measurement was affected also by the proximity to the overheated urban surfaces (road, 

walls) and from anthropogenic heat sources, as traffic. As expected, the UWG is not able to 

take into account site specific variables that can modify the climate at microscale; the model is 

based on the average-oriented canyon parametrization and estimates average values of the air 

temperature, supposed homogenous into the urban canyon. In effect, comparing the MBE 

between the model prediction and the observations, it can be seen a systematic overestimation 

of the temperature with respect to the roof level measurements (Boncompagni and Raval) and 

an underestimation with respect to the road level measurements (Via Arenula). 

 

5. Conclusions 

 

This study presented an evaluation of the UWG model, by comparing the predicted urban 

temperatures to hourly observations in different urban sites. The results show an average 

RMSE between the modelled and observed air temperatures ranging between 0.5 and 1.5°C, in 

line with previous analysis. 

 

The model performance decreases for non-homogeneous urban contexts in terms of building 

density and vegetation, as in Via Boncompagni, Rome. In effect, the accuracy of UWG 

calculation strongly depends on the location of the urban site within the city and on its features. 

The model prediction is more accurate when the urban site is located in a fairly central position 

and in a rather homogeneous urban district, above all for what concern building density. 

 

In the case of Raval in Barcelona and Via Boncompagni in Rome, the UWG model was not able 

to take into account the proximity to the sea or to the Park of Villa Borghese; these 

approximations contributed to the inaccuracy of the prediction, leading to an overestimation of 

the urban temperature, especially in summer. 

 

However, the UWG prediction was able to capture the average daily trend of the urban heat 

island effect, so it can actually allow a significant improvement of the energy simulations in the 

urban context, giving more accurate urban weather file with respect to the airport temperature 

that is still currently used.  

 

The most accurate prediction of UWG was the one for Via Arenula, in Rome. In that case the 

UWG calculation significantly reduced the error in the urban temperature estimation if compared 

to rural meteorological data. However, there was a systematic error for what concern the central 

hours of the day that suggests an underestimation of the diurnal radiative trapping.  

 

Conversely, the model tends to overestimate the urban temperature with respect to the roof 

level observations (Via Boncompagni and Raval). This happens because it cannot adequately 

simulate the beneficial effect of the wind and the sea breeze, which is considerable above the 

roof level.  

 

In general, the model performs better for urban sites characterized by low wind conditions, 

where the UHI intensity is mainly due to the canyon geometry and to the anthropogenic heat 

release. This condition can be met in several urban contexts, above all in the Mediterranean 

compact city where the building density determine a "skimming flow" regime and a low 

interaction between the canyon air and the above layers of atmosphere. On the contrary, the 



 

 

152 

ACE©  AÑO 11, núm.32, OCTUBRE 2016 | URBAN HEAT ISLAND PREDICTION IN THE MEDITERRANEAN CONTEXT: AN 

EVALUATION OF THE URBAN WEATHER GENERATOR MODEL 

Agnese Salvati, Helena Coch Roura y Carlo Cecere 

results for a coastal neighborhood (e.g. Barceloneta in Barcelona) would be completely 

unreliable, because the wind channeling and speed assume, there, a determining role on the 

UHI intensity. So the UWG can undoubtedly allow more accurate energy simulations, but it is 

not able to estimate the microclimate at the street level, that depends from site specific 

characteristics and singularities. However, the microclimate at street level is more relevant to 

the thermal comfort assessment rather than to the building energy analysis. The buildings' 

energy performance in the urban context is related to the average trend of the canyon air 

temperature, so the improvement made by UWG is significant, above all in the light of the 

simplicity and rapidity of the simulations. 

 

For a proper use of the UWG model, some considerations must be made before running the 

simulation: the urban site must be rather homogeneous in terms of building density and 

vegetation coverage and the input parameters must be computed on the correct "source area", 

according to the dominant winds. With those precautions, the UWG can be a useful tool for 

modeling the urban temperature and perform more realistic energy analysis. 

 

Acknowledgments 

This paper was supported by the Spanish Ministry, under project BIA2013-45597-R and funded 

by Doctoral Scholarship, Sapienza University, MIUR, Italy. 

 

References 

AKBARI, H. and KONOPACKI, S. Calculating energy-saving potentials of heat-island reduction 

strategies. In Energy Policy, 33 (6): 721-756, Elsevier 2005. 

 

ALEXANDER, P. J., MILLS, G. and FEALY, R. Using LCZ data to run an urban energy balance 

model. In Urban Climate, 13 (July 2016): 14-37, Elsevier 2015. 

 

ALLEGRINI, J., DORER, V., and CARMELIET, J. Influence of the urban microclimate in street 

canyons on the energy demand for space cooling and heating of buildings. In Energy and 

Buildings, 55: 823-832, Elsevier 2012. 

 

ASOCIACIÓN GVSIG. GVSIG 2.2 - User guide. Retrieved from <www.gvsig.com> 2015. 

 

BONACQUISTI, V., CASALE, G. R., PALMIERI, S., and SIANI, A M. A canopy layer model and 

its application to Rome. In The Science of the Total Environment, 364: 1-13, Elsevier 2006. 

 

BUENO, B., ROTH, M., NORFORD, L., and LI, R. Computationally efficient prediction of canopy 

level urban air temperature at the neighbourhood scale. In Urban Climate, 9: 35-53, Elsevier 

2014. 

 

BUENO, B., NORFORD, L., HIDALGO, J., and PIGEON, G. The urban weather generator. In 

Journal of Building Performance Simulation, 6 (4): 269-281, Taylor and Francis 2013. 

 



 

 

153 

ACE©  AÑO 11, núm.32, OCTUBRE 2016 | URBAN HEAT ISLAND PREDICTION IN THE MEDITERRANEAN CONTEXT: AN 

EVALUATION OF THE URBAN WEATHER GENERATOR MODEL 

Agnese Salvati, Helena Coch Roura y Carlo Cecere 

BUENO, B., NORFORD, L., PIGEON, G., and BRITTER, R. A resistance-capacitance network 

model for the analysis of the interactions between the energy performance of buildings and the 

urban climate. In Building and Environment, 54: 116-125, Elsevier 2012. 

 

BUENO, B., PIGEON, G., NORFORD, L. K., ZIBOUCHE, K., and MARCHADIER, C. 

Development and evaluation of a building energy model integrated in the TEB scheme. In 

Geoscientific Model Development, 5 (2): 433-448, Copernicus Publications 2012b.  

BUENO, B., NORFORD, L., PIGEON, G., and BRITTER, R. Combining a Detailed Building 

Energy Model with a Physically-Based Urban Canopy Model. In Boundary-Layer Meteorology, 

140(3): 471-489 Springer 2011. 

 

COLACINO, M. and LAVAGNINI, A. Evidence of the urban heat island in Rome by 

climatological analyses. In Archives for Meteorology, Geophysics, and Bioclimatology Series B, 

31 (1-2): 7-97, Springer-Verlag 1982. 

 

CRAWLEY, D. B. (2008). Estimating the impacts of climate change and urbanization on building 

performance. In Journal of Building Performance Simulation, 1(2): 91-115, Taylor and Francis 

2008. 

  

Crawley, D. B., Hand, J. W., Kummert, M., and Griffith, B. T. Contrasting the capabilities of 

building energy performance simulation programs. In Building and Environment, 43 (4): 661-

673, Elsevier 2008. 

 

DI BERNARDINO, A., MONTI, P., LEUZZI, G., and QUERZOLI, G. Water-Channel Study of 

Flow and Turbulence Past a Two-Dimensional Array of Obstacles. In Boundary-Layer 

Meteorology, 155 (1): 73-85, Springer 2015. 

 

DORER, V., and ALLEGRINI, J. Urban Climate and Energy Demand in Buildings. Final Report. 

Retrieved from <http://www.bfe.admin.ch/php/modules/enet/streamfile.php?file=000000010715. 

pdfandname=000000290497> 2012 

 

GARTLAND, L. Heat Islands: Understanding and Mitigating Heat in Urban Areas. London 

Earthscan, Edition. 2008. 192 p. 

 

GIVONI, B. Climate considerations in building and urban design. New York: Van Nostrand 

Reinhold. 1998. 480 p. 

 

GRIMMOND, C. S. B. ET AL. The international urban energy balance models comparison 

project: First results from phase 1. In Journal of Applied Meteorology and Climatology, 49(6): 

1268-1292, American Meteorological Society 2010. 

 

KIKEGAWA, Y., GENCHI, Y., YOSHIKADO, H., and KONDO, H. Development of a numerical 

simulation system toward comprehensive assessments of urban warming countermeasures 

including their impacts upon the urban buildings’ energy-demands. In Applied Energy, 76(4): 

449-466, Elsevier 2003. 

 



 

 

154 

ACE©  AÑO 11, núm.32, OCTUBRE 2016 | URBAN HEAT ISLAND PREDICTION IN THE MEDITERRANEAN CONTEXT: AN 

EVALUATION OF THE URBAN WEATHER GENERATOR MODEL 

Agnese Salvati, Helena Coch Roura y Carlo Cecere 

KLJUN, N., CALANCA, P., ROTACH, M. W., and SCHMID, H. P. A simple parameterisation for 

flux footprint prediction. In Boundary-Layer Meteorology, 112: 503-523, Kluwer Academic 

Publishers 2004. 

 

KOLOKOTRONI, M., REN, X., DAVIES, M., and MAVROGIANNI, A. London’s urban heat 

island: Impact on current and future energy consumption in office buildings. In Energy and 

Buildings, 47: 302-311, Elsevier 2012. 

 

MASSON, V. A physically-based scheme for the urban energy budget in atmospheric models. 

In Boundary-Layer Meteorology, 94 (3): 357-397, Kluwer Academic Publishers 2000. 

 

MOONEN, P., DEFRAEYE, T., DORER, V., BLOCKEN, B. Urban Physics: Effect of the micro-

climate on comfort, health and energy demand. In Frontiers of Architectural Research, 1(3): 

197-228, Elsevier 2012. 

 

MORENO-GARCIA, M. C. Intensity and form of the urban heat island in Barcelona. In 

International Journal of Climatology, 14: 705-710. Royal meteorological Society 1994. 

 

OKE, T. R. Boundary Layer Climate. London Methuen 1987. 435 p. 

 

OKE, T. R. Initial guidance to obtain representative meteorological observations at urban sites. 

WMO/TD, 1250. 2006. Disponible en < 

https://www.wmo.int/pages/prog/www/IMOP/publications/IOM-81/IOM-81-UrbanMetObs.pdf> 

 

PELLICCIONI, A., MONTI, P., GARIAZZO, C., and LEUZZI, G. Some characteristics of the 

urban boundary layer above Rome, Italy, and applicability of Monin–Obukhov similarity. In 

Environmental Fluid Mechanics, 12 (5): 405-428, Springer 2012. 

 

PÉREZ-LOMBARD, L., ORTIZ, J., and POUT, C. A review on buildings energy consumption 

information. In Energy and Buildings, 40: 394-398, Elsevier 2008. 

 

PIGEON, G., LEGAIN, D., DURAND, P., and MASSON, V. Anthropogenic heat release in an old 

European agglomeration (Toulouse, France). In International Journal of Climatology, 27: 1969-

1981, Royal Meteorological Society 2007. 

 

SAILOR, D. J. A review of methods for estimating anthropogenic heat and moisture emissions 

in the urban environment. In International Journal of Climatology, 31(2): 189-199, Royal 

Meteorological Society 2011. 

 

SALVATI, A., CECERE, C., COCH, H. Microclimatic response of urban form in the 

Mediterranean context. In ISUF International Conference (22nd, 2015, Rome, Italy). City as 

organism. New vision for urban life. Rome, G. Strappa, A. D. Amato, and A. Camporeale Eds. 

Rome U+D Edition 2016. pp 719-728. 

 

SALVATI, A., COCH, H., and CECERE, C. Urban Morphology and Energy Performance: the 

direct and indirect contribution in Mediterranean Climate. In International PLEA Conference 



 

 

155 

ACE©  AÑO 11, núm.32, OCTUBRE 2016 | URBAN HEAT ISLAND PREDICTION IN THE MEDITERRANEAN CONTEXT: AN 

EVALUATION OF THE URBAN WEATHER GENERATOR MODEL 

Agnese Salvati, Helena Coch Roura y Carlo Cecere 

(31
st
, 2015, Rome). Architecture in (R) Evolution. Cucinella M., Pentella G., Fagnani A. and 

D’Ambrosio L: Eds. Bologna, Ass. Building Green Futures 2015 (e-book proceedings) 

 

SANTAMOURIS, M. Heat Island Research in Europe: The State of the Art. In Advances in -

Building Energy Research, 1 (March 2015): 123-150, Taylor and Francis 2007. 

 

SANTAMOURIS, M. On the energy impact of urban heat island and global warming on 

buildings. In Energy and Buildings, 82: 100-113, Elsevier 2014. 

 

SCHMID, H. P. Footprint modeling for vegetation atmosphere exchange studies: a review and 

perspective. In Agricultural and Forest Meteorology, 113 (1-4), 159-183, Elsevier 2002. 

 

STEWART, I. D., and OKE, T. R. Local Climate Zones for Urban Temperature Studies. In 

Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society, 93 (12): 1879-1900, American Meteorological 

Society 2012. 

 

XIE, X., LIU, C. H., and LEUNG, D. Y. C. Impact of building facades and ground heating on 

wind flow and pollutant transport in street canyons. In Atmospheric Environment, 41(39): 9030-

9049, Elsevier 2007. 

 

NG, X., ZHAO, L., BRUSE, M., and MENG, Q. An integrated simulation method for building 

energy performance assessment in urban environments. In Energy and Buildings, 54: 243-251, 

Elsevier 2012. 



 

 

156 

ACE©  AÑO 11, núm.32, OCTUBRE 2016 | URBAN HEAT ISLAND PREDICTION IN THE MEDITERRANEAN CONTEXT: AN 

EVALUATION OF THE URBAN WEATHER GENERATOR MODEL 

Agnese Salvati, Helena Coch Roura y Carlo Cecere 

 


