















































Athens Journal of Mediterranean Studies July 2015 

      

249 

Shop-Window Lighting in the Mediterranean 

Countries: The Use of Sun to Improve Visual 

Appeal and Reduce Energy Demand 
 

By Elena Anagnou

 

Helena Coch
†
   

Isabel Crespo
‡
 

 
The present study deals with the potential reduction of energy consumption for 

lighting of shop window displays in the Mediterranean countries. Urban commerce 

has a very high impact on economics and it is a highly energy-consuming sector. Light 

has the power of attracting people’s attention, which is one of the goals of the trading 

and selling activity and very high illuminance levels are usually recommended. In the 

Mediterranean areas, where daytime lasts for many hours, commercial activity takes 

place mainly under sunshine conditions and shop windows frequently fail to fulfil their 

main corporative goal, namely the unobstructed observation of the products exhibited. 

The necessary increase of artificial lighting illuminance levels to accent interior light 

conditions, due to extremely high-luminance urban surroundings, leads to an 

important increase of energy consumption. Nevertheless, the results are generally very 

poor, due to reflections and other kinds of visual problems. The present study 

evaluates the visual and energetic benefits of an innovative passive design that 

obstructs solar rays and redirects them into the interior of the shop window scene. A 

scale model of this new design confirms the visual benefits produced by its use, via the 

different luminance maps tested. 

 

Keywords: display lighting, passive design, saving energy, shop-window. 

 

 

Introduction 

 

The image of the Mediterranean cities, where climate favours exterior 

human activities, is conserably affected by urban commerce and storefronts. 

Being a fundamental element of the commercial process, a proper visual 

presentation of shop windows is crucial. Lighting contributes to the creation of 

a corporate identity, ideally, it assists the production of the image desired by 

the trader and together with other components of the design it contributes to 

sales promotion (Rea, 2000). The present study analyzes the visual 

inconveniences of window displays associated with the Mediterranean climate 

and how they are or should be dealt with, so that the aesthetic and commercial 

function of shop windows will not be inhibited.  

 

                                                           

 Researcher, Polytechnic University of Catalonia, Spain. 

† Polytechnic University of Catalonia, Spain. 
‡
 Polytechnic University of Catalonia, Spain. 



Vol. 1, No. 3 Anagnou et al.: Shop-Window Lighting in Mediterranean Countries... 

 

250 

In the Mediterranean Cities, the Shopping is Combined with Promenade 

under the Sun 

 

In Mediterranean climates, the temperature favours urban commerce, since 

duration of daily solar radiation is extensive and solar intensity is prevalent 

throughout the whole year. For example, in one of the most commercial 

districts of Barcelona, Eixample, the urban scenery offers optimal conditions 

regarding the use of the mild climate of Barcelona; at pedestrian level the 

broad avenues are offered to enjoy the sun and good weather and combine 

promenade with shopping (see figure 1). 

 

Figure 1. In Mediterranean Cities like Barcelona, Urban Fabric and Mild 

Climate Favour Urban Commerce 

 
 

However, although in the Mediterranean countries shop-window glazing 

mainly takes place under sunlight, shop-window light scenes are basically 

designed for their night presentation. This fact has significant inconveniences 

for the shop-window glazing procedure that derive from the exposure of 

window displays to varying light conditions in the outside environment; due to 

the very high level of exterior illuminance, the visual goals of window displays 

are often impeded. 

 

High Energy Consumption yet Poor Visual Outcome   

The lighting design of window displays is required to ensure visual 

comfort and good vision of the products exhibited (Anagnou and Coch 2012). 

In order to do so, adequate illuminance levels and luminance contrasts must be 

secured. A recommended value for luminance ratio between the illuminated 

object and its surrounding area is 3:1 (Carillo et al. 2010). Regarding 

illuminance values, certain studies prove that a higher illuminance level 

implies that more passers-by are attracted by the shop windows (Carillo et al. 

2010). As a result, the consumption of energy for the lighting of window 

displays is rather high (Freyssinier et al. 2006). In Catalonia, window display 



Athens Journal of Mediterranean Studies July 2015 

      

251 

lighting constitutes 11.2% of the total energy consumption for the lighting of a 

typical store (Institut Catalá d´Energia, 2008).   

However, despite the high energy consumption, visual inconveniences 

insist; during the research discussed in this paper, a study of a representative 

sample of shop windows of the city of Barcelona has been performed analyzing 

their visual results. The basic tools of this analysis have been the luminance 

maps and evaluation, via computer application, of the odds of glare. The study 

has confirmed and identified the main inconveniences that can impair the 

visual result and, therefore, the commercial purposes, during daytime hours. 

Specifically, the most frequent problems are: failure to reach the appropriate 

contrasts for the projection of exhibits, glare and annoying reflections.  

Indeed among the analysed stores, the visual presentation of 65% of them 

failed to reach a contrast of 3:1 between all exhibits and their surroundings, as 

well as 65% of them failed to avoid annoying reflections (see Figure 2). In 

addition, the conducted analysis confirms that the commercial storefronts 

mostly affected by such inconveniences are those receiving direct solar 

incidence, weather in the actual presentation of the window or in immediately 

adjacent areas.  

In order to help face these visual disadvantages resulting from very high 

levels of exterior illuminance, a remedy often applied is to increase artificial 

illuminance projected during the day, in contrast to the one projected 

overnight. However, the intensity of sunlight in the Mediterranean countries is 

so high that artificial lighting cannot compete with the natural one making it 

vain for any power to increase during the day, along with the corresponding 

energy additional charge this practice entails. 

This study instead evaluates the visual and energetic benefits of an 

innovative passive design. 

 



Vol. 1, No. 3 Anagnou et al.: Shop-Window Lighting in Mediterranean Countries... 

 

252 

Figure 2. (a) Graphic Showing Percentage of Commerce Failing to Reach 

Contrast 3:1 Between All Exhibits and their Surroundings, Plus An Example 

(B) Graphic Showing Percentage of Commerce with Presence of Annoying 

Reflections, Plus An Example 

 
 

 

Methodology 

 

The present research evaluates the visual and energetic benefits of a 

passive design that obstructs solar rays and redirects them into the interior of 

the shop window scene. In fact, the improvement of the quality of the 

observation of exhibits during daytime is assessed, along with the possible 

reduction in energy consumption.  

 

Selection of the Case   

The center of Barcelona, Eixample, has been considered ideal for this 

study because it is a district with a significant concentration of commercial 

activity and it has a structure that favours sun-lighting of its wide streets and 

building facades; in addition, the regulated matrix of its urban fabric facilitates 

such a study and allows the generalization of results across its surface (see 

Figure 3).   



Athens Journal of Mediterranean Studies July 2015 

      

253 

Figure 3. The Regulated Matrix of Eixample District  

 
Source: https://www.google.com/maps/preview (subsequently elaborated image) 

 

A segment of the Eixample has been modelled in a simulation program 

that incorporates solar trajectories (Heliodon). After analyzing the data 

obtained during the study, concerning the time of exposure to solar radiation 

and the percentage of illuminated surface is observed as expected, that: a) The 

facades of the ground floor facing south are the most affected. b) The most 

detrimental period, when higher percentage of the surfaces of the ground floor 

is exposed to sunlight despite the obstruction of the urban fabric, is summer 

(see Figure 4). Furthermore, it is the period with the highest average monthly 

hours of sunshine in Barcelona. 

 

Figure 4.  a) Design and Emissivity Percentage Isochronous of South Facades. 

b) Percentage of Illuminated Surface, Evolution throughout the Year 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

https://www.google.com/maps/preview


Vol. 1, No. 3 Anagnou et al.: Shop-Window Lighting in Mediterranean Countries... 

 

254 

Development of the Passive Design Component 

A typical window display of Barcelona has been selected among the 

sample observed, referred in introduction, that is about four meters high, one 

meter wide and facing south. Based on the solar diagram of the city, several 

design tests have been performed in order that, when a system of reflective 

surfaces is incorporated in a typical window facing south, it could make the 

most of the solar incidence during the most unfavourable conditions; the latter 

being summer solstice, as confirmed with Heliodon.  

The design that is finally proposed here (see Figure 5), is based on two 

successive light reflections. Rays that fall upon the first and curved surface will 

be reflected symmetrically around the axis joining the point of incidence and 

its centre of curvature (Peoglos et al. 2004); subsequently, they will be cast on 

the plane surface and will be reflected towards the interior of the scene.  

 

Figure 5. (a) Geometry of the Component Proposed (b) Conduction of Natural 

Light in the Interior of the Scene 

 
 

Development of the Scale Models 

Two scale models of the window analyzed, the one being independent of 

and the other one based on the proposed system, have been developed. As in 

the present study the effect of chromatic contrast is not analyzed, all the 

components of the scene have been chosen to be of soft and slightly contrasting 

colours (see Figure 6).  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Athens Journal of Mediterranean Studies July 2015 

      

255 

Figure 6. Model Based on the System Proposed 

 
 

The dimensions of the models have been adjusted to the artificial lighting 

projected, giving special care so that both the area of the surfaces and the 

luminous flux they receive, would be correctly scaled. In each one of the 

models two LED sources have been placed above two mannequins and 30cm 

of led stripe above the background of the scene
1
. In order to simulate the 

illuminance of the real window display, after measuring the luminous intensity 

of both real and model light sources, and applying the basic laws of 

photometry, the appropriate scale of the model has been defined to dM=0,09dR 
2
. A potentiometer has also been connected to the led stripe, so that its intensity 

could be dimmed and, in this manner, possible reduction of energy for vertical 

illumination could be evaluated.  

 

Simulation of the Desired Exterior Light Conditions 

The study took place in Athens on December 10, during the time of zenith. 

In order to simulate the summer solstice in Barcelona (72° during the zenith) 

the table where each model was placed has been rotated through 43° (see 

Figure 7) equal to the difference of solar altitude on December 10 in Athens 

(29o during the zenith). Furthermore, in order to obtain an overall assessment 

of the results for the entire year, a simulation of the equinox and winter solstice 

in Barcelona (49º and 26º correspondingly during the zenith) were simulated 

rotating the table through 20º, and -3º correspondingly. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

                                                           
1
A Prolight PM2B 3LxS-SD-3W above each mannequin and a power LED a strip led of 40W 

type 3528 for vertical illumination. 
2
dM = dimensions of the model, dR =  dimensions of the real window display  



Vol. 1, No. 3 Anagnou et al.: Shop-Window Lighting in Mediterranean Countries... 

 

256 

Figure 7. Simulation of the Desired Exterior Lighting Conditions by Rotating 

Through 43
o
 the Table Where the Model Is Placed   

 
 

 

Evaluation of Visual Differentiation, Depending On the Existence of the 

Proposed System 

The comparison of the visual outcome of the two different models has 

been realized via the observation of photographs and their equivalent 

luminance maps, in addition to the observation in situ. The comparison took 

into account the following visual inconveniences:  

 

1. Annoying reflections. 
2. Achievement of 3:1 contrast between products and their surrounding 

area. 

3. Glare. 
 

In order to compare the possibility of glare in every situation, the Radiance 

based tool, called Evalglare, which evaluates that possibility through the 

daylight glare probability index, DGP (Wienold 2009) has been used in 

addition to the luminance maps. 

 

 

Results and Discussion 

 

The comparison of the visual result of the two scenes, the one 

independently of and the other one based on the proposed design, has resulted 

the expected improvement. Via the observation of the photographs and the 

luminance maps derived from them, the positive effect of the redirection of the 

sunlight into the scene is appreciated (see Figure 8).  

 

 

 

 

 

 



Athens Journal of Mediterranean Studies July 2015 

      

257 

Figure 8. (a) Photograph and Luminance Map (b) DGP Index. Comparison of 

the Two Models, without (left) and with (right) the System Proposed 

 
 

Specifically, regarding the model of the proposed system, the following 

parameters are observed: 

 

1. The reflections on the glass of the scene are significantly moderated 
compared to the model without the system. 

2. The desired contrast of 3:1 between the products and their surrounding 
area is achieved, avoiding thought high contrasts dued to solar 

incidence on them. 

3. Less areas of high luminance that can dazzle are generated comparing 
to the model without the system. The comparison of DGP index for the 

two cases is indicative. 

 

Concerning the rest of the seasons, the design proposed has no negative 

effect. On the contrary, the effect against the inconveniences of glare and 

annoying reflexions are positive throughout the year. 

Following, in order to evaluate the possibility of energy reduction, the 

power of the background lighting of the scene has been decreased in the case of 

the design proposed; applying the 1/3 of the illuminance projected before, the 

result has been again positive (see Figure 9). Even with a drastic reduction of 

power applied when the proposed design is incorporated, regarding the model 

of the proposed system, the following parameters are observed: 

 

1. The 3:1 contrast is once again achieved.  
2. The generated reflections are significantly lighter.  



Vol. 1, No. 3 Anagnou et al.: Shop-Window Lighting in Mediterranean Countries... 

 

258 

3. Probability of glare is smaller.  
 

All these effects were expected, since solar light intensity that is 

introduced in the scene is the one increasing significantly the illuminance in it; 

not artificial lighting. 

 

Figure 9. (a) Photograph and Luminance Map (b) DGP index. Comparison of 

the Two Models, without (left) and with (right) the System Proposed When In 

Addition Wall Wash Lighting Is Reduced to 1/3 

 
 

 

Conclusion 

 

This paper results in a passive design proposal that can offer very positive 

effects on the visual result of shop windows, improving the quality of their 

observation, thus fulfilling their commercial visual goals during the day and, in 

addition, reducing energy consumption. In the Mediterranean countries, the 

inability of artificial lighting to compete with high solar illuminance makes it 

vain for any power to increase during daytime, along with the corresponding 

energy charge this practice entails. Instead, the increase of interior illuminance 

levels of shop windows by using the very illuminance of the sun may improve 

the visual outcome and reduce energy consumption for the lighting of the 

window display.  

The positioning of the proposed design of sunlight redirection, with the 

dual effect of both obstruction of  its incidence and the benefit of its intensity 

to increase illuminance in the interior of the shop window, has very positive 

effects on its visual presentation, especially in terms of reducing annoying 

reflexions and the possibility of glare. Moreover, these effects are valid even 



Athens Journal of Mediterranean Studies July 2015 

      

259 

when reducing the installed power for the lighting of the background of the 

scene, thus making possible, in combination with the use of sensors and 

resistors, further reduction of energy consumption for the lighting of the 

display window. This new lighting passive system results in a very simple, 

effective and low cost solution that can be easily applied in existing shop-

windows, with considerable visual and environmental benefits when 

incorporated in the highly energy-consuming display windows.  

 

 

References 

 
Anagnou E, Coch H (2012) Escaparates de Barcelona: El impacto del alumbrado 

comercial exterior a la ciudad [Barcelona windows: The impact of outside 

commercial lighting to the city]. Luces Cei, Febrero 45: 18-24. 

Carillo C, Diaz-Dorado E, Cidrás J, Bouza-Pregal A, Falcón P, Fernández A, Álvarez-

Sánchez A (2013) Lighting control system based on digital camera for energy 

saving in shop windows. Energy and Buildings 59: 143–151 

Freyssinier JP, Frering D, Taylor J, Narendran N, Rizzo P (2006) Reducing light 

energy use in retail display windows. Sixth International Conference on Solid 

State Lighting. San Diego: Proceeding of SPIE. 

Institut Catalá d´Energia (2008) Caracterització del consum energétic en els 

establiments del sector de pimes de comerç i serveis de Catalunya 

[Characterization of energy consumption on the premises of the SME sector of 

trade and services of Catalonia]. Barcelona. 

Peoglos B, Raptis I, Christodoulides C (2004) Optical Instruments. In B Peoglos, I 

Raptis, C Christodoulides, Experimental Physics Techniques. Athens: National 

Technical University of Athens 3: 39-82. 

Rea M (2000) IESNA Lighting Handbook: Reference & application. 9th Edition. New 

York: Illumination Engineering Society of North America. 

Wienold J (2009) Dynamic daylight glare evaluation. IBPSA Conference. Glasgow: 

Building Simulation: 944-951. 

 



Vol. 1, No. 3 Anagnou et al.: Shop-Window Lighting in Mediterranean Countries... 

 

260 

 


