














































   1  

ARCHITECTURAL REPERCUSSIONS OF ENVIRONMENTAL CLIMATE CONTROL 

IN THE GENERATION OF ADMINISTRATIVE BUILDING TYPES; DIFFERENCES 

BETWEEN MODEL AND TECHNOLOGY CHOSEN. 
 

Cristina Cabello Matud 

Universidad de Zaragoza 

Universidad Politécnica de Cataluña 

e-mail: ccabello@unizar.es 

 

Helena Coch Roura 

Carlos Alonso Montolío 

Universidad Politécnica de Cataluña 

e-mail: helena.coch@upc.edu 

 

 

 

 

 

ABSTRACT 

 

This work will try to determine which models have truly 

been influential when considering the construction of a 

building for administrative use. This paper upholds four 

types created in the United States in less than a century 

of architecture and how one of the driving forces behind 

establishing the formal traits generated by these types 

and their corresponding sub-types is technological 

development linked to thermal installations in the office 

buildings. 

 

The study is undertaken considering the climate control 

installations as volumetric elements to be implemented in 

the building and connecting them to it. Research allows 

us to establish the links between architectural type and 

thermal installations taking into account new trends, 

installation efficiency and possible integration of 

renewable energies into buildings with administrative 

use. 

 

1. GENERATION OF MODELS 

 

The generation of the models that would serve as 

reference points in Europe and Spain when considering 

the construction of a building for administrative use can 

be ascertained from an examination of a period of 

American architectural history running from the end of 

the 19th century to the mid-20th century. Here was 

where the need to implement new uses and advances in 

construction technology allowed the generation of new 

architectural types that led to the model par excellence: 

the glass skyscraper.  

 

Four types with sufficient individuality have been 

identified which can be considered as models due to their 

capacity for systemization and later copying. Their 

general defining characteristics are detailed below and 

the environmental reasons behind their generation are 

highlighted.  

1.1. Heavy block with open court 

 

This type appeared in Chicago at the end of the 19th 

century primarily because of the birth of a new use: The 

office – with distinct requirements from known uses 

(mainly residential) and which needed to be located in 

the most densely populated areas in the city. The first 

signs of the work being organized were described thus by 

I. Ábalos and J. Herreros in their book: “But we are 

dealing with an activity that is fixed in time and space, 

professional, depending on a physical medium – an 

activity that is associated with single-purpose buildings 

and is linked to an urban model based on the grouping 

together of the tertiary sector”
1
. 

 

Contrary to the buildings of the age, these can be 

considered putative skyscrapers and they could not have 

happened without the development of lifts or the 

advances in steel structures. However, as they were the 

result of “extrusion” in terms of height from complete 

plots of land – adjoining streets on at least two sides of 

the land – the proportions of these buildings were more 

those of a block than a tower and this type was given the 

name “Chicago Quarter  Block”
2
. 

 

 

 
Fig.1: Guaranty Building 

 

 
Fig.2: Guaranty distribution. 

Offices area and services area. 

 

 



   2  

With its 13 floors, the Guaranty building (constructed in 

1894 in Buffalo by Louis H. Sullivan, and stylistically 

referencing Italian buildings) was one of the first 

administrative buildings that was built skywards. While 

from the main access roads to the building the volumetric 

configuration seems compact, the building’s floor has a 

setback in the form of a patio in the rear wall, the aim 

being to achieve natural lighting and ventilation in the 

majority of the offices – even in the stairwells and the 

services.  

 

The 15-floor heavy block 

with open court designed by 

the Chicago School 

responded to the need for 

optimal use of each floor to 

obtain working areas. The 

useful area was conditioned 

by the depth of the intended 

shared office space which 

had to always be ventilated 

and lit naturally, thus 

obtaining optimal 

habitability in the large 

rooms. The result was floors 

in a “U”, “E”, etc. shape and a maximum surface area 

with gaps alternating between hollows and fillers, thanks 

to the light iron shell hidden within the façade.                                                                      

 

The same volumetric configuration – though the upper 

floors were scaled in a recessed form – is found in the 

Milam Building in San Antonio, Texas, built in 1928. 

Additionally, this building (whose architect was George 

Willis and engineer M.L. Diver) signified a change in the 

approach to thermal conditioning of the work areas as it 

incorporated the installation of artificial climate control.  

 

ºThe heavy building model was exported firstly to New 

York in the next few years, leading to the first “heavy” 

skyscrapers as a result of the cost of the land and the 

firmness of the surface where the buildings were 

constructed. Thus renowned recessed towers such as the 

Chrysler Building by William van Allen (finished in 

1932) and the Empire State Building by Shreve, Lamb & 

Harmon (finished a year before the Chrysler) appeared. 

In both buildings, the depths of the floors, the setback on 

particular floors, the organization of the lift, services and 

storage core, and the configuration of the windows and 

offices are in response to the need for natural ventilation 

and light in all the work areas.  

 

1.2. Block with inner atrium 

 

In Buffalo, prior to the development of the administrative 

building in Chicago, Frank Lloyd Wright built the first 

sealed and artificially air-conditioned office building – 

the Larkin Administration Building (completed in 1905). 

The importance of this building does not lie so much in 

how it served as a model for other similar buildings – 

though it had and has a repercussion in later buildings – 

but rather in how it saw the climate control installations 

as volumetric elements placed in the building and linked 

both internally and externally. As R. Banham says: 

“History and critics have tended to focus exclusively on 

the happy achievement of inner spaces and their 

connection with the large exterior volumes, without 

noting that the climate control handling system has a 

crucial interface with the inner and outer shape” 
3
. The 

Larkin building is an invention in and of itself, a way of 

doing things.  

 

It is a compact block wherein the towers for the 

emplacing of the stairs and the gaps for the ventilation 

ducts and the rest of the installations have a bearing on 

the volumetric configuration of the block and are 

noticeable in the building’s floors. It is possible to say 

that this is the first articulated block in existence. In 

addition to the external features of this building, the 

quality of the inner spaces needs to be highlighted: these 

respond to a model that was repeated in other major 

architectural works for administrative use – the block 

with inner atrium. This arrangement guaranteed light and 

the quality of the work spaces, with them being insulated 

from the adverse outdoors, though it did cause 

difficulties for the provision of climate control to the 

spaces at the highest levels. In the Larkin building, the 

ventilation grilles are found below the sills to ensure 

thermal comfort in work areas.  

 

The references to Wright’s 

building are unavoidable in 

many of the later 

administrative ideas given 

the obsession with sealing 

work buildings, the 

reduction in the number of 

windows accessible to users 

and the achievement of 

comfort through artificial 

systems as in the “windowless” building designed by 

Paul Witmer for the Hershey Chocolate Company (1934) 

or placing the core of installations on the outside of 

buildings in constructions such as the Richards Memorial 

Laboratories by Louis Kahn (1961).  

 

 
Fig.3: Heavy block with 

open court. 

 

 
Fig.4: Larkin Building. 

 

 
Fig.5: Larkin distribution. 

Cores stairs and offices area. 

 

 

 
Fig.6: Block with atrium. 

 



   3  

1.3. The articulated tower 

 

By articulated tower we understand 

a building that consists of two 

differing volumes: a glass office 

tower and a rather more opaque 

core containing the services, 

mechanical systems and stairs. In 

this fashion, a maximum open-plan 

area was freed, thus providing the 

largest possible working area. The 

origin of this functional style of 

organization expressed in the 

external configuration of the 

building lies in the Philadelphia 

Savings Fund Society (PSFS), 

designed by Lowe and Lescaze in 

1932. Of all the office buildings erected in America prior 

to World War II, this is without a doubt the one that had 

the greatest repercussion and its manner is such that 

when considering the construction of administrative 

buildings it is still referenced.  

 

The 32-story PSFS is considered the first skyscraper in 

the International Style
4
, and it reveals the simplicity and 

stylistic features of this movement. Its T-shaped floor 

gives shape to the collection of rooms and elements used 

for installations, communications and services in the 

northern section. There are offices of differing sizes in 

the eastern, western and southern sections of the 

building. Externally, two polyhedrons are detectable: one 

is more glazed and the other more darkly opaque.  

 

The origin of the articulated tower type is better 

understood if it is linked to the climate control systems of 

the time. The majority of buildings with air conditioning 

before the War were “All Air” systems with the 

consequent need for space required by having to emplace 

the vertical ducts. This was able to inspire aesthetics as 

expressive as that of the articulated tower: “The era of 

the open-plan office had yet to arrive”
5
. The 

development of enclosing the ducts in a false ceiling was 

a much more discrete way to resolve the issue, closing 

the chamber and hiding all the internal machinery in the 

building.  

From Wright in the Larkin to Khan in the Laboratories, 

the installations in the buildings served to generate 

singular volumes in their architecture externally and to 

show the horizontal distribution of pipes and ducts – 

incorporating the aesthetics of the technique into the 

buildings. R. Serra referred  to it when talking about the 

interconnectedness of technique and architecture: “As in 

reality there is no real comparison between technique 

and art, a technical standpoint may favour the creation 

of a more attractive aesthetic or, on the other hand, an 

aesthetic approach to a technical or scientific problem 

may lead to a more rigid solution”
6
. 

 

The purest examples of articulated towers where the 

offices and the services core were most clearly 

differentiated were to arrive a few years later, and 

included the Inland Steel Building, in Chicago, by 

Skidmore, Owings and Merrill (1958). The juxtaposition 

of the office block and the services, installations and 

communications core is the defining concept in the shape 

of the floor and the volumetric configuration of the 

tower.  

 

However, the influence of the PSFS on the generation of 

models does not merely refer to the articulation of the 

two polyhedrons of which it consists but also that its 

design includes some of the most characteristic traits of 

later office towers: the intermediate mechanical floor, the 

framed element in the upper part of the tower and the 

base constructed on a plinth that has a commercial use or 

special rooms for the office building.  

 

1.4. The polyhedral crystal tower 

 

The aesthetic criteria promoted by the International Style 

in the America of the 20s or the later Modern Movement 

from Europe – with architects such as Le Corbusier and 

Mies van der Rohe – required the office tower, a 

paradigm of economic development in the post World 

War II period, to have a more compact, polyhedral and 

lighter external appearance. This type achieved its peak 

in cities like Chicago and New York in the 50s and 60s.  

 

Thus, Mies van der Rohe’s much desired glass 

skyscraper saw its pinnacle in his work in collaboration 

with Philip Johnson on the Seagram building in New 

York (1958)
7
. With its “H-shaped mullions” and 38 

floors of offices, it is a step away from the predominant 

approach of the time as it incorporates into the whole a 

forecourt plaza which is fully integrated into the street-

level transparent entrance. The framed element in the 

upper part of the tower contains the technical floor for 

the building and the three communication, service and 

installation cores (located within the completely open-

plan office floors) which run along the building vertically 

and anchor the tower to the ground are the formal 

features constituting a characteristic type for the later 

 
Fig.7: Articulated 

tower 

 

 
Fig.8: PSFS Building 

 

 
Fig. 9: PSFS distribution. Offices 

area and  services, communications 

and facilities area. 

 



   4  

administrative uses projects that Mies and others would 

undertake.  

 

This new concept of the large 

polyhedral crystal tower could 

not have come about without 

the appearance of the curtain 

wall and the complete 

implementation of air 

conditioning systems. The 

rectangular office tower floor, 

central services and 

communications core freeing 

up a maximum amount of 

space for the offices and the 

glass-enclosed surface are the 

features that define the administrative building par 

excellence. Inside, the use of air conditioning systems 

using a water (instead of air) distribution system plus the 

consequent reduction in vertical ducts crossing the 

buildings made an open-plan office floor possible – 

fitting in with the minimalist aesthetic of the time.  

 

The first block to be fully sealed and artificially climate 

controlled was the Equitable Building, in Oregon, 

(finished in 1948; designed by P. Belluschi). It was one 

of the first buildings to use double glazing tinted green to 

reduce solar transmission – the only element used to 

control solar radiation – from direct sunlight or glare. It 

was the first building to be heated, cooled and ventilated 

thanks to the air conditioning installation designed by 

engineer J. Donald Kroeker
8
. 

 

However, the polyhedral tower of reference because of 

its four curtain walls has to be Lever House (construction 

finished in 1952; designed by Skidmore, Owings and 

Merrill) in New York. Its 21 stories allowed it not to 

have an intermediate mechanical floor. Its most 

characteristic features are: the plinth on which the office 

tower “floated” and the differentiation in the external 

appearance of the mechanical floor located at the top of 

the tower.  These aspects would be repeated in other 

buildings with similar characteristics in the coming years 

in the western United States
9
. 

A similar concept had been used a couple of years 

previously in the United Nations Building in New York 

(finished in 1950). Although the original idea came from 

Le Corbusier, the undertaking was achieved by Wallace 

Harrison. A building with a greater surface area meant 

two intermediate mechanical floors had to be included, in 

addition to the basement and the roof, with the intention 

of optimizing the space needed by the vertical air 

conditioning ducts. The large glass tower was possible 

thanks to the use of the “air and water” air conditioning 

system, known as the “Carrier Weathermaster”. This 

latter became established as the means of artificial 

climate control in fully glazed administrative buildings. 

R. Banham expressed it thus: “Le Corbusier 

accomplished his dream of creating a large glass 

building in an urban location and here in New York he 

also found the talent of the one man who could make it 

work: Willis Carrier”
10

. In this style of building climate 

control, the inductors located at the perimeter of the 

office floor would require spatial needs that defined the 

distribution of the façades with curtain walls while the 

space occupied by the high-speed air ducts that passed 

through the ceiling of the offices below was less than 

with previous systems – as it alone replaced the 

building’s ventilation needs, though it did necessitate an 

acoustic false ceiling.  

 

From the PSFS and thanks to advances in construction 

techniques both in cladding and in artificial climate 

control systems, other sub-types of glazed tower became 

possible: the articulated tower, the tower on a podium, 

the tower with framed floor on the roof and the tower 

with intermediate floors,mainly, whose formal traits in 

pure or combined forms would be repeated in towers. 

future 

 

2. INFLUENCES IN EUROPE IN THE 60s-80s 

 

Following a few decades of “frustrated”
11

 attempts by 

the Modern Movement architects to construct tall 

buildings in Europe with natural ventilation, it was not 

until the consolidation of the polyhedral crystal tower in 

America that this type began to be exported for 

administrative use to cities like London or Berne, for 

example. The influence of American office building 

models with their consequent reliance on artificial 

climate control was more notable in Britain than in 

northern Europe where administrative buildings were 

more predominantly organic and linked to the outside 

world. When referring to exporting the concept, this is to 

mean not just the formal type but also the construction 

technology and the mechanical systems that made this 

development possible.  

 

By way of an example, the following are two 

administrative use buildings which clearly reflect the 

formal defining features of the type as described in the 

preceding section and  built in London at the end of the 

 
Fig.10: Crystal tower. 

 

 
Fig. 12: Lever House 

distribution. Offices and 

service spaces. 

 

 
Fig.11: Lever House 

Building. 

 



   5  

60s: the tower for the Commercial Union Assurances 

Co.
12 

 (designed by architects Gollins, Melvin, Ward 

&Partners) – with its 24 floors of offices and its two 

technical floors, it was able to achieve a square open 

floor with a compact central core  of stairs, lifts, services 

and installations; the neighbouring tower for the 

Peninsular and Oriental Steam Navigation Co., which 

was part of the same project (1969), comprises a glazed 

eleven-floor tower on a double-height plinth with a 

framed floor to house the installations for the building.  

 

Another administrative building that was constructed 

thanks to artificial climate control via perimeter 

convection in the enclosure of the work area was the 

Radio Schweiz
13

,AG, tower in Berne (1971) whose 

architect was F. Geiser. Once more there was a square 

floor with four glazed walls and a central core.  

 

It was not until the 70s that the glass office tower began 

to make an appearance in Spain: “This was a period in 

which the bank buildings quickly appropriated the 

precepts of the International Style – with its geometric 

volumes, straight lines, smooth flat surfaces and flexible 

floors – into modern construction use. This volume and 

verticality – as the maximum expression of the capitalist 

process of accumulation – was the most requested 

expressive form for this type of prestigious architecture”
 

14
. 

 

Among the first towers in the 60s, the Philips Building
15 

in Madrid (by García Benito) stands out with its thirteen 

floors and twin office towers articulated around a core of 

stairs that remained partly hidden. This whole was placed 

on a setback plinth that was adapted to the plot of land. 

Then, from  the period of economic splendour there is the 

BBVA Tower by Sáez de Oiza (1978-1981), also in 

Madrid and clearly influenced by Wright
16

. 

 

The articulated tower that was born with the PSFS saw 

its representation in Europe in the 60s: a pure example 

with a clear differentiation between the mechanical 

services core and the office space can be found in the 

Cooperative Insurance Society (CIS)
 17

 building, 

constructed in Manchester in 1962 (by architects Gordon 

Tait and G.S. Hay), with 25 floors, a five-story podium 

and a technical floor on the roof.  

The articulation of the communications and installations 

core and, above all, the incorporation of the inner atrium 

above which the work spaces are located is present in the 

design of one of European architecture’s most recent 

representations of the administrative building: Lloyd’s
18

  

in London by R. Rogers (finished in 1986). The 

difference with the Larkin is that Rogers designs offices 

based around the central atrium in the building without 

losing light or views, which modern sealed and glazed 

architecture permits.  

 

In the period described in this section,  the types that 

served as a model for the administrative building 

persisted, the enclosure construction systems evolving to 

become structural elements, dematerializing the central 

service cores and granting ever more importance to the 

floor-frame-ceiling as a whole as a horizontal distribution 

element for energy contributing to total flexibility of the 

office floor and using variable air volume (VAV) 

systems which are adapted to the heating needs of users.  

 

3. REINTERPRETATION OR GENERATION OF 

NEW MODELS 

 

The start of the oil crisis in 1970 saw all the buildings 

which had been completed with curtain walling came 

into question and conditioned all the inner heating 

fixtures to artificial climate control. It was time to 

examine some of the aspects that might have the most 

influence on the reinterpretation of the given models or 

on the creation of new administrative building types.  

 

On the one hand, the single glass skin cladding the 

glazed towers would become multiple layers, complex 

and variable – constituting an active part of the climate 

control systems for the building and improving energy 

efficiency. The cladding would include shading elements 

and the regulation of natural light, double glazing with 

specific technology for solar protection, low emissivity, 

etc. and chambers through which air would flow to 

condition the rooms. Two examples of the use of a 

façade as an air renewal system: for the offices in the 

New Parliament building
19

in London by M. Hopkins & 

Partners (finished in 1999) and the active façade as an 

 
Fig.13: Commercial 

Union Assurances Co 

distribution. 

 

 
Fig.14: Cooperative Insurance 

Society distribution. 

 

 

 
Fig.16: Space Tower. 

 

 
Fig.15: BBVA Tower. 

 



   6  

element to attenuate external climate conditions in the 

Space Tower
20 

in Madrid (2007) by Pei Cobb Freed & 

Partners. The differentiated resolution of the various 

glazed façades in the office tower had begun to be an 

important design criterion.  

 

The completely sealed skin was questioned while the 

ideas of boosting natural ventilation and night-time 

cooling gained greater credence as design criteria in 

modern office buildings. The use of an inner atrium not 

just as a meeting place or for its views but as a 

mechanism to extract stale air and as an indoor garden is 

a strategy in thermal conditioning that defines the formal 

traits of many current office buildings. For examples, see 

The Boots Company PLC in Beeton
21 

(designed by 

DEGW; finished in 1998) or the reinterpretation of the 

atrium as a spiral in the Swiss Re
22

 by N. Foster in 

London (2004). 

 

The generation of heating and cooling through the 

inclusion of renewable energies should be a factor that 

means the building is unavoidably integrated into the 

landscape and the skyline and it must be incorporated 

into the architectural design; it will go on to define new 

formal traits for administrative types. For evidence of 

this, see the refurbishment of the CIS articulated tower in 

2004 where the three sides of the stairs, services and 

installations core serve as a support for the emplacement 

of photovoltaic panels. This action included the 

positioning of wind turbines on the roof.  

 

Henceforth, only installations including domotics or 

regulation and maximum energy efficiency will be 

considered adequate for the artificial climate control of 

buildings. The inclusion of energy efficiency elements 

such as heat exchangers or centralized control rooms 

means the reorganization of spaces intended for the 

active climate control installations in office buildings.  

 

Additionally, the latest changes in the understanding of 

the work space including the presence of computers and 

information technology are of interest not so much for 

how they influence the design of “virtual space” but 

rather in the sharing of floor and ceiling space – 

horizontal distributors of heat energy – and in the 

increase in power this means for the building and the 

need the equipment has for cooling facilities.  

 

4. CONCLUSIONS 

 

One of the driving forces behind the establishment of the 

formal traits of the various architectural types for the 

building designed for administrative use that emerged in 

the America of the late 19th century to its culmination in 

the glazed office tower of the 1950s is the adequate 

heating of the work space.  

 

In the first half of this period, the shape, cladding and 

volumetric configuration of the office blocks were 

defined starting from achieving optimal natural 

ventilation and light conditions in most of the offices 

considered for construction.  

 

The majority of the climate controlled buildings dating 

from before World War II had “All Air” air conditioning 

systems. The result was administrative buildings whose 

height and shape was conditioned by the spatial and 

energy needs of the vertical climate control ducts.  

 

Only the implementation of the “air and water” systems 

allowed complete dominion over the interior 

environment of the office buildings. The development of 

fully sealed, transparent cladding made possible glazed 

office towers which were open-plan and adaptable to the 

needs of the users.  

 

The models created in cities like Chicago and New York 

were repeated in Europe in the succeeding years, thus 

confirming that the choice of type when designing an 

office building conditions the type of thermal 

installations needed therein. 

 

5. REFERENCES 

 
1 
Ábalos I. y J. Herreros J., “TÉCNICA Y 

ARQUITECTURA en la ciudad contemporánea”. 

Editorial Nerea, 1992, Hondarribia.Pág. 174. 

 
2 
Citado en Ashrae Journal.Junio 1999.Artículo de David 

Arnold:“The Evolution of Modern Office Buildings and 

Air Conditioning”. Pág. 42. 

 
3 
BanhamR.,”La arquitectura del entorno bien 

climatizado”. Ediciones Infinito, 1975, Buenos Aires. 

 
4  

Ídem. Pág.230. 

 
5
 Citado en AshraeJournal.  Julio 1999. Artículo de 

David Arnold: “Air Conditioning in Office Buildings 

After World War II”. pág. 33. 
 

 
Fig.17: Lloyd’s in front, Commercial 

Union Assurances Co. and Swiss Re 

Tower behind. 

 

 

 

 

 

 



   7  

6 
Serra R.,  “Arquitectura i máquina”.  Edicions UPC, 

1996, Barcelona. Pág. 23. 

 
7
 Cohen J.-L.,  “Mies van der Rohe”.  Editorial Akal, 

2007, Madrid. Pág. 142-145. 
 

8
 Citado en Ashrae Journal.  Julio 1999. Artículo de 

David Arnold: “Air Conditioning in Office Buildings 

After World War II”. Pág. 34. 

 
9 
Danz, E. y Menges, A. “SOM. La arquitectura de 

Skidmore, Owings& Merrill, 1950-1973”. Gustavo Gili 

S.A., 1975, Barcelona. Pág. 32-33. 

 
10 

BanhamR.,”La arquitectura del entorno bien 

climatizado”. Ediciones Infinito, 1975, Buenos Aires. 

Pág. 246. 

 
11

 Quintana J.,”El rascacielos en Europa 1930-1939”. 

Alianza Editorial, 2006. 

 
12 

Joedicke J.,”EDIFICIOS ADMINISTRATIVOS Y DE 

OFICINAS. Ejemplos internacionales”. Editorial 

Gustavo Gili, 1976,  Barcelona. Pág.83-90. 

 
13

 Ídem. Pág.77-82. 

 
14

 Martín C., de su tesis doctoral “El aire acondicionado 

como factor de diseño en la arquitectura española: 

Energía Materializada” citando a Sobrino J. en la 

“Arquitectura Industrial en España”,2008. Pág.333. 

 
15

 Fernández-Galiano L. y Colectivo de Arquitectura. ”El 

edificio de oficinas. Análisis y criterios de diseño” Edita 

Citema, 1977, Madrid. Pág.21 y pág. 67. 

 
16

 Martín C., “El aire acondicionado como factor de 

diseño en la arquitectura española: Energía 

Materializada”, pág.333-362. 

 
17 

Fuente planta base: ”El edificio de oficinas. Análisis y 

criterios de diseño”. Luis Fernández-Galiano y Colectivo 

de Arquitectura. Pág.25. 

 
18 

De la Revista A+U: “Richard Rogers 1978-1988”. 

Extra Edition December 1988. Tokyo. Artículo: “Lloyd’s 

Redevelopment”. Pág.148-169. 

 
19 

Donati C. “Michael Hopkins”. Edita: Luca Molinari. 

ShiraEditore.2006. Milano. 

 
20 

De la Revista Arquitectura Viva: “Torres de España”. 

Nº121. 2008. Madrid. Artículo de PeiCobbFreed: 

“Cohete celeste”. Pág.70-77. 
 

21 
Arnold T., Hascher R., Jeska S. y Klauck B. y otros, 

“Atlas de Edificios de Oficinas”. Editorial Gustavo Gili, 

2002, Barcelona. Pág.206-209. 

22 
De la Revista Arquitectura Viva: “Tipos de oficina”. 

Nº103. 2003. Madrid. Artículo de Norman Foster: “Sede 

de Swiss Re, Londres”. Pág.98-105. 
 

23
www.amisingplanet.com 

 

 

This paper is supported by the Spanish MICINN under 

projet ENE 2009-11540. 

 

 

 

http://www.amisingplanet.com/

