



















































PLEA 2017 Proceedings - Design to Thrive - Volume III


Façade design and energy demand:  fenestration indexes from an urban 
approach 

Elena Garcia-Nevado
1
, Benoit Beckers

2
 Helena Coch Roura

1  
and Isabel Crespo

1 

1

2

 Architecture & Energy, School of Architecture of Barcelona, Universitat Politècnica de 
Catalunya (UPC).  Av Diagonal 649, 08028 Barcelona, Spain.  elena.garcia.nevado@upc.edu  
Department of Building and Public Works (ISA BTP). Université de Pau et des Pays de 
l'Adour (UPPA). Allée Parc Montaury, 64600 Anglet, France. benoit.beckers@univ-pau.fr 

Abstract: Façade design has significant effects on inner conditions of spaces and also on the energy needs to 
achieve user’s comfort. In this regard, the proportion of glazed surfaces to opaque ones plays a key role. 
Although the link between the fenestration ratio and energy demand for a space has been widely addressed in 
literature, a considerable number of these studies were based on isolated models, disregarding the effect of 
the urban surroundings. The aim of this paper is to provide insights on the impact of the window-to-wall ratio 
(WWR) on thermal energy demands taking into consideration a specific urban context. The Eixample district of 
Barcelona, with Mediterranean temperate climate, has been selected as the case study. Heating and cooling 
energy needs have been evaluated for a single residential space by means of computer simulations in Design 
Builder for different positions within the tissue. Results show that, from a thermal point of view, the design of 
façade openings within an urban context should vary depending on the orientation and the degree of 
obstruction, as a reflection of the differences in energy balance within the building envelope.  

Keywords: Window-to-wall ratio, Mediterranean climate, Energy demand 

Introduction 

Building envelope, as the filter between outside and inside spaces, poses an environmental 
challenge for architects. Among all surfaces composing this enclosure, façades have been 
found to be decisive for environmental conditions inside buildings and, consequently, for 
energy requirements to maintain user’s comfort levels. 

Regarding the façade design, one of the first early-stage decisions made by designers 
is the proportion between glazed surfaces and opaque ones. For a particular space, this 
geometrical relationship may be expressed through two parameters: window-to-wall ratio 
(WWR) and window-to-floor ratio (WFR). Both indexes have been recurrently employed in 
literature to describe the link between fenestration design and inner environmental 
conditions regarding lighting (Bodart & De Herde, 2002; Ghisi & Tinker, 2005) and heat 
(Persson et al., 2006; Inanici & Demirbilek, 2000) either as individual aspects or from global 
perspective (Ochoa et al., 2012; Skarking et al., 2016). 

One common approach for studies on the correlation between WWR and energy 
needs is to conduct their analyses based on a spatial model – usually a shoebox – conceived 
as an isolated entity. This definition of the study problem constitutes a logical starting point 
on the matter and allows us to provide valuable and straightforward insights for a simple, 
yet feasible, scenario. However, the final energy impact of windows on indoor environment 

5230

mailto:elena.garcia.nevado@upc.edu
mailto:benoit.beckers@univ-pau.fr


not only depends on the element features itself but also on geometrical and material 
characteristics of the urban surroundings.  

Investigations taking into consideration the effect of urban context are, though, much 
more limited. Some studies have been carried out defining a simplified urban context by 
using the endless canyon scheme. For example, Hegazy et al (2013) studied the combined 
effect of window size and shading device on daylight autonomy and energy consumption in 
Cairo. In this work, the complex balance between reducing air conditioning demands and 
lighting needs in the case of cooling-dominant climates was highlighted.  

Despite the usefulness of the urban canyon approach, this model overlooks the 3D 
complexity of urban environments regarding local energy changes due to street 
intersections (Garcia-Nevado et al., 2016) and other non-canyon-shaped configurations (e.g. 
squares). In this sense, analysis based on urban tissue samples could contribute to a better 
understanding of the implications of urban façade design under more realistic conditions.   

Based on a complex 3D environment, Fernández et al (2016) demonstrated that, 
results of window layout optimisation may differ depending on whether urban surroundings 
are taken into account or not. In the same vein, Vermeulen et al (2013) carried out an 
optimization analysis of the form and the façade layout for a block located in neighborhood 
of Paris. Results of this work suggested that, for heating-dominant climates, the optimum 
size of openings mainly depends on orientation and urban obstruction.  

As shown, the role of façade design from an urban perspective is still in need of 
further research. This paper aims to provide additional insights on the impact of glazing 
ratio on thermal energy demands taking into consideration a specific urban context. This 
work focuses on a temperate climate, where heating and cooling needs have to be 
considered during the design process with regard to urban solar obstructions.  

Method 

In order to discuss the impact of WWR on thermal performance of spaces located in a 
specific built environment, a four-step method has been developed. First, the basic 
simulation model to be tested within a certain urban context is to be designed. The basic 
model is conceived as a single-space box with just one exterior façade where a variable-
sized window will be located.  

Second, the urban context where to study effects of WWR changes is to be modelled. 
The urban model consists of a central block - where the basic model will be integrated - 
surrounded by the minimum number of additional blocks which reproduce a representative 
sample of the chosen tissue.  

Third, a parametric study of the thermal behaviour of the base model is performed in 
terms of WWR for the previously-defined urban model. To this end, heating, cooling and 
total air conditioning demands are selected as assessment parameters. These parameters 
will be calculated by means of computer-based energy simulations on an annual basis.  

Finally, an optimisation analysis of WWR is carried out for the selected urban context. 
The optimisation problem consists in minimising a single objective function, in our case, 
global air-conditioning demands. Two optimisation scenarios are analysed on the basis of 
the constraints imposed to the glazing ratio solutions. On one hand, the optimisation 
problem is solved with no constraints about either the minimum or maximum WWR. On the 
other, the optimisation assessment is performed fixing a minimum WWR and applying a 
tolerance range on the minimum demand of a 10%. 

5231



Case study  

Base model description  

The base model of the present case study consists of a shoebox (width·depth·height = 
6m·6m·3m) representing a sample of a single residential unit. The model is completely 
enclosed by adiabatic surfaces except for one, the exterior façade, where a single window is 
placed. The WWR of the space is parametrically defined between 0% and 100%, in 10% 
steps. No shading devices have been taken into consideration. Thermal features of the base 
model are detailed in Table 1. 

Table 1. Base model features.  

Façade 
materials      

Exterior wall    Brick wall (12cm) + air cavity (5cm) + Brick wall (6cm)     
                           [U=1,92 W/m

2
] 

Window            Single glass (6mm) + aluminium frame without thermal bridge break     
                           [U=5,7 W/m

2
; g = 0,8]  

Partitions 
Horizontal         Concrete joists & ceramic blocks (20cm) + floor slab (5cm)            
Vertical              Brick wall (12cm) 

 
 

Urban context definition  

The Eixample district of Barcelona has been selected as case study. The original urban plan 
was conceived by Idelfons Cerdà (Cerdà 1867) in response to the unhealthy conditions of 
the overcrowded industrial city. It consists of an orthogonal grid of streets with 45º North 
orientation whose basic repetition unit was a slightly chamfered square (113x113m).  

As a result of speculative processes, the Eixample resulted to be a much more densely 
built urban structure than the one initially planned. For this work, the profile of the block 
where the base model will be tested is defined according to regulations into force between 
1932 and 1976 (CCCB 2009). During this period, highest densities and land occupations were 
reached posing a critical scenario in terms of solar access.  

The present case study comprises a sample of 9 blocks (3x3). The base model is 
evaluated for several representative locations within the centre block of the tissue in order 
to analyse thermal behaviour differences in height. These positions correspond to the 
middle point of each block facet at two different levels (L1, L5) (Figure 1).  

 

 
 

Figure 1. Plan (left) and section (right) of the Eixample tissue and selected locations for the test model. 

L0 
L1 

L5

…
 

5232



Within the Eixample block, two kinds of façades can be identified: chamfer and long 
façade (Figure 2). The former, belonging to a square-shaped space, presents a lower degree 
of sky obstruction than the latter, pertaining to a canyon-shaped space. In sight of solar 
obstruction diagrams, it can be stated that more significant differences in height are found 
in longer façades (SW/SE, NW/NE) than in chamfer ones (E/W, N, S) regarding solar 
radiation availability.    

Figure 2. Solar obstructions in stereographic projection for L1 (dark grey) and L5 (light grey) for S, E, N, SE and 
NE façades, calculated in Heliodon (Beckers & Masset 2006).  

Simulation settings 

Energy simulations have been conducted using the software Design Builder v.5. This tool 
computes heating and cooling loads of spaces through dynamic thermal simulations based 
on climate data. Energy calculations in this software take into account shortwave radiation 
interactions with the urban surroundings (obstruction of diffuse and direct radiation + 
source of reflected radiation). As for longwave exchanges, the urban environment is 
considered to be a sky view obstacle, which is at the same temperature as the air. An 
overview of the simulation settings used for the present case study is included in Table 2.  

Table 2. Simulation settings. 

User’s profile 
Residential  use 
Occupation rate   0,04 p/m

2
   

Schedule         100%   23-7h  /   25%  7-15h   /  50%  15-23h 

Location Barcelona   41
o
N     -    IWEC Weather file 

Set-point Temperature  
Heating   21 

o
C   

Cooling   26 
o
C 

Free cooling  21 – 24h   from June to September 

Infiltrations  0,5 ren·h
-1

 

Reflectivity RGROUND =   0.4            RBUILDINGS  =  0.4 

Results and discussion 

Cooling, heating and global demands 

Results of air-conditioning demands depending on WWR are shown in Figure 3 for rooms 
belonging to an isolated block and also for an urban one. Differences in energy 
requirements between E, SE, NE and W, SW, NW orientations respectively are barely 
noticeable on an annual basis; therefore, only the former have been depicted. 

CHAMFER FAÇADES LONG FAÇADES 

VOLUME III PLEA 2017 PROCEEDINGS - DESIGN TO THRIVE 5233



Figure 3. Air conditioning demands for an isolated and an urban block at levels P1 and P5. 

VOLUME III PLEA 2017 PROCEEDINGS - DESIGN TO THRIVE 5234



Figure 3 shows that the increase in the opening size results in an almost linear rise in 
cooling requirements for all the analysed cases. Since cooling needs are mainly driven by 
radiation loads, the significance of this increase demand will depend not only on orientation 
but also on the degree of obstruction. Consequently, for the same orientation, the higher 
the floor level is, the more noticeable the increases in cooling demands are computed as 
openings enlarge. Changes in cooling demand due to higher WWR may be significant in both 
relative and absolute terms, increasing energy needs between 11 to 64 kWh/m

2
year (in N-

L1 and E/W-L5 cases, respectively).  
As for heating demand, the enlarging of the glazed surface has uneven effects on 

energy requirements depending on the orientation and the degree of obstruction. On one 
hand, a decrease in heating needs is observed for south facing spaces and the less 
obstructed ones facing SE/SW and E/W orientations. This reduction in energy demand is 
explained by the fact that, for these locations, solar gains exceed conduction losses. Due to 
this effect, heating demand is reduced between 8 and 32 kWh/m

2
year (in E-L5 and S-L5 

cases respectively). On the other hand, the growth of the window size is associated to a 
slight increase in heating requirements for the rest of orientations regardless the height. 

Regarding total air-conditioning demands, the parametric increase from 0 to 100% of 
WWR is linked in general terms to a rise in energy needs (ranging from a 1,5 to a 2,1 factor 
for N-L1 and E/W-L2 cases respectively). However, it is worthy to differentiate two 
particular situations in this regard. On one hand, for all N, NE, NW, E and W cases, the bigger 
the window is, the higher total demand is computed, reaching the minimum total demand 
for a 0% WWR. On the other, for S, SE and SW orientations the minimum air conditioning 
demand is reached between the 30% and 10% WWR.    

Optimization of WWR to minimise total air-conditioning demand 

In this subsection, the WWR optimization based on the minimisation of the total air-
conditioning demand (Tmin) is discussed. In this regard, two different scenarios have been 
assessed and graphically represented (Figure 4 and 5).  

First, the “optimum WWR” for each case is determined as the glazing ratio linked to 
the minimum total air conditioning demand (Tmin), without any further constraints on the 
window size. Though in this scenario lightning requirements may not always be fulfilled, it 
constitutes a conceptual approach on the thermal impact of the window size worthwhile to 
analyse. Results for this optimisation case are depicted in the elevation of Figure 4. Under 
this approach, windows would be present only in south façades and in the higher floors of 
southeast/southwest ones. These results indicate that, for the study case, the presence of 
glazing surfaces only has a positive thermal impact for S, SE and SW orientations and under 
highly-unobstructed conditions.  

Second, the “optimum WWR” is defined as the maximum window size that does not 
lead to a “significant increase” in demand compared with Tmin, being WWR≥ 10% in any case. 
For the present study, a “significant increase” has been defined as an increment of 10% of 
Tmin. Block elevations based on these criteria are depicted in Figure 5. Urban façade design 
resulting from this thermal optimisation is characterised by a non-uniform layout. 
Differences in WWR glazing ratios are detectable between orientations. Additionally, for the 
more obstructed façades (SE, SW, NE, NW), they are also present in height, reflection of the 
link between obstruction and the window net energy performance.  

VOLUME III PLEA 2017 PROCEEDINGS - DESIGN TO THRIVE 5235



It is worth-mentioned that the maximum glazing ratio obtained for this scenario (30%) 
is similar to the WWR average found by the authors in their ongoing research about 
fenestration in the Eixample. A possible explanation for this parallelism could be the 
existence of a non-explicit knowledge on the part of designers about certain façade 
configurations which pose a good compromise between thermal and lighting performance 
for this climate and urban context. 

 

 
Figure 4. Elevation with WWR associated to the minimum air-conditioning demand.  

 

 
 

Figure 5. Elevation with WWR increasing by less than a 10% the minimum air-conditioning demand.  

 

Conclusions   

In this paper, the impact of WWR on air-conditioning demands has been discussed from an 
urban perspective. Results indicate that, for the climate of Barcelona, only the windows 
with a south component (S, SE, SW) on highly unobstructed contexts present a net positive 
effect from a thermal point of view. It has been shown that, for the urban tissue of the 
Eixample, WWR increases beyond a 30% always result in rises in total air-conditioning 
demands, regardless orientation and degree of obstruction.  

In this work, a discussion on the possibilities of optimizing WWR to minimize air 
conditioning needs has been also carried out for the Eixample case. To illustrate conclusions 
on this point, a schematic view about a thermally optimised urban landscape of the 
Eixample has been included (Figure 6). The urban layout of the tissue is highlighted as one 
influencing factor regarding the obtained optimum glazing ratio. Consequently, façade 
design resulting from a thermal-based WWR optimisation differs among orientations. In 
addition to this, the optimum opening size from a thermal point of view grows in height (the 
higher the floor, the bigger the window) for the more obstructed façades.  

The complexity of energy exchanges taking place through the building façade makes 
difficult for architects to understand the consequences of its design. Results of this work 
provide insights about thermal implications associated to changes in the WWR, an aspect 
which is present from an early stage of design. Findings on this paper may also contribute to 
a better understanding of the role of façade design regarding the thermal behavior of urban 
tissues.  

VOLUME III PLEA 2017 PROCEEDINGS - DESIGN TO THRIVE 5236



Figure 6. Urban landscape of Eixample with WWR which minimises air conditioning demands. 

Acknowledgements 

This work has been supported by the Spanish Ministry of Economy under project code 
BIA2016-77675-R and a FPU fellowship from the Spanish Ministry of Education granted to 
Elena García Nevado.  

References 

Beckers, B., Masset, L. (2006). Heliodon 2. Software and user guide. www.heliodon.net. 
Bodart, M., De Herde, A. (2002). Global energy savings in offices buildings by the use of daylighting. 

Energy and Buildings, 34, pp.421–429. 
Centro de Cultura Contemporánea de Barcelona - CCCB (2009). Ordenanzas de edificación del Ensanche: 

1857 -2002. Available at: http://issuu.com/anycerda/docs/m3.4._ordenances_d_edificaci_/3?e=0. 
Cerdà, I. (1867). Teoría General de la Urbanización. Madrid (1968): Instituto de Estudios Fiscales. 
Fernández, E., Aguerre, JP., Beckers, B.,Besuievsky, G. (2016). Optimizing Window Shape for 

Daylighting : An Urban Context Approach. Eurographics Workshop on Urban Data Modelling and Visualisation, 
2016. 

Garcia-Nevado, E., Pages-Ramon, A., Coch, H. (2016). Solar access assessment in dense urban 
environments: The effect of intersections in an urban canyon. Energies, 9(10). 

Ghisi, E., Tinker, JA. (2005). An Ideal Window Area concept for energy efficient integration of daylight 
and artificial light in buildings. Building and Environment, 40(1), pp.51–61. 

Hegazy, MA., Attia, S., Moro, JL., 2013. Parametric analysis for daylight autonomy and energy 
consumption in hot climates. In: 13th IBPSA International Conference 2013, Chambéry, France, 25-28 August 
2013. International Building Performance Simulation Association. 

Inanici, MN., Demirbilek, FN. (2000). Thermal performance optimization of building aspect ratio and 
south window size in five cities having different climatic characteristics of Turkey. Building and Environment, 
35(1), pp.41–52. 

Ochoa, CE., Aries, M., Van Loenen, E. Hensen, J. (2012). Considerations on design optimization criteria 
for windows providing low energy consumption and high visual comfort. Applied Energy, 95, pp.238–245. 

Persson, ML., Roos, A., Wall, M. (2006). Influence of window size on the energy balance of low energy 
houses. Energy and Buildings, 38(3), pp.181–188. 

Skarking, GCJ., Hviid, CA., Svendsen, S. (2016). Roadmap for improving roof and façade windows in 
nearly zero-energy houses in Europe. Energy and Buildings, 116, pp.602–613. 

Vermeulen, T., Kämpf, JH., Beckers, B. (2013). Urban Form Optimization for the Energy Performance of 
Buildings Using CitySim. In: CISBAT International Conference 2013, Lausanne, Switzerland, 4-6 September 2013. 
Solar Energy and Building Physics Laboratory.   

VOLUME III PLEA 2017 PROCEEDINGS - DESIGN TO THRIVE 5237


	Design to Thrive - PLEA 2017
	Introduction to the Proceedings of PLEA 2017
	Volume Contents
	Table of Contents
	Low Carbon Design
	Materials
	Overheating
	Passive & Climatic Design
	Place Making and Well-being
	Renewables / Solar & Hydrogen Buildings
	Resilience, Aging and Adapting to Change
	Sound
	Transition Communities
	Transport
	Ventilation
	Vernacular Buildings
	Water and Waste
	Windcatchers and Windows



