














































Barcelona a … de …


ACE 32 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

A DIGITAL IMAGE PROCESSING METHOD FOR 

URBAN SCENES BRIGHTNESS ASSESSMENT 

 

 

 

 

 

Judit Lopez-Besora, Antonio Isalgué y Helena Coch Roura 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Cómo citar este artículo: LOPEZ-BESORA, J.; ISALGUE, A. y COCH ROURA, H. A digital 

image processing method for urban scenes brightness assessment [en línea] Fecha de 

consulta: dd-mm-aa. En: ACE: Architecture, City and Environment = Arquitectura, Ciudad y 

Entorno, 11 (32): 157-170, 2016. DOI: 10.5821/ace.11.32.4837. ISSN: 1886-4805. 



 

 

 

157 

ACE©  AÑO 11, núm.32, OCTUBRE 2016 | A DIGITAL IMAGE PROCESSING METHOD FOR URBAN SCENES BRIGHTNESS 

ASSESSMENT 

Judit Lopez-Besora, Antoni Isalgué y Helena Coch 

A DIGITAL IMAGE PROCESSING METHOD FOR URBAN SCENES 

BRIGHTNESS ASSESSMENT 

 

  

LOPEZ-BESORA, Judit 
1
 

ISALGUE, Antonio 

COCH ROURA, Helena  

 

 
Remisión inicial: 05-04-2016             Remisión final: 13-10-2016 

 
 

Key words: Outdoor visual perception; Mediterranean city; luminance; picture analysis tool 

 

 

Abstract 

 

The appearance of the city is strongly linked to many aspects such as climate, culture and 

sociological background. In cities with a prevalence of clear skies, one of the determining 

aspects is the climatic condition, which defines a luminous context where all elements appear 

significantly bright. In order to establish the luminosity of the urban scene and its components, 

an analysis of pictures taken in real environments is proposed, carried out through a digital 

image processing software developed by the authors. The information contained in each pixel of 

a digital image is used to assess the distribution of light in the picture. The pictures selected for 

assessment represent an urban scene as seen by a standing observer. In this situation the 

scene can be divided in three zones with similar features: pavement, sky and façades. The 

developed software provides output information for the aforementioned zones and the whole 

image consisting on light data (average, maximum, minimum and standard deviation) 

convertible to luminance (cd/m
2
) if reference values are provided. The validity of the procedure 

is tested in this work and implemented in real pictures. After testing it, the software has proven 

to be easy to use and the results obtained in the examples have shown a trend in their values. 

The implementation of the software suggests that a wider number of cases of study would make 

possible to establish a pattern in the daylight distribution of urban scenes conceived as an 

addition of zones with different luminous appearance. 

 

1. Introduction 

 

In the last centuries, cities have gathered must of the population in the world, and this number is 

growing year after year. Factors such as economy, security and culture lead people to live in 

urban crowds, and cities have become the everyday landscape for people. The magnitude of 

                                                     
1
 Judit López Besora: Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya - Departament de Tecnologia de l'Arquitectura. ETSAB, 

UPC. Av. Diagonal, 649 08028 Barcelona. Contact email: judit.lopez.besora@upc.edu 



 

 

 

158 

ACE©  AÑO 11, núm.32, OCTUBRE 2016 | A DIGITAL IMAGE PROCESSING METHOD FOR URBAN SCENES BRIGHTNESS 

ASSESSMENT 

Judit Lopez-Besora, Antoni Isalgué y Helena Coch 

cities is usually measured in terms of population, density, soil occupation and other dimensional 

parameters; but cities can also be described with numbers based on other criteria: climate data, 

mobility, economy, etc. The combination of these and other magnitudes have impact on the life 

of people since it significantly affects their quality of life. Despite the diversity of parameters, a 

city can be defined in quantitative and qualitative terms. The last aspect is highly connected to 

the image provided, which gives identity, structure and meaning to the city. It is determined by 

mental maps formed by elements such as paths, edges, districts, nodes and landmarks, as 

defined by Kevin Lynch in his work (Lynch, 1960). The first element, paths, plays an important 

role in ordering the whole, since it is one of the main elements which give identity and continuity 

to the city. 

 

One of the qualitative aspects that characterize the city and its paths is the luminous 

appearance of urban scenes. It affects users’ quality of vision when moving along the city 

because it becomes an important source of contrast in specific situations, especially under 

sunlight. It is noticeable in latitudes with high solar incidence due to the vertical position of sun 

and a favourable climate condition (Baker et al., 1993). The presence of daylight is generally 

perceived as a positive aspect because it implies health advantages for people (Lam, 1986) and 

at the same time it offers a valuable cue for estimating information about time, season and 

weather conditions of a place (Granzier and Valsecchi, 2014). The high intensity of solar 

radiation represents an appropriate situation for solar access in cities (Curreli and Coch. 2013) 

but at the same time it can generate visual contrast. As a consequence, people moving along 

the city have to cope with extreme luminance values within their visual field simultaneously and 

when passing from a bright scene to a darker one (Lopez-Besora et al., 2016), which affects 

both visual comfort and performance. To deal with this subject, the present work is focused in 

two aspects: the characteristics of the urban scene and the brightness assessment. 

 

1.1 The urban scene 

 

The urban scene is here the framework used to assess visual contrast caused by brightness in 

cities. It is considered that contrast can be produced within a single scene or through a series of 

different brightness scenes. In the case of cities, the urban scene is defined by two aspects: 

urban space and field of vision. It comprises what is seen by users, standing moving observers 

which field of vision frames an outlined part of the urban landscape. Geometry is the basis of 

urban scenes definition, provided that they depend on both urban configuration and the limits of 

the human visual field. 

 

The first variable is basically geometrical and it comprises the dimensional characteristics of the 

urban fabric. As for vision along streets, dimensional values which are not perceived by 

pedestrians are not considered for the analysis. In that sense, the most used quantitative 

parameter, density, can be defined in several ways (Alexander et al., 1993) but it can be 

perceived in a different way depending on aspects such as building articulation, façade area or 

type of dwellings (Bergdoll and Williams, 1990; Zacharias and Stamps, 2004) and it often gives 

scarce information about the appearance of the city (Berghauser Pont and Haupt, 2010). Some 

authors set out the difference between physical and perceived density (Rapoport, 1975; Cheng, 

2009) as a theory for urban definition based on density (Morganti et al., 2012), even though they 

are not necessarily coincident. Nevertheless, other parameters such as the urban canyon 

(Strømann-Andersen et al., 2011) are more appropriate to understand the appearance of the 



 

 

 

159 

ACE©  AÑO 11, núm.32, OCTUBRE 2016 | A DIGITAL IMAGE PROCESSING METHOD FOR URBAN SCENES BRIGHTNESS 

ASSESSMENT 

Judit Lopez-Besora, Antoni Isalgué y Helena Coch 

city since it is considered that the dimension of the urban canyon bears a closer connection with 

the perception of density experienced by pedestrians. This value is expressed by the relation 

between the wide of the street and the height of buildings. From that relation it can be deduced 

that horizontal and vertical surfaces (pavements and façades) configure two groups of elements 

or zones with similar features that share importance in street view scenes. The vision of these 

zones depends on the dimension of the street and buildings, as said above. However, another 

zone completes the urban scene and has to be considered, the sky vault. As a consequence, 

pedestrians’ vision of the city is configured by a zone at the bottom occupied by the pavement 

(Zone 1), another zone in the middle of the scene with building façades (Zone 2), and another 

zone at the top with the sky (Zone 3), as shown in Figure 1. Depending on the dimension of the 

urban canyon, the proportion of each zone will be different. Besides the position and proportion 

of the different zones, it has to be noted that materials also play an important role in outdoor 

visual comfort (Rosso et al., 2015) and the appearance of the city. 

 

Figure 1. Three zones division of urban scenes 

 
Source: authors. Self-elaboration of the results 

 

The second variable is the human vision field. In normal conditions, the field of vision comprises 

almost everything located in front of the observer, with a small zone of precise vision at the 

centre coincident with the point of focus, and a peripheral area with different degree of 

sensitivity. The different sensitivity zones and the limits of the field are defined by angles 

depicted in two planes, horizontal and vertical (Panero and Zelnik. 2007).  

 

These angles frame the visual scene and configure the vision of the city experienced by static 

pedestrians. However, urban visual scenes for moving observers are mainly defined for the 

upper and lower limits of the field, provided that the movement of walking observers is produced 

in a horizontal plane. As a consequence, the definition of lateral limits in urban visual scenes 

makes little sense, because they change constantly unlike the upper and lower ones, which 

remain almost unchanged (Figure 2). 

 



 

 

 

160 

ACE©  AÑO 11, núm.32, OCTUBRE 2016 | A DIGITAL IMAGE PROCESSING METHOD FOR URBAN SCENES BRIGHTNESS 

ASSESSMENT 

Judit Lopez-Besora, Antoni Isalgué y Helena Coch 

Figure 2. Visual field of moving observers 

 
Source: authors. Self-elaboration of the results 

 

The combination of three zones division defined above (pavements, façades and sky) along 

with the visual field makes possible the definition of urban visual scenes in terms of geometry 

and visual sensitivity. In that sense, only the zone of the visual field where chromatic distinction 

is possible has been considered for the study: 30° to the top and 40° to the bottom (Panero and 

Zelnik. 2007), as shown in Figure 2. 

 

For all said above, the urban scene is configured by three zones which vision is outlined by the 

limits of the visual field. This is a definition valid for any urban scene, even though depending on 

the context, the proportion of each zone can be different. Apart from this, the context also 

determines the luminosity of each zone, among other factors such as daylight availability 

(Compagnon, 2004) and materials (Rosso et al., 2015). In this study, it is assumed that the 

defined zones (pavements, façades and sky) can be separately described in terms of brightness 

because each of them can be considered uniform on average. As a consequence, the 

assessment of urban scenes appears as an addition of weighted zones in terms of luminance 

and proportion in the field of vision. 

 

1.2 Brightness and luminance 
 

The combination of zones with different luminance in a visual scene can result in a source of 

contrast. The human visual system has a capacity of adaptation to a wide range of luminance 

values from very low to high values (10
-7

 - 10
6
 cd/m

2
), and once adapted, the eye can cope with 

a luminance range of 1:1.000 (Jacobs, 2004). But if these values are located in the same scene 

or consecutive scenes with a little time interval between them, an excessive contrast can be 

produced. Besides, the same value of luminance is perceived in a different way depending on 

the surrounding values, as a consequence of simultaneous contrast. Here lies the difference 

between luminance and brightness: while luminance is referred to a physical value, brightness 

is the used term to express the sensation perceived by the observer, affected by aspects such 

as simultaneity. 

 

Brightness in urban scenes is very important because the composition of the image can cause 

contrast in the same scene or between different ones. In environments with direct sunlight, 



 

 

 

161 

ACE©  AÑO 11, núm.32, OCTUBRE 2016 | A DIGITAL IMAGE PROCESSING METHOD FOR URBAN SCENES BRIGHTNESS 

ASSESSMENT 

Judit Lopez-Besora, Antoni Isalgué y Helena Coch 

surfaces show a shaded and a sunlit area with a large luminance difference, causing a strong 

contrast. In addition, when passing from a shaded street to a sunny one or from the exterior to 

the interior of a building, the consequence regarding contrast is similar (Lopez-Besora et al., 

2016). If average values of luminance are attributed to pavements, façades and sky, it seems 

possible to establish the visual appearance of the urban scene in terms of brightness. 

 

The proposed method of brightness assessment in street view situations precisely tackles the 

distribution of different brightness surfaces within observers’ visual field. Digital images 

physically represent this framework and at the same time contain valuable light information in 

their pixels. The combination of these two factors makes the analysis of digital images an 

efficient tool to assess the appearance of urban scenes as seen by pedestrians. 

 

2. Methodology 

 

The aim of the study was the weighting in terms of light of a different zones urban scene. The 

existing procedures of image processing such as HDR (Howlett et al., 2007; Inanici, 2010; 

Thanachareonkit et al., 2011) and other image based methodologies (Demers, 2006; Inanici, 

2006) provide information about the composition, distribution and values of light in a defined 

context. All of them conceive the image as a whole, offering a map of light distribution in the 

picture translated to luminance or lightness data. However, the introduction of the three zones 

division and the description of each zone in terms of luminance were considered more 

interesting for this specific analysis. It led to the conception of an assessment methodology 

consisting of an image processing software developed by the authors, in which the information 

on the luminosity is obtained in the defined zones from digital images and few input data. The 

source is BMP images coming from chosen environments and subsequently processed by the 

software. In the following sections, the procedure is thoroughly detailed. 

 

2.1 Choice of representative images for processing 
 

The depiction of the urban scene is performed by the choice of images taken with this specific 

purpose. Although the analysed pictures do not require complex technical requirements, some 

considerations must be taken into account before starting the process. 

 

As for the content, it is preferable to choose places with a clear distinction among the 

aforementioned Zones 1 – 3: pavement, façades and sky. This distinction will be better 

analysed if it is depicted in horizontal stripes, just to replicate them later in the image with a 

horizontal pixel division. The best situation to reproduce this division is the frontal vision of 

buildings, that is to say perpendicular to the main direction of the street. As an example, images 

I.1 and I.2 (Figure 3) show the three zones distinction defined above in two cases of study; they 

were chosen for their simplicity and the ease of distinguishing the zones. The pictures were 

taken with the intention of analysing the whole image and their corresponding sky, façades and 

pavement areas. As for the mentioned zones, the division can be easily made in the selected 

pictures, even though some elements interfere and dilute the boundaries between areas. 

Despite this, the analysis of real situations serves as a test for the image processing procedure. 

 



 

 

 

162 

ACE©  AÑO 11, núm.32, OCTUBRE 2016 | A DIGITAL IMAGE PROCESSING METHOD FOR URBAN SCENES BRIGHTNESS 

ASSESSMENT 

Judit Lopez-Besora, Antoni Isalgué y Helena Coch 

Figure 3. Three zones division in images I.1 and I.2 

 
Source: authors. Self-elaboration of the results 

 

It is important that the images represent urban scenes in an outdoor scenario clearly 

recognisable. In that sense, the MIT image scenes recognition procedure
2
 analyses a given 

image in an online application and makes a prediction about the type of environment, semantic 

categories and sun scene attributes. This procedure was carried out with pictures I.1 and I.2, 

and the results provided a recurrent definition of outdoor environments with sun scene attributes 

of natural light, open area, pavement, trees, asphalt, direct sun and no horizon, characteristic of 

urban environments. 

 

Once the location is decided and prior to taking the pictures, some technical requirements have 

to be considered; these requirements are not mandatory but advisable. The focal length of 

pictures should be short in order to expand the vision of the environment and reproduce as well 

as possible the visual scene. A focal length between 18 and 35 mm is recommended. Other 

parameters such as shutter speed, lens aperture and ISO speed depend on the light 

characteristics of the environment, and do not interfere in the results of the image processing. In 

the examples of images I.1 and I.2 (Table 1), the photometric parameters were suggested by 

the camera for an ISO speed 200 and a focal length of 18 mm (the pictures were taken with a 

digital camera Canon EOS 350D). 

 

Table 1. Photometric parameters of images I.1 and I.2 

 Focal 

length 

Shutter 

speed 

Aperture ISO 

Image I.1 18 mm 1/320 f/11 200 

Image I.2 18 mm 1/400 f/11 200 

Source: authors. Self-elaboration of the results 

 

                                                     
2
 http://places.csail.mit.edu/demo.html 

 

http://places.csail.mit.edu/demo.html


 

 

 

163 

ACE©  AÑO 11, núm.32, OCTUBRE 2016 | A DIGITAL IMAGE PROCESSING METHOD FOR URBAN SCENES BRIGHTNESS 

ASSESSMENT 

Judit Lopez-Besora, Antoni Isalgué y Helena Coch 

For all said above, it can be deduced that any standard digital image can be used for 

processing as long as the framing includes the zones of the urban scene in a frontal view. 

 

2.2 Processing software and input data 
 

Using images from real environments was intended for brightness assessment in urban scenes 

as a whole and its zones separately. With this purpose in mind, the authors developed a 

software which extracts light data from the pixels within an image. In broad terms, it converts 

RGB information of each pixel in a number comparable to its luminosity. The software considers 

a range of luminosity from 0 to 765, where 0 corresponds to no luminosity (black) and 765 is the 

addition of the maximum value of red, green and blue (255 x 3). After the analysis of every 

single pixel, the software provides comprehensive information about the image composition in 

terms of luminosity. The software performs this operation for the whole image and for specific 

parts previously defined by the user. 

 

Images must be located in the same folder of the software and converted to a BMP format. 

Then, the user can run it and follow the instructions. The software is able to recognise the 

resolution of the image (in pixels) but the mentioned three zones division is required; that is, the 

number of pixels of each horizontal division counted from the bottom of the image. This division 

reproduces the horizontal bands corresponding to pavement, façades and sky zones (Zones 1 – 

3).  In the cases of study, images I.1 and I.2 had a resolution of 3456 x 2304 pixels, and the 

division of each zone is shown in Table 2. 

 

Table 2. Horizontal pixel division of images I.1 and I.2 

 First y division Second y division 

Image I.1 924 1.521 

Image I.2 711 1.564 

Source: authors. Self-elaboration of the results 

 

If no other input is provided, the software converts the RGB information of each pixel in unitless 

light data. However, if luminance measurements are carried out at the same time the pictures 

were taken, this information can be used as a reference to turn the output data into cd/m
2
 units. 

If it is the case, the software asks for the coordinates of a reference pixel (x, y) as well as its 

luminance value in cd/m
2
. Table 3 shows the position and luminance value of the reference 

pixel in images I.1 and I.2. 

 

Table 3. Position and reference luminance of images I.1 and I.2 

 Ref. pixel coordinates (x, y) Reference luminance (cd/m
2
) 

Image I.1 (2.048, 881) 13.460 

Image I.2 (1.827, 1194) 15.900 

Source: authors. Self-elaboration of the results 

 

In the cases of study, the reference luminance value was measured at the same time the 

pictures were taken. In both cases a point located in a surface with uniform colour and texture 

was chosen in order to easily identify it in the picture. 



 

 

 

164 

ACE©  AÑO 11, núm.32, OCTUBRE 2016 | A DIGITAL IMAGE PROCESSING METHOD FOR URBAN SCENES BRIGHTNESS 

ASSESSMENT 

Judit Lopez-Besora, Antoni Isalgué y Helena Coch 

 

2.3 Output data 

 

After introducing the input data and running the software, the system generates a .dat file with 

the information extracted from the image. It is presented as text, and the information provided 

corresponds to the whole image and the zones defined by the user in the input data. The output 

file provides the dimensions of the picture, the position of the pixel division, the coordinates of 

the calibration point along with the reference luminance, and the number of pixels contained in 

each zone defined by the division. After this synthesis of information about the picture, light data 

is provided. First, the values for the whole image of these parameters: average luminance (in 

cd/m
2
 and 0-765); standard deviation (in cd/m

2
 and 0-765); maximum and minimum luminance 

(in cd/m
2
 and 0-765). Then, the same light data is given for Zones 1 – 3 (average luminance, 

standard deviation, maximum and minimum luminance). The software also calculates de ratio 

between standard deviation and average value for each zone of the visual scene. 

3. Results and Discussion 

After the implementation of the software in Images I.1 and I.2, a list of results is obtained. The 

.dat file provides light data in a 0-765 scale and luminance values for Zones 1 – 3, as said 

above. The results are organized in Table 4, only with luminance values, and are graphically 

shown in Figure 4. 

 

Table 4. Luminance output data 

  

Average 

luminance 

(cd/m
2
) 

Standard 

deviation 

(cd/m
2
) 

L max 

(cd/m
2
) 

L min 

(cd/m
2
) 

Image I.1 

Zone 1 10.246,6 2.248,9 16.501,4 1.445,2 

Zone 2 7.544,3 2.983,6 15.315,0 539,2 

Zone 3 4.631,4 3.462,5 15.056,2 301,9 

Total image 7.638,1 3.819,6 16.501,4 301,9 

Image I.2 

Zone 1 8.945,2 3.345,9 15.372,8 167,1 

Zone 2 6.766,9 4.649,9 18.263,5 119,3 

Zone 3 8.189,1 3.397,4 17.260,8 143,2 

Total image 7.895,9 4.000,7 18.263,5 119,3 

Source: authors. Self-elaboration of the results 



 

 

 

165 

ACE©  AÑO 11, núm.32, OCTUBRE 2016 | A DIGITAL IMAGE PROCESSING METHOD FOR URBAN SCENES BRIGHTNESS 

ASSESSMENT 

Judit Lopez-Besora, Antoni Isalgué y Helena Coch 

Figure 4. Images I.1 and I.2 and luminance results obtained in Zones 1, 2 and 3 (average 

luminance and standard deviation in cd/m
2
) 

 
 

Source: authors. Self-elaboration of the results 

 

The results from the analysed images allow a discussion about the validity of the urban scenes 

brightness assessment method, while the values obtained in the examples depict the vision of 

the city in specific environments under sunlight. The methodology has proven easy to use for 

any picture as long as the image clearly represents the zones in the urban scene. As the 

software divides the image in horizontal stripes, the selected images must represent as 

accurately as possible the zones in such composition. Nevertheless, if foreshortened scenes 

are depicted, the values of pavement, façades and sky can be mixed and offer a different result. 

The intention of the procedure was to characterize in terms of brightness each zone in the 

urban visual scene, and the procedure is an easy and useful tool to determine it. However, the 

reality of urban scenes is far more complex. Although the position and main characteristics of 

these zones is constant, in real environments some elements overlap from one zone to another. 

It is not considered a disadvantage but an opportunity to determine their influence in future 

assessments. Apart from this, other considerations can be made about the results obtained in 

the pictures analysed. 

 

In the first image (I.1), the values of average luminance increase from the top to the bottom. At 

the same time, the trend of the standard deviation value is the inverse: it increases from the 

bottom to the top of the scene. In this case, there is a uniform pavement surface made of light 



 

 

 

166 

ACE©  AÑO 11, núm.32, OCTUBRE 2016 | A DIGITAL IMAGE PROCESSING METHOD FOR URBAN SCENES BRIGHTNESS 

ASSESSMENT 

Judit Lopez-Besora, Antoni Isalgué y Helena Coch 

concrete with only a small area which contains the shadows of trees darkening this zone. 

Above, the zone with the main façade has a white surface partially sunlit and shaded, and a 

dark area corresponding to the entrance court and porch. On average, this zone is darker than 

the pavement caused by the simultaneous existence of sun and shade surfaces, which also 

produces a higher standard deviation. Finally, the sky zone is darkened by the vision of trees, 

which have a much lower luminance than the rest of the elements in the scene. If no trees were 

present in this environment, a brighter and more uniform zone would be expected to appear. 

The maximum luminance values within the image were found in the pavements zone, while the 

minimum ones were located in the sky zone. The effect of trees in this environment is key to the 

visual outcome, as it offers the possibility of darkening an expected bright area, the sky. Apart 

from this, vegetation gives rise to the presence of shadow in the scene, which has visual but 

also thermal consequences in the environment (Rojas et al., 2015). 

 

The second image (I.2) represents another kind of environment. A very bright façade is 

preceded by a dark grey wall that configures the entrance to a court. In this case, a mass of 

vegetation is also present in the scene, even though in this case it does not cover the sky zone. 

Here, the presence of the sky is higher than in the previous example and the brighter zone is 

still the pavement. However, the absence of trees in the upper part of the scene increases the 

luminance value in Zone 3 with respect to image I.1. The progression of average luminance and 

standard deviation from the bottom to the top of image I.2 follows the same pattern of I.1, but 

the difference lies on the row of trees in I.1 which modify this trend, darkening the Zone 3 and 

increasing standard deviation. Without the presence of trees, the second scene shows a C-

shape pattern in terms of average luminance values. 

 

In both cases, the results of average luminance and standard deviation in pavements depict it 

as the brightest and most uniform zone of the urban visual scene. In general terms, the bottom 

of the scene is usually covered by fewer elements than other zones such as façades and for 

that reason it seems to be more homogeneous in terms of brightness. The façades zone, 

however, has shown an average luminance lower than the bottom of the scene and with a 

higher standard deviation. It may be caused by the presence of more elements and irregularities 

at this level, as well as the shadows of trees, which can act as solar control systems on lower 

level façades (Villalba et al., 2014). A higher standard deviation in façades would indicate that 

there is more dispersion of pixels with different value than the other zones. No further 

information is provided about the distribution of these pixels in this zone and the whole scene, 

which could indicate a concentrated or disperse distribution of light patches in the scene. As for 

the top of the scene, it has been stated above the difference between images I.1 and I.2 

concerning the presence of vegetation in the urban scene. The row of trees contributes to 

darken the top of the scene and introduces light and shade patches in this zone. 

 

The position of the different sensitivity areas in the visual field of a moving observer, in relation 

with the zones in the urban visual scene, reveals that the brighter zones are located in the 

periphery. As a consequence, the point of focus of the observer is located in Zone 2, facing the 

façades. Nonetheless, is has to be pointed out that when we are walking, the vision is usually 

focused on the pavement, for security reasons. Since it has proved to be the brightest zone in 

the visual scene, pavements are expected to be an important zone in urban design. 

 



 

 

 

167 

ACE©  AÑO 11, núm.32, OCTUBRE 2016 | A DIGITAL IMAGE PROCESSING METHOD FOR URBAN SCENES BRIGHTNESS 

ASSESSMENT 

Judit Lopez-Besora, Antoni Isalgué y Helena Coch 

4. Conclusion 

The procedure has been tested in two images corresponding to Mediterranean sunlit 

environments. The definition of the urban visual scene in three zones has shown some benefits. 

First, the simplicity of the abstraction seems useful for a rough definition of urban scenes as a 

composition of zones. In addition, this distinction permits future assessments in order to 

establish the brightness of each zone. Besides, the analysis has shown the main characteristics 

of them, successfully integrating the complexity of a real environment. 

 

As for the results obtained in the cases of study, it seems that there is a trend in the values 

offered by the software for a Mediterranean city. First of all, the pavement appears as the 

brightest and more uniform zone in the urban visual scene. Second, the façades zone shows its 

complexity with lower average luminance than pavements and higher standard deviation. As for 

the top of the scene, both cases showed different results, even though the presence of trees 

seems to be the decisive factor on darkening the top of the visual field. A composition with 

treetops turns the top of the scene into the darkest zone, while its absence completely changes 

the vision of the scene, which would be expected to show a configuration similar to image I.2. 

As a consequence, the sky zone without obstructions would be slightly darker than pavements. 

 

To sum up, the method tested in this work has proven a useful tool to assess brightness in 

urban scenes where the chosen images and environments depict a particular city and context. 

The results have shown a trend in the distribution of brightness in the given scene where 

pavements play an important role. 

 

Acknowledgments 

This work has been supported by the Spanish Ministry of Economy under project code: 

BIA2013-45597-R. 

 

References 

 

ALEXANDER, E.R. et al. Density Measures: A review. In: Journal of Architectural and Planning 

Research, 10 (3): 181-102, 1993. 

 

BAKER, N.V. et al. Daylighting in Architecture: A European Reference Book. London, James & 

James, 1993. 380 p. 

 

BERGDOLL, J.R. and WILLIAMS R.W. Density Perception on Residential Streets. In: Berkeley 

Planning Journal, 5 (1): 15-38, 1990. 

 

BERGHAUSER PONT, M. and HAUPT, P. Spacematrix. Space, Density and Urban Form. 

Rotterdam, NAi Publishers, 2010. 304 p. 

 

CHENG, V. Understanding density and high density. In: NG, E. Designing High-Density Cities 

for Social & Environmental Sustainability. London, Routledge, 2009. pp. 3-17. 

 



 

 

 

168 

ACE©  AÑO 11, núm.32, OCTUBRE 2016 | A DIGITAL IMAGE PROCESSING METHOD FOR URBAN SCENES BRIGHTNESS 

ASSESSMENT 

Judit Lopez-Besora, Antoni Isalgué y Helena Coch 

COMPAGNON, R. Solar and daylight availability in the urban fabric. In: Energy and Buildings, 

36: 321-328, 2004. 

 

CURRELI, A. and COCH, H. Urban layout and façade solar potential: a case study in the 

Mediterranean Region. In: ACE: Architecture, City and Environment, 7 (21), 117-132, 2013. 

 

DEMERS, C.M.H. Assessing light in architecture: a numerical procedure for a qualitative and 

quantitative analysis. In: Proceedings of the International Lighting Conference, Associazione 

Italiana di Illuminazione (AIDI), CIE (Comission internationale de l’Éclairage) (2006, Venise, 

Italia). 

 

GRANZIER, J.M.J. and VALSECCHI, M. Variations in daylight as a contextual cue for 

estimating season, time of day, and weather conditions. In: Journal of Vision, 14 (1) 22: 1-23, 

2014. 

 

HOWLETT, O. et al. Scoping Study for Daylight Metrics from Luminance Maps. In: Leukos, 3 

(3): 201-215, 2007. 

 

INANICI, M.N. Evaluation of high Dynamic Range Image-Based Sky Models in Lighting 

Simulation. In: Leukos, 07 (2): 69-84, 2010. 

 

INANICI, M.N. Evaluation of high dynamic range photography as a luminance data acquisition 

system. In: Lighting Res. Technol. 38 (2): 123-136, 2006. 

 

JACOBS, A. SynthLight Handbook. Chapter 1: Fundamentals. London, 2004. Electronic 

resource. [Consultation data: 05 April 2016]. Available in: <http://www.new-

learn.info/packages/synthlight/handbook/doc/chapter1.pdf> 

 

LAM, M.C. Sunlight as formgiver for architecture. New York, Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1986. 464 

p. 

 

LOPEZ-BESORA, J. et al. Daylight Management in Mediterranean Cities: When Shortage Is Not 

the Issue. In: Energies, 9, 753, 1-12, 2016. 

 

LYNCH, K. The image of the city. 1
st
 edition. Cambridge, The M.I.T Press, 1960. 194 p. 

 

MORGANTI, M. et al. The effect of urban obstructions in mediterranean climates: built form 

typology, density and energy. In: ACE: Architecture, City and Environment, 7 (19): 13-26, 2012. 

 

PANERO, J. and ZELNIK, M. Las dimensiones humanas en los espacios interiores. Barcelona, 

Gustavo Gili, 2007. 320 p. 

 

RAPOPORT, A. Redefinition of density. In: Environment and Behavior, 2 (7): 133-158, 1975. 

 

ROJAS, G.M. et al. La vegetación en el confort micro climático. Comparación de especies del 

clima mediterráneo de Barcelona, España. In: ACE: Architecture, City and Environment, 10 

(29): 59-84, 2015. 



 

 

 

169 

ACE©  AÑO 11, núm.32, OCTUBRE 2016 | A DIGITAL IMAGE PROCESSING METHOD FOR URBAN SCENES BRIGHTNESS 

ASSESSMENT 

Judit Lopez-Besora, Antoni Isalgué y Helena Coch 

 

ROSSO, F. et al. Outdoor thermal and visual perception of natural cool materials for roof and 

urban paving. In: Procedia Engineering, 118: 1325-1332, 2015. 

 

STRØMANN-ANDERSEN, J. et al. The urban canyon and building energy use: Urban density 

versus daylight and passive solar gains. In: Energy and Buildings, 43 (8): 2011-2020, 2011. 

 

THANACHAREONKIT, A. et al. Digital Camera for Continuous Luminance Mapping for 

Daylighting Performance Assessment. In: Proceedings CISBAT 2011. Lausanne, Switzerland, 

2011. pp. 485-490. 

 

VILLALBA, A. et al. An approach to urban tree daylight permeability simulation using models 

based on louvers. In: Building and Environment, 73: 75-87, 2014. 

 

ZACHARIAS, J. and STAMPS, A. Perceived building density as a function of layout. In: 

Perceptual and Motor Skills, 98: 777-784, 2004. 



 

 

 

170 

ACE©  AÑO 11, núm.32, OCTUBRE 2016 | A DIGITAL IMAGE PROCESSING METHOD FOR URBAN SCENES BRIGHTNESS 

ASSESSMENT 

Judit Lopez-Besora, Antoni Isalgué y Helena Coch 

 


