























































Template and Instructions for Preparation of Full Paper for PLEA 2007


PLEA2012 - 28th Conference, Opportunities, Limits & Needs Towards an environmentally responsible architecture Lima, Perú 7-9 November 2012 

 

 

Solar Potential on Roofs: 
An Index for Different Urban Layouts 

 

ALESSANDRA CURRELI
1
, HELENA COCH ROURA, ALEXIS AGUILAR SÁNCHEZ

1
 

 
1
Architectural Building Department, School of Architecture of Barcelona– Polytechinic University of Catalonia (UPC), 

Barcelona, Spain 

 

 

 
ABSTRACT: Volumetric distribution of the built form really affects the capability of an urban environment to integrate 

renewable energy, with specific regard to active and passive use of solar radiation collected by the building envelope. The 

solar potential of a generic surface does not directly correspond to the energy received, but is related to the effective 

possibilities for exploitation. 

This study deals with defining an index of horizontal solar collection which expresses the amount of direct solar radiation 

received by roofs compared to the corresponding overall gross floor area of an urban block. This parameter represents a 

significant tool in assessing the efficiency of different types of buildings with regard to technical use of solar gains.  

The proportion between height and the plan of a building assumes a crucial role. The comparative analysis presented 

here seeks to examine the relationship between slenderness and potential of an urban block to match its overall domestic 

hot water through solar gains. The results allow formulation of early considerations about the most appropriate 

distribution of horizontal and vertical exposure surfaces and about the combination of active and passive use of solar 

energy. 

Keywords: index of horizontal solar collection, domestic hot water demand, urban block, slenderness 

 

 

INTRODUCTION  

On the one hand, rapid increase of urban population and 

scarcity of available land sources are progressively 

leading to high density living settlements and to 

concentration of energy consumption in small areas [1]. 

On the other hand, forthcoming depletion of fossil fuels 

and the pressure to reduce CO2 emissions requires 

exploitation of alternatives renewable sources. Energy 

provided by the sun offers great opportunities for both 

passive use and active applications, such as photovoltaic 

and thermal conversion systems. Nevertheless, a frequent 

problem in dense urban areas is the lack of surface area 

available and suitable for installing appropriate technical 

devices to convert solar radiation into thermal and 

electrical energy [2], i.e. the roofs. Within the urban 

fabric, buildings are often not able to meet their own 

energy requirements only through solar contribution and 

additional mechanical installations are therefore required 

to achieve recommended comfort conditions.  
 

In fact, the real solar potential of a generic urban 

surface (a façade, a roof, a public space) does not directly 

correspond to the solar gain amounts, but it should be 

related to effective possibilities for exploiting energy 

received to satisfy energy demand: it is not simply a 

matter of quantity, but also of quality. In other words, 

when evaluating the solar potential of an urban block, 

energy balance between consumption and collection has 

to be taken into account. 

Morphological structure of the urban fabric is 

recognized as one of the key factors in determining 

overall energy performance [3,4,5]. For a given building 

density, volumetric distribution and geometric properties 

of the built form can change significantly and affect 

capacity to gain and lose energy in very different ways 

[6]. Several previous studies focused attention on urban 

canyon geometry with regard to daylight and sunlight 

access on façades [7], while less interest has been paid to 

urban form with regard to possible exploitation of solar 

energy on roofs. An interesting research study by Cheng 

et al. relates vertical randomness and site coverage in a 

building cluster to solar potential [8]. This study 

indicates further investigation issues concerning vertical 

and horizontal proportions of an urban block and energy 

performance. 

 

High or Low-Rise Buildings? 

The problem of “best height” of an urban building has 

been a matter of discussion throughout the entire 

twentieth century and continues being a subject of debate 

to this day. Although at the beginning, economic, social 

and hygiene needs represented the most importance 

issues [9], over the last decades, attention shifted to 

environmental and energy implications of a vertical 



PLEA2012 - 28th Conference, Opportunities, Limits & Needs Towards an environmentally responsible architecture Lima, Perú 7-9 November 2012 

 

development. On the one hand, multi-storey blocks 

disperse less energy per square meter of floor area than a 

detached lower building [10], since they have less 

exposed wall area and roof heat-loss [11]. On the other 

hand, additional energy is required by higher buildings to 

run lifts and mechanical conditioning systems providing 

internal comfort [12].  
 

What, therefore, is the “best height” for an urban 

block? This topic is quite complex, due to several 

interacting variables to consider and the debate remains 

open. Both high and low-rise developments, in fact, 

provide benefits and disadvantages in terms of energy 

performance and land occupation. The capacity of a 

building to match energy needs and solar gains 

represents an important aspect to consider in providing a 

more exhaustive answer. In other words, it is not simply 

a problem of height and relative consumption, but rather 

concerns volumetric proportions of the block with regard 

to overall energy balance. Therefore, the previous 

question could be reformulated as follows: “Which type 

of building would potentially be able to satisfy energy 

demand by means of its own solar gains?”. According to 

Lynch, the type is understood as the relationship between 

height and footprint of a building [13]. 
 

This work deals with study of volumetric proportions 

of an urban block with regard to its potential to satisfy 

thermal energy consumption for domestic hot water 

through solar energy collected on roofs. The main 

purpose is to evaluate the performance of different urban 

layouts, by comparing their index of roof solar potential 

to predicted demand, in order to define the most energy 

efficient volumetric distribution for an urban block. The 

concept of slenderness is introduced as a useful 

parameter to define the proportion between height and 

plan of the built mass with regard to horizontal and 

vertical surfaces available for solar exposure. 

 

 

METHODOLOGY 

This paper is based on analysis of existing urban case 

studies. All input data used (geometrical characteristics 

of built volumes, population density, domestic hot water 

demand, solar gains) refer, as far as possible, to the real 

state with a very small approximation. Proceeding from 

the singular and unique aspects of each specific situation, 

a progressive process of abstraction permits discovering 

and understanding general common trends, without 

discarding the importance of specifics in a real urban 

context.  
 

The research implementation is expressed in 4 main 

steps which are indicated and explained in the following 

subsections.  

 
 

Selection of Case Studies and Calculation of 

Slenderness 

Adequate samples of 4 different urban patterns within a 

given FAR (Floor Area Ratio) values range were chosen 

in the urban area of Barcelona, Spain (Fig. 1): A) 

Eixample, B) Gracia, C) Barri Gotic and D) Poble Sec. 

 

 

 
 

Fig .1: The four selected urban fabric samples and, in evidence, 

the blocks analysed 
 

 

As the Fig.1 shows, the analysis always refers to the 

central block. Table 1 reports basic morphological 

indicators of selected configurations, defined according 

to the Spacecalculator [14]. For each of them, the 

slenderness coefficient (S) is also calculated. 

 

 
Table 1: Morphological features and slenderness coefficients of 

the central blocks 

 

    Case A Case B Case C Case D 

Floor Area Ratio FAR 3.12 2.65 3.64 3.05 

Height (m) h 14.64 9.26 14.13 17.41 

Floor number  L 5 3 5 6 

Average plan 

surface area (m
2
) 

S0 10857 3304 3252 3606 

Overall floor 

surface area (m
2
) 

F 54285 9912 16260 21636 

Slenderness  S  0.24 0.27 0.40 0.45 

 

 

Slenderness is one of the main parameters that 

describe the form of the building, providing an idea of 

general volumetric proportions, with specific regard to 



PLEA2012 - 28th Conference, Opportunities, Limits & Needs Towards an environmentally responsible architecture Lima, Perú 7-9 November 2012 

 

vertical and horizontal development. More specifically, it 

is defined as the ratio of height (h) to the average surface 

area of the plan (S0) of a building, the latter being 

expressed as the radius of an equivalent circular surface 

area that is a linear magnitude [15]. The slenderness 

coefficient is, therefore, an a-dimensional value 

calculated using the following formula: 

  

S = h/(S0/π+h
2
)½                             (1) 

 

The lighting and thermal effects concerning this 

formal property can seriously affect the global solar 

potential of a building or an urban block. In principle, for 

the same built volume, higher values of slenderness 

should provide better conditions for passive use of 

daylight and sunlight, thanks to great extension of 

façades and to minimization of the central floor areas 

with no direct radiation. On the contrary, lower values of 

S should enhance active exploitation of solar energy, as a 

result of the larger collection surface on roofs. 

 

Assessment of Roof Solar Potential  

Roof solar potential refers to the month of December 

which has the lowest level of irradiation in the entire 

year. Solar analysis is implemented by means of 

Heliodon2 [16], a simulation software which provides 

data about cumulative distribution of solar energy 

collected by the building envelope, taking into account 

the influence of surrounding obstructions. The Heliodon2 

calculation model is relatively simple as it assumes 

isotropic sky conditions and reflections and emissions 

from other surfaces are not considered. This means that 

data input and calculation costs are significantly reduced 

and information provided by the program is not totally 

diagnostic, but contains potential values that are very 

useful for comparative and qualitative analysis. 

Nevertheless, it is possible to obtain more realistic 

information by adjusting the theoretical values of 

horizontal solar radiation with experimental data 

measured in an open surface [17]. The ratio between 

these two numbers allows for definition of a correction 

factor (%) to apply to potential results provided by 

Heliodon2. In this work, the weather database available 

on the Energy Plus web-site were used [18].  
 

The index of horizontal solar collection (Ih) of a 

building expresses the amount of solar radiation 

potentially available to satisfy overall energy 

requirements. More precisely, it is defined as the ratio of 

energy collected by roofs to gross floor area (F). It is 

important to specify that block height within selected 

portions of urban texture is relatively constant so that 

shadows cast by surrounding obstructions on roofs are 

not remarkable. The values of Ih regarding selected case 

studies are listed in Table 2. 
 
 
 

Table 2: Energy gains and index of horizontal solar collection 

 

    Case A Case B Case C Case D 

Solar energy gains 

(kWh/m
2
) 

Ip 12.35 13.14 16.19 13.04 

Index of horizontal 

solar potential 

(kWh/m
2
) 

Ih 2.55 4.25 3.24 2.20 

 

 

Assessment of Energy Load for Domestic Hot Water  

Energy demand for domestic hot water depends on the 

number of people living in a building, on their habits and 

on the type of sanitary installations. Estimation of needs 

is normally approximated considering average daily 

amount of litres/person at a given temperature. In this 

research study, data from a national statistical study 

about Spanish residential habits were taken into account, 

i.e. daily consumption (cw) of 46 litres/person with a 

supply temperature of 45°C [19]. The water is assumed 

to flow into the public network at 12°C, so that the 

difference of temperature (δT ) to compensate is 33°C. 
 

Firstly, values of cw and δT led to finding individual 

daily thermal consumption, namely 1.76 kWh/day/inhab. 

In order to calculate monthly thermal energy demand 

(Qm) in the various case studies, it was then necessary to 

multiply the individual consumption by the days of the 

month and by the actual number of inhabitants of each 

block [20].  

 

 
Table 3:Real population data of the reference urban  blocks  

 

    Case A Case B Case C Case D 

Inhabitants number  - 687 161 292 445 

Population density 

(inhab/ha) 
- 130 158 191 213 

 

 

Comparison of Potential Thermal Energy Produced 

by Solar Source and Predicted Consumption 
The amount of solar radiation effectively converted into 

thermal energy mostly depends on technological 

characteristics and on inclination of the solar collectors 

installed on roofs. In this research study, different types 

of thermal panels were analysed with tilt angles of 30° 

and 60° (Table 4): the first angle provides the highest 

yearly efficiency, the second is ideal for the winter 

season. To obtain unit energy production (E30 and E60) 

associated with each block analysed, the previously 

calculated values of Ih were corrected by the efficiency 

(η) of the various systems: a) single selective glass 

covered panels; b) double selective glass covered panels; 

c) evacuated-tube heat-pipes. 



PLEA2012 - 28th Conference, Opportunities, Limits & Needs Towards an environmentally responsible architecture Lima, Perú 7-9 November 2012 

 

In order to compare predicted requirements to potential 

supply, defining unit thermal energy demand (Qu) was 

necessary, which is obtained simply by dividing overall 

demand (Qm) by floor area (F). 

 

 
Table 4: Comparison between unit energy demand and unit 

energy production associated with different solar collection 

systems 

 

  

Solar 

system 

η 
(%) Case A Case B Case C Case D 

Qu 
(kWh/m

2
) 

- - 0.71 0.86 1.04 1.16 

E30 
(kWh/m

2
) 

a 35 0.75 2.32 1.07 0.71 

b 44 0.94 2.92 1.34 0.90 

c 43 0.92 2.85 1.31 0.88 

E60 
(kWh/m

2
) 

a 40 0.86 1.73 1.22 0.82 

b 50 1.07 2.16 1.53 1.02 

c 49 1.05 2.12 1.50 1.00 

 

 

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
 

Slenderness and Solar Potential 

Slenderness coefficients calculated by (1) firstly allow 

splitting the 4 examples into two groups: A and B,  with 

values of 0.24 and 0.27 respectively, could be considered 

slenderness cases; C and D with 0.41 and 0.45, are 

instead classified as medium-high slenderness 

conditions. Solar performances of cases in the same 

category are supposedly similar. In principle, for lower 

slenderness coefficients, higher values of Ih are expected, 

due to the reasons explained in the previous section.  

 

Actually, the results only partially prove this 

assumption: the index of horizontal solar collection 

effectively changes in inverse proportion to slenderness, 

but with the clear exception of Case A (see the graph in 

Fig. 2); in fact, although it has the lowest slenderness 

value, it provides very little roof solar potential. 

Therefore, contrary to what was supposed, cases A and B 

in the same slenderness class do not demonstrate 

analogous behaviour: the Ih of the latter (B) is almost 

twice that of the first one (A): 4.25 vs. 2.55.  

 
Figure 2: The relationship between index of horizontal solar 

collection (y axis) and slenderness (x axis) 

 

 

Further examination of B, C and D makes it evidence 

that the plans have quite similar average surface areas in 

all 3 cases (between 3200 and 3600 m
2
): variation of 

solar potential is therefore mainly attributable to the 

number of levels (L). Parametric verification effectively 

confirms that the index of horizontal solar collection only 

depends on height, but it is not definitely affected by 

average surface area of the plan of the block. 

 The graph in Fig. 3 relates values of Ih to height of 

the block. The curve progress can be substantially 

approximated to a power function: Ih decreases slowlier 

according to height increase of the building, tending to 

zero for values of h growing towards infinity. 

 

 

 
Figure 3: Relationship between index of horizontal solar 

collection (y axis) and height (x axis) of the urban block 

 

 

The irregular position of point C in the curve 

probably depends on roughness of the roof surface: in 

fact, in a real urban block, the shadows cast by lift and 

stair towers, chimneys or other technical volumes can 

truly affect roof solar potential. In case C (Barri Gotic), 

the influence of these obstructions is definitely less 

considerable than in others, as the 20% increase in the 

solar gains demonstrates (see Table 2). This performance 

is ascribable to another general characteristic defining the 

A 

B 

C 

D 

0.00 

0.50 

1.00 

1.50 

2.00 

2.50 

3.00 

3.50 

4.00 

4.50 

0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25 0.30 0.35 0.40 0.45 0.50 0.55 

Ih  (kWh/m2) 

B 

C 

A D 

y = 42.06x-1.018 

R² = 0.9001 
0.00 

0.50 

1.00 

1.50 

2.00 

2.50 

3.00 

3.50 

4.00 

4.50 

0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 

Ih  (kWh/m2) 



PLEA2012 - 28th Conference, Opportunities, Limits & Needs Towards an environmentally responsible architecture Lima, Perú 7-9 November 2012 

 

building form, namely the compactness. This parameter 

effectively concerns the “degree of concentration” of 

built mass, expressing the relationship between external 

envelope and volume.  

 

Energy Demand and Energy Production 

As predicted, results clearly show that unit thermal 

energy demand strictly depends on population density of 

the block, in other words, on capacity to accommodate a 

certain type of dwellings and a certain number of people. 

Therefore, the unit thermal energy demand is indirectly 

related to volumetric configuration of the block. The 

graph in the Fig. 4 displays a direct proportionality 

between values of Qu and both values of P and S. 

 

 

 
Figure 4: Direct proportionality among index of horizontal 

solar collection, population density (right y axis) and 

slenderness (left y axis)  

 

 

This trend could be explained as follows: a 

horizontally developed block can potentially 

accommodate less population density than a vertically 

developed block. In fact, the larger the occupation of the 

plan with respect to height, the greater the need to empty 

volume at certain points (small courtyards, patios and 

wells), in order to provide natural light and ventilation to 

interior spaces. The immediate consequence of this 

mandatory operation is progressive reduction of available 

effective living surface area. Porosity, which is one of 

the main formal characteristics of a building, seems to 

be, therefore, related to energy performance as described 

above; in fact, it essentially defines the ratio between 

solid and empty parts of its volume. As a tendency, lower 

population density and lower requirements should 

correspond to higher porosity values. 

 

 
 
Figure 5: Comparison among unit thermal energi demand and 

energy produced by single selective glass covered panels (30° 

tilt angle) and double selective glass covered panels (60° tilt 

angle) 

 

 

The graph in the Fig. 5 compares unit energy demand 

to unit energy produced by 30° tilted plate solar 

collectors with a single selective glass cover (which 

currently is one of the most common domestic 

installations) and by 60° tilted plate solar collectors with 

a double selective glass cover (which provides the best 

efficiency in the technical solutions analysed).  

 

In A and C, consumption and supply are completely 

equilibrated: the potential solar gains on the roof fit the 

energy needs for domestic hot water of the entire block 

perfectly. It is important to highlight that, although they 

belong to different classes of slenderness, these two cases 

are very similar in height, namely 5 floors. Case B 

(Gracia) performs even better than previous ones: energy 

production is almost three times greater than predicted 

demand. The remaining energy is therefore exploitable 

for other thermal applications, i.e. heating and cooling. 

Case C (Poble Sec) represents, on the other hand, the 

most unfavourable situation: here the index of horizontal 

solar collection is able to meet only half of the overall 

requirement. Of course, the unit energy production could 

be enhanced by means of more efficient solar collection 

systems, such as evacuated-tube heat-pipes or double 

selective glass covered panels and by optimizing the 

tilted angle (see Table 4). Nevertheless, despite these 

technological improvements, the energy provided would 

not completely satisfy overall thermal energy demand in 

any of the cases; this means that to achieve a minimum 

balance between solar supply and consumption 

volumetric proportions of the block need to be adjusted.  

 

Concerning this issue, it is interesting to notice that 

the Poble Sec block (D) has the greatest number of floors 

in the case studies, i.e., 6. The decrease of only one level 

would enhance a 20% increase of unit solar potential 

(from 2.20 to 2.66 kWh/m
2
), while the unit energy 

0 

20 

40 

60 

80 

100 

120 

140 

160 

180 

200 

220 

240 

260 

0.00 

0.10 

0.20 

0.30 

0.40 

0.50 

0.60 

0.70 

0.80 

0.90 

1.00 

1.10 

1.20 

1.30 

A B C D 

Qu (kWh/m2) 
S 
P (inhab/ha) 

0.00 

0.20 

0.40 

0.60 

0.80 

1.00 

1.20 

1.40 

1.60 

1.80 

2.00 

2.20 

2.40 

2.60 

A B C D 

Qu (kWh/m2) 

E30 a (kWh/m2) 

E60 b (kWh/m2) 



PLEA2012 - 28th Conference, Opportunities, Limits & Needs Towards an environmentally responsible architecture Lima, Perú 7-9 November 2012 

 

demand would remain unchanged. Under these initial 

conditions, an installation of double selective glass 

covered collectors would provide unit energy production 

of 1.17 kWh/m
2
, representing the least amount required 

to meet thermal energy needs for domestic hot water of 

the entire block. The enlargement of the average surface 

area of the plan would produce a similar qualitative 

performance, but to achieve equivalent numerical results 

a substantial modification would be required. In other 

words, to reach a minimal energy balance, the footprint 

of the plan of the block should become significantly 

greater than its current extension.  

 

 

CONCLUSIONS 

This paper sought an optimal combination between 

volumetric distribution of an urban block and solar 

performance of its cover regarding thermal energy 

production. On the one hand, the comparative analysis 

demonstrated that index of horizontal solar collection is 

in inverse proportion to the number of floors in the 

building, but it is not affected by the footprint of the plan. 

On the other hand, it has been noted that unit thermal 

energy demand is indirectly related to surface area of the 

plan or, rather, to the typology of the block and therefore 

to slenderness. Since the early stages of the design of the 

building, the thermal energy balance can be improved by 

means of formal choices which do not only affect 

potential solar gains, but might also regulate future 

consumption. Obviously, in the latter case, effects of the 

designer decisions are much more unpredictable, due to 

greater influence of subjective factors (e.g. real 

occupation, habits of users) in determining final demand. 

  

Finally, “What type of urban block is therefore able to 

match solar energy supply to energy demand?” Optimal 

volumetric proportions cannot be established in absolute 

terms for an urban block; for every specific value or class 

of slenderness, several “pairs” of height and surface area 

of the plan can be associated with different energy 

performances. The task of architects is to evaluate and 

select a combination that can provide optimal efficiency 

in terms of supply and consumption in a given climatic 

context and specific situation. The four examples 

selected showed that low and medium-rise buildings are 

generally more suitable than high-rise buildings to satisfy 

requirements and work with an autonomous solar supply 

system for domestic hot water. The threshold of 5 floors 

might be considered as the upper “limit” to match 

domestic hot water thermal demand by the solar source; 

higher buildings tend to be less appropriate for self-

reliance, due to the greater extension of gross floor area 

that requires thermal energy. The influence of the 

average surface area of the plan, instead, does not appear 

so remarkable, as it has more to do with population 

density and the corresponding energy demand, but it is 

not related to horizontal solar potential of an urban block. 

FURTHER DEVELOPMENTS 

This research was conducted through the design of 3D 

virtual models based on original characteristics of the 

blocks selected, taking into account variations and 

diversities typical of an existing urban context. If, on the 

one hand, this kind of approach makes identification of 

key factors and general trends more complex, on the 

other hand it allows for evaluation of effective influence 

of specificities and irregularities. In this case, the 

influence of formal parameters such as compactness and 

porosity would probably not have been detected through 

employment of a generic archetypal model. However, a 

parametric analysis would be helpful to develop 

systematic comparisons, for example, among different 

geographic locations. 
 

Within the European territory, in fact, the index of 

horizontal solar collection of a block can be substantially 

different from North to South latitudes, due to the 

different sun elevation angles. It would be interesting to 

check if general achievements regarding Barcelona could 

be extended to other countries. Tendentially, the higher 

the latitude, the lower should be the values of Ih and vice 

versa. This means that, if the unit thermal energy demand 

is constant, urban blocks with 5-6 floors are more 

suitable in Southern countries than in Northern ones, 

where, low-rise buildings combined with very tilted solar 

collectors would work more efficiently. 
 

A parametric approach would allow serial assessment 

of possible active and passive solar potential associated 

with different types of urban blocks in different 

locations. This simplified operative process would be 

useful, in the early stages of the project, to orient 

designer decisions towards more conscious and efficient 

settlements. However, methodological arrangements do 

not have to discard unique features and identity of the 

specific context of intervention which plays a 

determinant role, as this paper demonstrated. 
 
 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS. The authors would like to 

thank Benoit Beckers, Professor at the UTC of 

Compiègne, France for providing the Heliodon2 software 

and the report of solar radiation calculation in Barcelona.  
 

This work is supported by the Spanish MICINN 

under project ENE2009-11540.  

 
 

REFERENCES 
1. Stepehen, S.Y. Lau, (2011). Physical environment of tall 

residential buildings: the case of Hong Kong. In High-Rise 

Living in Asian Cities, eds. B. Yuen & A.G.O. Yeh, Springer 

Netherlands:  p. 25-48. 

2. Pitts, A., (2010). Energy in high-density cities. In  Designing 

high-density cities for social and environmental sustainability, 

Earthscan, London; Sterling, VA: p. 263-271. 



PLEA2012 - 28th Conference, Opportunities, Limits & Needs Towards an environmentally responsible architecture Lima, Perú 7-9 November 2012 

 

3. Knowles, R.L., (1977), Energy and Form: an Ecological 

Approach to Urban Growth, The MIT Press, Cambridge Mass.; 

London.  

4. Ratti, C., Raydan, D. and K. Steemers, (2003). Building form 

and environmental performance: archetypes, analysis and an 

arid climate, Energy and Buildings, 35, no. 1: p. 49-59.  

5. Gupta, V., (1985) 

6. Hachem, C, Athienitis and P. Fazio, (2011). Investigation of 

solar potential of housing units in different neighborhood 

designs, Energy and Buildings, 43, no. 9: p. 2262-2273.  

7. Strømann-Andersen, J. and P.A. Sattrup, (2011). The urban 

canyon and building energy use: Urban density versus daylight 

and passive solar gains, Energy and Buildings, 43, no. 8: p. 

2011-2020.  

8. Cheng, V., Steemers, K., Montovan, M. and R. Compagnon, 

(2006). Urban form, density and solar potential. In PLEA-The 

23
rd

 Conference on Passive and Low Energy Architecture, 

Geneva, CH, September 6-8. 

9. Gropius, W., (1977). Alcances de la arquitectura integral, 7ª 

edn, La Isla, Buenos Aires. 

10. Chrisomallidou, N., (2001). Guidelines for integrating 

energy conservation techniques in urban buildings. In Energy 

and climate in the urban built environment, James & James, 

London: p. 247-310 

11. Zhu, W. and R. L.H. Chiu, (2011). The planning and design 

of environmentally sustainable high-rises. In High-Rise Living 

in Asian Cities, eds. B. Yuen & A.G.O. Yeh, Springer 

Netherlands:  p. 49-64. 

12. Roaf, S., (2010). The sustainability of high density. In  

Designing high-density cities for social and environmental 

sustainability, Earthscan, London; Sterling, VA: p. 27-39. 

13. Lynch, K., (1990). Progettare la città: la qualità della 

forma urbana, Etaslibri, Milano.  

14. Berghauser Pont, M. and P. Haupt, (2010). Spacematrix. 

Space, density and urban form, NAi Publishers, Rotterdam.  

15. Serra Florensa, R. And H. Coch Roura, (1995). 

Arquitectura y energía natural, Edicions UPC, Barcelona.  

16. http://www.heliodon.net/ 

17. Merino, L., Antaluca, E., Akinoglu, B. and B. Beckers, 

(2010). Solar Energy Input Estimation for Urban Scales 

Applications. In 8
th

 International Conference on System 

Simulation in Buildings. Liege, Belgium, December 13-15. 

18. Data source: U.S. Department of Energy's Office of Energy 

Efficiency and Renewable Energy (EERE) - EnergyPlus Energy 

Simulation Software  

http://apps1.eere.energy.gov/buildings/energyplus/cfm/weather

_data.cfm  

19. Data source: Ajuntament de Barcelona - Barcelona pel 

Medi Ambient. 

 http://www.mediambient.bcn.es/cat/energia/param_cont.htm 

20. Data source: Ajuntament de Barcelona - Departament 

d'Estadística

http://www.heliodon.net/
http://apps1.eere.energy.gov/buildings/energyplus/cfm/weather_data.cfm
http://apps1.eere.energy.gov/buildings/energyplus/cfm/weather_data.cfm
http://www.mediambient.bcn.es/cat/energia/param_cont.htm

