












































Microsoft Word - PLEA_FinalPaper_ref_408.doc


PLEA 2008 - The 25th Conference on Passive and Low Energy Architecture. Dublin, Scotland, 22-24 October 2008                   1/6 

408: Adaptive comfort and climate-sensitive 
architecture: How occupants feel in their homes?                   

 
  

    Ganem1,2, C., Coch1, H., Esteves, A.2 
 

    1 ETSAB – UPC. Av. Diagonal 649, 08028. Barcelona (SPAIN)   
    2 INCIHUSA - CONICET CC.131, CP.5500. Mendoza (ARGENTINA) 

cganem@lab.cricyt.edu.ar 
 
 

ABSTRACT:  Temperate continental climates present considerable daily and seasonal temperature 
variations in a range that goes from 0-15ºC in winter and can reach up to 18-36ºC in summer with a 
low relative humidity (30-50%). These characteristics sometimes compromise architectural solutions 
but also, if climatic features are taken as design opportunities, architecture can advantage of its 
richness. Unluckily, most of existent buildings were only designed to protect from the exterior 
environment often with the help of auxiliary energy, and not to work with it in an environment friendly  
way. It is important to take into account that the way in which occupants evaluate the indoor thermal 
environment is context dependent and varies with time. That is directly related to the way occupants 
usually adapt to variations and how are their comfort expectations. With all of these in mind, the main 
issue that is addressed in this paper is to know how occupants feel in their homes. The case 
experience has been conducted through winter and summer surveys in the city of Mendoza, 
Argentina and presents interesting results related to architectural performance (previous 
measurements) and the sensitivity occupants have towards their own living environment. It is 
discovered the need to study the effect of variables such as indoor air movement and radiative 
temperature to understand even better how occupants feel in their homes and why. Only from there it 
is possible to propose sustainable solutions. 
 
Keywords:  existent buildings, passive adaptive comfort , climate-sensitive architecture. 
 

 
1. INTRODUCTION 
 
Temperate continental climates present considerable 
daily and seasonal temperature variations in a range 
that goes from 0-15ºC in winter and can reach up to 
18-36ºC in summer with a low relative humidity (30-
50%).  
 
Climate characteristics sometimes compromise 
architectural solutions but also, if climatic features are 
taken as design opportunities, architecture can 
advantage of its richness.  
 
Unluckily, most of existent buildings were only 
designed to protect from the exterior environment 
often with the help of auxiliary energy, and not to work 
with it in an environment friendly  way. 
 
As the rate of replacement of old buildings with new 
buildings is very slow, the existing building stock in 
cities will eventually be refurbished in order to reach 
certain desired "up grading" levels of comfort and 
modernity to create the necessary conditions to put 
the dwelling back into the market with an economic 
redevelopment. 
 
This modernization, however, usually leads to 
increased energy needs, which are usually covered 

by conventional, non renewable, energy resources, 
with the consequent contribution to the pollution of the 
city environment and thus, to global warming. 
 
Comfort may be defined as the sensation of complete 
physical and mental well-being. Thus defined, it is 
only to a limited extent within the control of the 
designer. The occupants’ biological, emotional and 
physical characteristics also come into play. [1]. 
 
Thermal comfort for an individual is famously 
described by ASHRAE Standard 55-2004 (non air 
conditioned buildings) [2] as ‘that condition of mind 
which expresses satisfaction with the thermal 
environment’. Sedentary people are particularly 
sensitive to local discomfort whereas those with a 
higher level of activity are less likely to complain. 
Quantitative units for local discomfort are given in ISO 
7730 [3]. 
 
It is important to take into account that the way in 
which occupants evaluate the indoor thermal 
environment is context dependent and varies with 
time. That is directly related to the way occupants 
usually adapt to variations and how are their comfort 
expectations. With all of these in mind, the main issue 
that is addressed in this paper is to know how 
occupants feel in their homes. 



PLEA 2008 - The 25th Conference on Passive and Low Energy Architecture. Dublin, Scotland, 22-24 October 2008                   2/6 
 

 
The post-occupancy evaluation (POE) is an 
increasingly important tool for the improvement of 
buildings and the evaluation of what makes energy-
efficient and sustainable buildings. [4] In the POE, the 
occupant provides a subjective measure of a building 
and acts effectively as “its” memory. [5] 
 
The answer of these questions will provide knowledge 
to nourish a climate-sensitive architecture that will 
give occupants the necessary tools (the ones each of 
them will be comfortable with) in order to enable 
passive adaptive comfort. 
 
The main objectives of this work are: 
- To work with most common single housing 
typologies in Mendoza, Argentina. (90% of existent 
urban tissue. [6]) 
-    To know thermal comfort perception of occupants. 
- To identify unsatisfied comfort needs and 
transformations that occupants have performed or 
wish to carry out to better their homes.    
- To recognize envelope flexibility opportunities 
feasible to be used in houses’ adaptation to 
occupants needs of comfort and image desires. 
 
2. METHODOLOGY  
 
The case experience has been conducted through 
winter and summer surveys in the city of Mendoza, 
Argentina and presents interesting results related to 
the role of the envelope and the sensitivity occupants 
have towards their own living environment. The 
characteristics of Mendoza’s climate are shown in 
Figure 1 through its Bioclimatic Chart. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Figure 1. Bioclimatic chart. Mendoza, Argentina. 
 
According to the Bio-climatic chart, Thermal Inertia is 
suggested as adequate to couple with the high 
thermal amplitude. Passive strategies such as Direct / 
Indirect Passive Gain and energy conservation in 
winter and Sun Protection and Nocturnal Ventilation 
in summer are adecuate strategies to regain internal 
comfort. [7] 
 
There were identified three main typologies (See 
Table 1). Each case presents a different level of 
compactness: 

a- OPEN: Half-patio Mediterranean House  
b- COMPACT: Rational Movement House  
c- SEMI-COMPACT Neocolonial Chalet  

 
 

 OPEN 
Mediterra 
nean half-
patio  

COMPACT 
Rational 
Movement 

SEMI– 
COMPACT 
Neocolonial
Chalet 

External 
Envelope/ 
Floor Area 
Factor [8] 

3.18 m2 of 
envelope 
in m2 of 
floor 

1.95 m2 of 
envelope 
in m2 of 
floor  

2.62 m2 of 
envelope in 
m2 of floor 

External 
Envelope/ 
Included 
Volume  

0.79 m2 of 
envelope 
in m3 
volume. 

0.54 m2 of 
envelope 
in m3 
volume. 

0.65 m2 of 
envelope in 
m3 volume. 

Compactness 
Coefficient = 
c [9] 

0.60 -0.75 
open 
typology 

0.90-100 
compact 
typology 

0.75-0.90 
semi-
compact 
typology 

Table 1. Characterization of three studied typologies. [10] 
 
The qualitative evaluation method was based in 
comfort perception enquiries performed in the same 
cases in two different seasons: winter and summer. 
Results were complemented with information drawn 
from direct observation. Qualitative results were 
finally compared with quantitative information already 
obtained, analysed and published. [11] [12] [13]. 
 
Field studies of thermal comfort have shown that the 
way in which occupants evaluate the indoor thermal 
environment is context-dependent and varies with 
time. In using occupants as part of the means of 
measuring buildings, post-occupancy evaluation 
should be understood as reflecting the changing 
nature of relationship between people, the climate 
and buildings. Surveys are therefore measuring a 
moving target, and close comparisons based on such 
surveys need to take this in to account.[4] 
 
3. CASE STUDIES  
 
Selection of sixty representative cases, twenty per 
typology.  Some examples can be seen in Fig. 2 to 4. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 TYPOLOGY 

ANALYSIS 

Fig. 3 COMPACT. Rational Movement House  

Fig. 2 OPEN. Half-patio Mediterranean House  

 

Bioclimatic Diagram - city of Mendoza
1 cló, 1 met

0
2
4
6
8

10
12
14
16
18
20

-10 -5 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45

Dry Bulb Temperature [°C]

A
bs

ol
ut

e 
H

um
id

ity
[m

m
H

g]



PLEA 2008 - The 25th Conference on Passive and Low Energy Architecture. Dublin, Scotland, 22-24 October 2008                   3/6 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Orientation plays an important role related to comfort 
perception. Because of this, there were considered 
five houses in each one of the four orientations to be 
found in the squared reticule of the city of Mendoza: 
North, South, East and West. Therefore it is possible 
to obtain global answers responding to a particular 
typology and not influenced by a particular 
orientation. And also, by reorganizing the obtained 
data to identify responses influenced by orientation 
with or without the typology variable. 
 
General data such as: time of the day (from 4 pm to 6 
pm) and season the enquiry was performed 
(winter/summer), amount of inhabitants per home 
(usually 4 or 5) , years occupants’ have lived in their 
homes (between 10 and 30), consent to control the 
homogeneity of selected cases and to restrict 
variables that could create noise in the obtained 
results.   
 
4. THERMAL COMFORT PERCEPTION 
 
To evaluate the obtained responses to enquiry 
questions related to comfort it is important to take in 
to account adaptive opportunities occupants’ have 
had at their hand. This is why it is worked at the same 
time with direct observation performed by a 
professional to identify changes that do not belong to 
the original architecture but to occupants 
spontaneously modifying their homes trying to make 
them more comfortable. 
 
Also is important to keep in mind that : Over time the 
temperature that people find comfortable (the 
“comfort temperature”) is close to the mean 
temperature they have experienced. This implies that 
the conditions that occupants find comfortable are 
influenced by their thermal experience and that they 
can adapt to a wide range of conditions. 
Temperatures up to 2ºC from the comfort temperature 
generally give only a minimal rise in discomfort. [14]  
 
Therefore, the reference to comfort perception in 
enquiries must be taken from the adaptation to 
climate point of view and, in this line of thought, lack 
of comfort or the use of mechanical air conditioning, 
must be taken as examples of the incapacity of 
occupants to adapt to indoor climate in their homes. It 
must be kept in mind that most of inhabitants (62%) 
inhabit their homes for more than 20 years. 
 
4.1 Summer comfort 
 
68% of occupants perceive their homes as 
comfortable in summer. Even though not every house 

has air conditioning equipment, every year there are 
more houses that do. It is a matter of time before 
every house that presents lack of comfort will restore 
comfort by mechanical means and therefore by using 
non-renewable energy. Understanding reasons of 
discomfort will lead architects in the path of providing 
adjusted passive solutions.  
 
In open typology, 70% of the occupants feel 
comfortable in their homes while the other 30% 
perceive their houses hot. Only 15%, that is half the 
occupants without comfort, use air conditioning (AC) 
to restore comfort. See Figure 5. 
 

THERMAL COMFORT PERCEPTION. 
SUMMER. HALF-PATIO TYPOLOGY.

ALL ORIENTATIONS.

70%

15%15% comfort
w/AC

comfort

hot

  
Figure 5. Summer: 70% of occupants feel  

comfortable in open typology houses. 
 

In the case of the houses that were oriented North 
(towards the Equator in the South Hemisphere), the 
percentage of occupants in comfort rises to 80%, 
been only the 20% of cases above expected 
temperatures.  
 
As we are evaluating an open typology, this is the 
effect of a poor response of the protection resources. 
That is, usually windows are protected by horizontal 
galleries with an excellent result in providing an 
intermediate space between indoors and outdoors, 
moderating the incident radiation on windows. In 
some cases (the ones overheated) this galleries have 
been glazed and whenever they remain closed, 
spaces indoor raise their temperatures. It is 
necessary to provide new protections to deal with 
incident radiation before it reaches the glazed 
galleries. See Figure 6. 

 
THERMAL COMFORT PERCEPTION. 
SUMMER. HALF-PATIO TYPOLOGY.

NORTH ORIENTATION

80%

20% comfort
w/AC

comfort

hot

 
Figure 6. Summer: 80% of occupants feel  

comfortable in north open typology houses. 
 

 

Fig. 4 SEMI-COMPACT. Neocolonial Chalet 



PLEA 2008 - The 25th Conference on Passive and Low Energy Architecture. Dublin, Scotland, 22-24 October 2008                   4/6 
 

In the case of compact houses, the perception of 
comfort diminish to 60%, while only 30% of 
uncomfortable occupants use air conditioning to deal 
with the unpleasant overheating. See Figure 7. 
 
In the case of North (Equator oriented) houses, all of 
them are perceived as hot. To understand this 
situation we have to use the direct observation 
resource. This is a typology that was conceived 
without any blind or sun protection. Its windows are 
about the 20% of the façade surface and therefore 
the house is overheated.  
 

 

THERMAL COMFORT PERCEPTION.
SUMMER. RATIONAL TYPOLOGY. ALL 

ORIENTATIONS. 

10%

30%

60%

comfort
w/AC

comfort

hot

  
Figure 7. Summer: 60% of occupants feel  
comfortable in compact typology houses. 

 
 
Occupants solve this problem by adding internal 
blinds or curtains that do not completely solve the 
overheating problem and also diminish considerably 
natural day lighting and sight. See Figure 8. 

 
 

THERMAL COMFORT PERCEPTION.
SUMMER. RATIONAL TYPOLOGY.

NORTH ORIENTATION

40%

60%

comfort
w/AC

comfort

hot

  
Figure 8. Summer: There is a clear problem of  

overheating in compact typology houses. 
 
 

In the case of the semi-compact typology, perception 
of comfort increases to 80% (see Figure 9) and in the 
case of houses oriented towards the Equator (North) 
the total of occupants enquired feel comfortable. This 
can be understood by analyzing big tilt roofs that 
shadow windows and by the presence of external 
blinds in every window. Truth is that they are always 
vertical, even though this is not the best way to 
protect spaces when they are oriented North 
(because of the lack of daylight and sight that can 
result from their use), occupants feel good. Main 
problems are registered with West orientations. 
 

THERMAL COMFORT PERCEPTION.
SUMMER. CHALET TYPOLOGY.

ALL ORIENTATIONS.

5% 15%

80%

comfort
w/AC

comfort

hot

  
Figure 9. Summer: 80% of occupants feel  

comfortable in Chalet houses.  
 
4.2 Winter comfort 
 
In all typologies it is used auxiliary heating in winter. 
Even though this fact and the great non-renewable 
energy use (usually natural gas), 54% of occupants 
perceive their houses as cold in winter.  
 
In open typology houses, 60% of occupants feel their 
homes comfortable in winter. (See Figure 10) In the 
case of houses oriented North (towards the Equator) 
the total of people enquired perceived their houses 
comfortable in winter. This is because houses present 
intermediate spaces such as glazed galleries 
(greenhouse effect) and double door porches that act 
as buffer spaces between the outdoor climate and 
indoor spaces. The main problem are houses 
oriented South because energy conservation 
strategies materialized in buffer spaces and thick 
masonry walls are not enough to maintain spaces 
comfortable.  
 

THERMAL COMFORT PERCEPTION.
WINTER. HALF-PATIO TYPOLOGY.

ALL ORIENTATIONS.

50%

40%

10%
cold
w/AH

comfort
w/AH

hot w/AH

 
Figure 10. Winter: 60% of occupants feel  

comfortable (of hot) in open typology houses.  
 
The difference of perception when radiation is coming 
into a space is due to mean radiant temperature that 
makes us feel comfortable even if air temperatures 
are not as high as we think they are. 
 
In the case of compact typology houses, 50% of 
occupants perceived them as comfortable or hot, 
while the other half feel them cold. This houses have 
mainly two orientations each along an axis that can 
be N-S or E-W. This is because they are usually 
attached one to another and only leave two façades: 
one towards the street and the other towards the 
patio.  



PLEA 2008 - The 25th Conference on Passive and Low Energy Architecture. Dublin, Scotland, 22-24 October 2008                   5/6 
 

Houses with North and South façades free have a 
better response. See Figure 11.  
 

THERMAL COMFORT PERCEPTION.
WINTER. RATIONAL TYPOLOGY.

ALL ORIENTATIONS. 

40%

50%

10% cold
w/AH

comfort
w/AH

hot w/AH

 
Figure 11. Summer: Half the occupants feel  

comfortable (or hot) in compact typology houses.  
 
Semi-compact houses present 40% of occupants that 
perceive them comfortable. (See Figure 12)  
 
These houses are difficult to classify in orientations 
because they are detached and their morphology 
usually articulates volumes, therefore they are not 
open, nor compact. These lead to situations in which 
there are almost the same amount of exposed 
surface in all orientations.  Mere over their tilt roofs 
also present a variety of orientations and, their 
surface, is important in the heat balance because the 
more they are tilt the more incidence they have over 
the overall house behaviour. This is the reason we 
take this results as representative of all orientations. 
 

THERMAL COMFORT PERCEPTION. 
WINTER. CHALET TYPOLOGY.

ALL ORIENTATIONS.

35%
60%

5% cold
w/AH

comfort
w/AH

hot w/AH

 
Figure 12. Summer: 40% of the occupants feel  
comfortable (or hot) in semi-compact houses.  

 
 
5. COMPARED RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS 
 
In table 2, results from enquiries to occupants are 
compared with mean air temperature measurements. 
This information incorporates results from enquiries 
addressed in this paper and data obtained in previous 
works that were focused in site measurements. These 
measurements were performed with ONSET H8 data 
loggers every 15 minutes and in periods of twenty 
days in each season.  
 
See table 2 for a summary of referred measured data 
compared with inhabitants’ perception of comfort. 
 
 

 
 

OPEN 
Mediterra 
nean half-
patio  

 

COMPACT 
Rational 
Movement 

 

SEMI– 
COMPACT 
Chalet 

 

SUMMER – All orientations 
 

Mean exterior 
Air Temp.  

 
18-36ºC 

 

Mean interior 
Air Temp. 

 
25-29ºC 

 
27-29 ºC 

 
27-28 ºC 

 

Occupant 
Comfort 
Perception 

 
70% 

 
60% 

  
80% 

 

WINTER – All orientations 
 

Mean exterior 
Air Temp.  

 
0-15ºC 

 

Mean interior 
Air Temp. 

 
16-20 ºC 

 
15-20 ºC 

 
15-18 ºC 

 

Occupant 
Comfort 
Perception 

 
60% 

 
50% 

 
40% 

Table 2. Measurements. Years 2004 and 2005 [15] 
 
Some comparisons are very interesting to analyze, for 
example: in the summer case, even though internal 
temperatures seem equivalent between compact and 
semi-compact houses, occupants perceive them in a 
very different way (60% of occupants are comfortable 
in compact houses against 80% in semi-compact.) 
This can be understood probably because of air 
movement comfort or radiative temperatures.   
 
This also happens in the winter comparison between 
open typology houses and the compact one. This can 
be once more related to indoor air movement, 
specially at night. The possibilities of an open 
envelope to exchange energy are more probable than 
in compact one.  
 
It is clear that measurements must be complemented 
with POEs because of two main reasons: In one 
hand, occupants are the ones that finally feel their 
homes. On the other hand, differences between 
perceptions when there are none significant ones in 
air temperature measurements relate to new data that 
must be collected in order to stand closer to the whole 
picture.  
 
Therefore, a further study is expected to follow the 
one presented on this paper not only with new 
enquiries and air temperature measurements but also 
including radiative temperature measurements and 
indoor air movement to add new variables of 
analyses. 
 
The more the variables analyzed, the closer we will 
be to fully understand how occupants feel in their 
homes and why. Only from there it is possible to 
propose sustainable solutions. 
 
 
 
 
  
 



PLEA 2008 - The 25th Conference on Passive and Low Energy Architecture. Dublin, Scotland, 22-24 October 2008                   6/6 
 

6. REFERENCES 
 
[1] Goulding, J., Lewis, O. And Steemers, T. (ed.) 
(1992) Energy in Architecture. The European passive 
solar handbook. Brussels and Luxembourg: 
Commission of the European Communities.  
[2] ASHRAE (2004) Standard 55-04 Thermal 
Environmental Conditions for Human Occupancy. 
American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air-
conditioning Engineers, Atlanta, GA. 
[3] ISO 7730 (1984) Moderate thermal environments. 
PMV and PPD indices and specification of the 
conditions of thermal comfort. Geneva: International 
Standards Organization. 
[4] Nicol, F. and Roaf, S. (2005) Post-occupancy 
evaluation and field studies of thermal comfort. 
Building Research & Information 33 (4) pp. 338-346. 
United Kingdom: Routledge, Taylor & Francis. 
[5]  Cohen, R., Standeven, M., Bordas, B. and 
Leaman, A. (2001) Assessing Building performance in 
use 1: The prove process. Building Research & 
Information 29 (2) pp. 85-102. United Kingdom: 
Routledge, Taylor & Francis. 
[6] Givoni, B. (1998) Climate considerations in 
buildings and urban design. NY, USA: Van Nostrand 
Reinhold. 
[7] Mesa, N. A. (2003) Método Teórico de diagnóstico 
de la habitabilidad termo-lumínica del espacio 
arquitectónico, como base para la planificación 
urbana: El caso de Mendoza, Argentina. Doctoral 
Thesis. Argentina: FAUD-UM. 
[8] Esteves, A. Y Gelardi, D. y Oliva, A. (1997) The 
shape in the Bioclimatic Architecture: The FAEP 
Factor. Proc. of 2nd Conference of Teachers of 
Architecture - TIA, cap. 3.12. Firenze, Italia. 
[9] Serra, R. y Coch, H. (1991). Arquitectura y 
Energía Natural. España: Edicions UPC.  
[10] Ganem, C.; Coch, H. y Esteves, A. (2006) 
Housing refurbishment: Environmental potential. 
Upgrade of the envelope of three housing typologies 
in Mendoza, Argentina. In Sayigh, A. (ed.): Proc. of 
the IX World Renewable Energy Congress. United 
Kingdom: Elsevier Science Ltd. 
[11] Ganem, C.; Esteves, A. y Coch, H. (2006) 
Traditional climate-adapted typologies as base for a 
new contemporary architectural approach. In Weber, 
W. (ed): Proc of  the 23rd International Conference on 
Passive and Low energy Architecture (PLEA 2006) 
Clever design, affordable comfort. Switzerland: Univ. 
de Genève. 
[12] Ganem, C.; Esteves, A. y Coch, H. (2005) 
Environmental rehabilitation of the envelope of 
buildings. The case of two “rational” houses in 
Mendoza, Argentina. In Melki, H. and Raydan, D. 
(ed.): Proc. of the 22nd International Conference on 
Passive and Low energy Architecture (PLEA 2005). 
Lebanon: Dame University.  
[13] Ganem, C.; Coch, H. y Esteves, A. (2005) 
Environmental rehabilitation of the envelope of 
buildings. The case of the “chalet” typology in 
Mendoza, Argentina. Procc. of the CISBAT 2005. 
Suiza: Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne – 
Massachussets Institute of Technology. EPFL – MIT.  
[14] Nicol, F. and Humphreys, M. A. (2005) Maximum 
temperatures in buildings to avoid heat discomfort. In 

Santamouris, M. (ed.): Proc. of the Passive and Low 
Energy Cooling Conference (PALENC 2005) pp. 219-
224. Greece. 
[15] Ganem, C. (2006) Rehabilitación Ambiental de la 
Envolvente de Viviendas. El caso de Mendoza. 
Doctoral Thesis. España: CA1 - ETSAB – UPC. 


