

























































Solar Energy as a Form Giver for Future Cities


energies

Article

Solar Energy as a Form Giver for Future Cities

Alessandra Curreli, Glòria Serra-Coch, Antonio Isalgue, Isabel Crespo and Helena Coch *

Architecture & Energy, School of Architecture of Barcelona, UPC. Av. Diagonal, 649, 7th Floor, 08028 Barcelona,
Spain; alessandracurreli@gmail.com (A.C.); gloriaserracoch@gmail.com (G.S.-C.);
antonio.isalgue@upc.edu (A.I.); isabel.crespo@upc.edu (I.C.)
* Correspondence: helena.coch@upc.edu; Tel.: +34-93-4010868

Academic Editor: Jukka Heinonen
Received: 1 May 2016; Accepted: 7 July 2016; Published: 14 July 2016

Abstract: Energy is considered as a main influence on urban configurations. However, there is
a difficulty on translating the city models based on theoretical renewable energy concepts into
practical applications. This study considers the possibility of understanding this future model as
a transformation of the existing urban centres. With this objective, a methodology to intervene
in existing cities based on the study of solar access is developed. Therefore, an analysis of solar
potential in relation with urban morphology is carried on through a simulation software in l’Eixample,
a neighbourhood of Barcelona. The distribution of the sun factor in the different areas of the
building blocks envelope displays possible morphological modifications that would facilitate solar
energy collection. Consequently, the analytical method presented could be applied to regulate urban
interventions with the aim of obtaining more solar energy based cities.

Keywords: urban morphology; solar access; renewable energies; reuse; cities; energy

1. Introduction

Energy and energetic fluxes are considered as a main driver of urban configuration
transformations [1]. It is possible to identify a connection between social and physical organization of
urban settlements and their supply systems, transformation means and available resources [2].

The purpose of this article is to explore the relation between energy and urban centres and exploit
its characteristics to determine a strategy to intervene in existing settlements. This methodology will
address the urban scale with the aim of adapting cities to the must be energy sources of humanity
development: renewable energies.

From the Neolithic to pre-industrial era, sun, wind, blood-force and biomass were used to produce
thermal and mechanical energy [3]. This energetic sources restricted urban growth by creating a close
physical and temporal connection between production and consumption. The intrinsic characteristics
of energetic sources, the supply systems present at the time and the storage difficulties gave as
a result a balance between demand and supply and the reduction of cities impact on their natural
surroundings [4].

With the introduction of coal as an energy resource during the Industrial era, the connection
between production and consumption was firstly broken [3]. On the one hand, this energetic resource
maximized the possible immediate production while, with the invention of the steam engine and the
introduction of the railway network, it disconnected the distance relation between the extraction and
the production [5]. Industries acted as a population pole of attraction, source of a rural exodus that
brought congestion and insalubrious living conditions in cities [6,7].

The introduction of electricity as a transportation system brought a complete disengagement
between energetic resources and urban centres locations. The capillarity of energy distribution and the
subsequence expansion of transportation flexibility allowed for new urban structures, morphologies

Energies 2016, 9, 544; doi:10.3390/en9070544 www.mdpi.com/journal/energies

http://www.mdpi.com/journal/energies
http://www.mdpi.com
http://www.mdpi.com/journal/energies


Energies 2016, 9, 544 2 of 11

and typologies. Urban vertical growth was a result of the elevator invention combined with rapid
transit systems [8].

The process of disassociation between settlements expansion and their energetic sources made
a new last step forward during the second Industrial Revolution [1] with the use of oil as a main
energetic resource. Fossil combustibles created the illusion of unlimited capacity of urban expansion
by delaying the noticeable effects and, therefore, cities were able of freely growing without being
aware of the long term consequences.

Cities began a process of transformation related with horizontal and extensive urban growth,
bringing with it the new concept of “urban sprawl” [9]. Car use and roads networks brought low
density structures with a lack of public space and social centres [10,11]. Nonetheless, this urban
morphology not only influenced the city structure from a social scope but also generated important
consequences for the environment [12].

With the oil crisis of 1973 the effects of this disengagement became suddenly visible and public
concern focused on the current problematic. As a result, the definition of sustainability was first
presented in 1984 [13], a concept repeatedly used since then. However, although the path to follow
seemed explicit, the concept and its practical applications progressively lost clarity while gaining
a strong media role and losing solid scientific background to support it.

Nevertheless, the relation between environmental problematic and urban centres was evident
and several schools of thought started addressing the issue [14–16]. The final objective was to obtain
complex, socially equitable and energy efficient settlements; capable of offering good living conditions
to citizens and characterized by a good balance between demand and production.

Consequently, the need to achieve a model of urbanism that addresses these new issues has been
widely discussed. Recovering the balance between production and consumption and reconnecting
urban expansion with its energetic possibilities seems a must. The introduction of renewable energies
is the clearest path to achieve these objectives and giving the sun the main role as primary energetic
source [17] seems the most sensible strategy to be able to restore the balance of the pre-Industrial era.

However, when translating the idea of developing renewable energies based settlements into
practice, most cases find themselves faced with a contradiction between the theoretical model and the
existing possibilities [15]. Generally, the outcomes of these attempts are newly made urban centres
that become more a mere addition of low-emission buildings than an organism that works as whole.

Moreover, these renewable energies based neighbourhoods tend to be presented as new
constructions that expand in the terrain, colonizing the fertile soil that can usually be found around
historical urban centres. Although addressing cities enlargement with energetic and environmental
issues as main objectives, the strategy of growing into the occupation of new fertile terrain involves
clear negative environmental consequences by itself.

On the other hand, many previous researches have been developed about the relationship between
the configuration and the solar potential of an urban fabric. Nevertheless, most of them focused on
generic archetypal urban forms [18–21] without fully considering the morphological specificities that
characterize the existing urban environments. Some current studies have proved that morphological
fabric features might have an important role in the solar potential of an urban tissue [22,23], as well as
other comfort factors, like the possibilities for ventilation [24].

For all these reasons, this article contemplates the need of creating a methodology to translate
theoretical concepts regarding energy use in general, and solar use in particular, in urban centres into
practical applications. This methodology will be based on the creation of a set of solar indicators that
will be the basis for operative tools to intervene in the existing. To be able to achieve more consistent
results, the strategies will be developed at the level of urban morphology instead of only focusing on
the building as a single and unrelated unit or considering the urban fabric as an archetypal model, such
as other studies, like the urban canyon model [25]. Finally, it is stressed the importance on developing
strategies to intervene in the existing built environment and transforming it into the renewable energy
based urban centres needed, instead of promoting alienated new models.



Energies 2016, 9, 544 3 of 11

Accordingly, this study aims to outline a methodology that promotes practical and concrete
actions to improve existing urban settlements by analysing their solar potential in relation with urban
morphology. This methodology has the objective of indicating architectural modifications to implement
in an urban tissue to be able to take advantage of the solar potential. The design and construction of
systems to exploit this solar energy—such as solar panels, photovoltaic cells, windows, trombe-walls
. . . etc.—would be a posterior step that is not addressed in this article as it has already been covered in
other scientific publications [26]. In order to assess the possible exploitation of the solar potential, the
incoming direct radiation will be studied considering its distribution on the different parts of the block.

2. Results

2.1. Case Study

The Eixample district in the city of Barcelona is considered a representative case study to be
analysed. It is the result of a rigorous and innovative urban planning process developed during the
19th century by the civil engineer Ildefons Cerdà.

The project is based on an exhaustive topographic plan of the area around the existing
Barcelona [27] and a detailed empirical report of its critical unsanitary conditions at the time of
industrialization [28], providing also a specific analysis of the city climate [29]. Its success is
a consequence of a very thorough analysis and a solid theoretical basis [30].

Like most other extension plans of the time, its development is based on a regular grid, associated
with the new objective of rationalizing the planning process, supported as well by the introduction
of methodological attitude [31] based on the idea, the territory, the regulations and the design as
fundamental phases [32]. An exceptional characteristic of this plan is its size, covering an area
ten times the extension of the existing city. With the aim of ensuring equal healthy sanitation to all the
inhabitants, Cerdà designed the basic unit as a square block (113 ˆ 113 m) with a 45˝ North orientation,
in order to provide a “democratic” sunlight distribution to the different façades [27].

Moreover, the circulation of the people and the goods were given a foreseeing importance.
The presence of new forms of mobility (the railway and, some decades later, the car) determined the
definition of a base layout with 20-metre-wide streets, where the dimensions reserved for vehicles
and pedestrian were distributed in two equivalent halves. The chamfered corners of the blocks
would facilitate the change of direction of the different circulation flows in the crossings and main
metropolitan axes with dimensions ranging 50–100 m were superposed to the orthogonal grid [30].

The final objective of the project was to propose a new functional and hygienic urban model in
order to regulate the expansion of the existing city. Although the plan (Figure 1a) was extensively
modified during its construction, the urban principles elaborated by Cerdà are still valid, with a clear
aim to ensure the comfort and quality of city life [33].

For this reason, it is interesting to analyse the effective performance of the current
Eixample, (Figure 1b) considering the environmental and energetic needs of the contemporary city.
More specifically, the attention is focused on the solar radiation access and to the possibilities of
exploitation of the energy collected by the buildings.



Energies 2016, 9, 544 4 of 11

Energies 2016, 9, 544  4 of 10 

 

 
(a) 

 
(b) 

Figure 1. (a) Idelfons Cerdà Eixample plan 1859. Imposed by royal decree the 31st march 1860. Arxiu 
Històric de la Ciutat de Barcelona; (b) Current Eixample. Author: Centre de Cultura Contemporania de 
Barcelona (CCCB). 

2.2. Distribution of the Sun Factor (F) 

The graphics in the Figure 2 show the global distribution of the Sun Factor—F (kWh/m2 per 
season) in the Eixample block’s envelope, in winter (Figure 2a) and in summer (Figure 2b).  

(a) (b)  

 
Figure 2. Global distribution of the Sun Factor—F (kWh/m2) in the Eixample block’s envelope, in 
winter (a) and in summer (b). 

Figure 1. (a) Idelfons Cerdà Eixample plan 1859. Imposed by royal decree the 31 March 1860.
Arxiu Històric de la Ciutat de Barcelona; (b) Current Eixample. Author: Centre de Cultura Contemporania
de Barcelona (CCCB).

2.2. Distribution of the Sun Factor (F)

The graphics in the Figure 2 show the global distribution of the Sun Factor—F (kWh/m2

per season) in the Eixample block’s envelope, in winter (Figure 2a) and in summer (Figure 2b).

Energies 2016, 9, 544  4 of 10 

 

 
(a) 

 
(b) 

Figure 1. (a) Idelfons Cerdà Eixample plan 1859. Imposed by royal decree the 31st march 1860. Arxiu 
Històric de la Ciutat de Barcelona; (b) Current Eixample. Author: Centre de Cultura Contemporania de 
Barcelona (CCCB). 

2.2. Distribution of the Sun Factor (F) 

The graphics in the Figure 2 show the global distribution of the Sun Factor—F (kWh/m2 per 
season) in the Eixample block’s envelope, in winter (Figure 2a) and in summer (Figure 2b).  

(a) (b)  

 
Figure 2. Global distribution of the Sun Factor—F (kWh/m2) in the Eixample block’s envelope, in 
winter (a) and in summer (b). Figure 2. Global distribution of the Sun Factor—F (kWh/m

2) in the Eixample block’s envelope, in winter
(a) and in summer (b).



Energies 2016, 9, 544 5 of 11

It is noticed that the solar flux is generally higher and more uniform on the horizontal surfaces
with respect to the vertical ones, due to the major influence of the surrounding blocks on the façades
and to the orientation of the urban grid. Effectively, on the external fronts, the losses in solar gains
due to the shadows cast by the neighbouring buildings are about 28% in winter and 13% in summer.
The influence of obstructions (I) is almost null on the roofs, where (I) = 0.2%, since the height of
the blocks in the selected sample is quite homogeneous. In this sense, it can be deduced that the
morphological characteristics of the urban plot only affects the vertical external surfaces of the block.

By analysing the outcomes of the solar simulation in terms of Sun Factor (kWh/m2), it is observed
that the different portions of the block show a variable performance (see the bar graphs in Figure 3).
As it was expected, the maximum values of Sun Factor (F) are located on the roofs (124 and 428 kWh/m2

in winter and summer, respectively) and on the internal courtyard (77 and 368 kWh/m2 in winter and
summer, respectively).

The outer fronts of the block provide a solar potential of 85 and 158 kWh/m2 in the two periods
of the year that have been simulated. In the winter season, the external vertical solar potential is
slightly higher than that of the patio, due to the steep inclination of the sun’s rays (23˝ at 12:00 h at the
winter solstice).

The values of the Sun Factor (F) on the inner façades (71 kWh/m2 in winter and 123 kWh/m2

in summer) slightly decrease compared with those detected on the outer vertical envelope. In fact,
in the present case, although the distance between opposite fronts is about 55–60 m and the ratio
between the height of the buildings and the wide dimension of the street H/W = 0.25, the shadows
projected by the lateral sides of the block have to be taken into account. This means that the interior
part of the block has a more complex solar behaviour compared with the simplified model of the urban
canyon, normally associated to the external façades [25].

Energies 2016, 9, 544  5 of 10 

 

It is noticed that the solar flux is generally higher and more uniform on the horizontal surfaces 
with respect to the vertical ones, due to the major influence of the surrounding blocks on the façades 
and to the orientation of the urban grid. Effectively, on the external fronts, the losses in solar gains 
due to the shadows cast by the neighbouring buildings are about 28% in winter and 13% in summer. 
The influence of obstructions (I) is almost null on the roofs, where (I) = 0.2%, since the height of the 
blocks in the selected sample is quite homogeneous. In this sense, it can be deduced that the 
morphological characteristics of the urban plot only affects the vertical external surfaces of the block. 

By analysing the outcomes of the solar simulation in terms of Sun Factor (kWh/m2), it is observed 
that the different portions of the block show a variable performance (see the bar graphs in Figure 3). 
As it was expected, the maximum values of Sun Factor (F) are located on the roofs (124 and 428 
kWh/m2 in winter and summer, respectively) and on the internal courtyard (77 and 368 kWh/m2 in 
winter and summer, respectively). 

The outer fronts of the block provide a solar potential of 85 and 158 kWh/m2 in the two periods 
of the year that have been simulated. In the winter season, the external vertical solar potential is 
slightly higher than that of the patio, due to the steep inclination of the sun’s rays (23° at 12:00 h at 
the winter solstice). 

The values of the Sun Factor (F) on the inner façades (71 kWh/m2 in winter and 123 kWh/m2 in 
summer) slightly decrease compared with those detected on the outer vertical envelope. In fact, in 
the present case, although the distance between opposite fronts is about 55–60 m and the ratio 
between the height of the buildings and the wide dimension of the street H/W = 0.25, the shadows 
projected by the lateral sides of the block have to be taken into account. This means that the interior 
part of the block has a more complex solar behaviour compared with the simplified model of the 
urban canyon, normally associated to the external façades [25]. 

 
Figure 3. Distribution of Sun Factor FR (kWh/m2) in the different envelope components during the 
winter and summer season. 

Finally, the lowest values of solar potential are registered on the “residual elements” of the 
block, such as wells, stairwells, small projections and the folders of the façades and so on, where the 
solar energy collection is not directly exploitable. In this case, the Sun Factor (F) is 28 kWh/m2 during 
the winter season and 58 kWh/m2 during the summer season. The overall area of the secondary 
elements is about 22.000 m2 (almost a half part of the whole envelope) which represents a very 

Figure 3. Distribution of Sun Factor FR (kWh/m2) in the different envelope components during the
winter and summer season.

Finally, the lowest values of solar potential are registered on the “residual elements” of the block,
such as wells, stairwells, small projections and the folders of the façades and so on, where the solar



Energies 2016, 9, 544 6 of 11

energy collection is not directly exploitable. In this case, the Sun Factor (F) is 28 kWh/m2 during the
winter season and 58 kWh/m2 during the summer season. The overall area of the secondary elements
is about 22.000 m2 (almost a half part of the whole envelope) which represents a very important
potential surface for solar collection. Nevertheless, it is noticed that the mutual shadows cast by these
elements drastically reduce the solar access on them.

2.3. Distribution of the Potential Solar Gains (G)

In terms of Potential Solar Gains—G (kWh), the performance of the Eixample block displays
a trend that is very similar to the one described in the previous paragraphs with regard to the Sun
Factor—F. However, the analysis of the solar indicator G highlights other important issues.

The graphs in Figure 4 display the percentage of solar energy accumulated by the different
components of the block’s envelope. The highest contributions proceed from the roofs, which
collect a percentage of 33% and of 43% of the total amount of G, during the winter and during
the summer, respectively.

The percentage of potential solar gains provided by the external façades is also quite relevant,
varying between 24% in winter and 17% in summer. The possibilities for solar access are basically
affected by the configuration of the urban fabric and, more specifically, by the proportions of the urban
canyon, H/W.

The contribution of the inner façades in terms of solar collection is about 14% in winter and 9%
in summer. These values are considerably lower than those registered in the previous case, due to the
influence of the transversal facades. In other words, the solar performance depends on the interior
morphology of the courtyard but it is not affected by the external obstructions.

It is quite interesting to observe that the “residual elements” cover between 16% (in the warm
season) and 21% (in the cold season) of the global solar gains. These contributions are almost equivalent
to those of the outer façades. This means that approximately one fifth of the solar energy collected
by the block is not exploitable at all for a passive use or an active use, such as photovoltaic or
thermal panels.

Remarkably, the lowest percentages are detected in the central patio, where the energy collected
is about 8% and 15% of the global solar gains, in winter and summer, respectively. In fact, although
the Sun Factor (kWh/m2) reaches its maximum values on the horizontal components of the block
(the roofs and the courtyard), the surface of exposure of the latter (about 3.000 m2) is definitely smaller
than those of the other elements.

Energies 2016, 9, 544  6 of 10 

 

important potential surface for solar collection. Nevertheless, it is noticed that the mutual shadows 
cast by these elements drastically reduce the solar access on them. 

2.3. Distribution of the Potential Solar Gains (G) 

In terms of Potential Solar Gains—G (kWh), the performance of the Eixample block displays a 
trend that is very similar to the one described in the previous paragraphs with regard to the Sun 
Factor—F. However, the analysis of the solar indicator G highlights other important issues. 

The graphs in Figure 4 display the percentage of solar energy accumulated by the different 
components of the block’s envelope. The highest contributions proceed from the roofs, which collect 
a percentage of 33% and of 43% of the total amount of G, during the winter and during the summer, 
respectively. 

The percentage of potential solar gains provided by the external façades is also quite relevant, 
varying between 24% in winter and 17% in summer. The possibilities for solar access are basically 
affected by the configuration of the urban fabric and, more specifically, by the proportions of the 
urban canyon, H/W. 

The contribution of the inner façades in terms of solar collection is about 14% in winter and 9% 
in summer. These values are considerably lower than those registered in the previous case, due to 
the influence of the transversal facades. In other words, the solar performance depends on the interior 
morphology of the courtyard but it is not affected by the external obstructions. 

It is quite interesting to observe that the “residual elements” cover between 16% (in the warm 
season) and 21% (in the cold season) of the global solar gains. These contributions are almost 
equivalent to those of the outer façades. This means that approximately one fifth of the solar energy 
collected by the block is not exploitable at all for a passive use or an active use, such as photovoltaic 
or thermal panels. 

Remarkably, the lowest percentages are detected in the central patio, where the energy collected 
is about 8% and 15% of the global solar gains, in winter and summer, respectively. In fact, although 
the Sun Factor (kWh/m2) reaches its maximum values on the horizontal components of the block (the 
roofs and the courtyard), the surface of exposure of the latter (about 3.000 m2) is definitely smaller 
than those of the other elements. 

 
Figure 4. Percentage distribution of solar gains potential G (kWh) in the different envelope 
components during the winter season and summer season. 

3. Discussion 

In the previous paragraph, the outcomes of the solar simulation have been studied and 
compared in quantitative terms. Nevertheless, it is interesting to analyse and discuss the same results 
from a qualitative point of view, in order to assess which are the actual viable possibilities to improve 
the solar efficiency of the Eixample urban fabric. 

The maximum solar access, both in terms of Sun Factor (F) and Potential Solar Gains (G), has 
been detected on the roofs of the buildings. However, it should be taken into account that the complex 
and articulated morphological structure of this part of the envelope could make the installation of 

Figure 4. Percentage distribution of solar gains potential G (kWh) in the different envelope components
during the winter season and summer season.



Energies 2016, 9, 544 7 of 11

3. Discussion

In the previous paragraph, the outcomes of the solar simulation have been studied and compared
in quantitative terms. Nevertheless, it is interesting to analyse and discuss the same results from
a qualitative point of view, in order to assess which are the actual viable possibilities to improve the
solar efficiency of the Eixample urban fabric.

The maximum solar access, both in terms of Sun Factor (F) and Potential Solar Gains (G), has
been detected on the roofs of the buildings. However, it should be taken into account that the complex
and articulated morphological structure of this part of the envelope could make the installation of
photovoltaic or thermal panels difficult and, therefore, restrain the opportunities for an active use of
the solar energy. Consequently, a possible morphological urban intervention could be based on the
levelling of horizontal surfaces in roofs, with the objective of facilitating the installation of active solar
energy collecting elements.

The configuration of the central patio, instead, offers concrete opportunities to be transformed into
a common public space for the neighbours of the block, where the social use of the solar energy could
be exploited. In the last decades, the City of Barcelona implemented many successful interventions
aimed at recovering the Eixample inner central courtyards; which have shown that the possibility to
improve the solar efficiency in these parts of the block is viable and concrete.

Concerning the vertical solar potential, it is important to highlight that the 45˝ rotation of the
streets grid with respect to the North allows a homogeneous and equitable distribution of the solar
gains on the envelope in terms of thermal energy and natural lighting [34]. Consequently, during the
winter, this orientation provides two symmetrical possible “collector” sides facing South-East and
South-West. During the summer, when protection from the solar radiation is normally required in
a Mediterranean climate, it allows to have two sheltered façades towards North-East and North-West.
The Eixample typology of two-façade sequenced dwelling, enjoying two orientations, benefits greatly
from this urban structure. Therefore, the preservation of this typology should be enhanced to avoid
losing its urban solar advantages.

Furthermore, the presence of the courtyard and the dimensional proportions of the Eixample
urban plot increase the overall surface of exposure, not only in the external façades, but also in the
inner sides of the block, incrementing the possibilities for a passive use of the solar energy.

The solar analysis demonstrated that the existing Eixample urban fabric offers different potential
opportunities to enhance the employment of the solar radiation. Consequently, a structured analysis of
the existing urban fabric allows to detect the areas of solar potential and their possible improvements.

The positive solar characteristics of the Eixample district are closely related with its planning by
I. Cerdà that, according to functional and hygienist design criteria, aimed at ensuring healthy and
high-quality life conditions to all its inhabitants. Although the Eixample followed a process of intense
building densification, its main morphological features are still recognizable and effective, both at the
scale of the block and at the scale of the urban fabric.

4. Materials and Methods

The solar analysis has been carried out by means of the simulation software Heliodon 2, a digital
tool which computes the energy collected by the buildings’ envelope during a determined period of
time (day, month, season, year) and also reports the average values, if required [35]. In the present
study, only the direct radiation has been taken into account. Possible effects of climate change are not
considered in this case.

Within the Eixample urban fabric, a homogeneous sample composed by nine blocks laid out
in a 3 ˆ 3 layout has been selected (Figure 5). The model has been developed with the Computer
Aided Design Software Autocad 2010 in three dimensions and real scale. The 3d sample has been
modelled by following the principles defined by the Open Geospatial Consortium for the LoD2 scale,
which considers a morphological detail scale with deviations smaller than 2 m compared with reality.
This level of detail is considered appropriate based on several factors: Firstly, the availability of



Energies 2016, 9, 544 8 of 11

geometrical information on the analysed sector. Secondly, the technical potential of the used software,
Heliodon and Autocad. Finally, and more important, the expected deviation from results that this
simplification could involve [2] (Figure 6).

Energies 2016, 9, 544  7 of 10 

 

photovoltaic or thermal panels difficult and, therefore, restrain the opportunities for an active use of 
the solar energy. Consequently, a possible morphological urban intervention could be based on the 
levelling of horizontal surfaces in roofs, with the objective of facilitating the installation of active solar 
energy collecting elements. 

The configuration of the central patio, instead, offers concrete opportunities to be transformed 
into a common public space for the neighbours of the block, where the social use of the solar energy 
could be exploited. In the last decades, the City of Barcelona implemented many successful 
interventions aimed at recovering the Eixample inner central courtyards; which have shown that the 
possibility to improve the solar efficiency in these parts of the block is viable and concrete. 

Concerning the vertical solar potential, it is important to highlight that the 45° rotation of the 
streets grid with respect to the North allows a homogeneous and equitable distribution of the solar 
gains on the envelope in terms of thermal energy and natural lighting [34]. Consequently, during the 
winter, this orientation provides two symmetrical possible “collector” sides facing South-East and 
South-West. During the summer, when protection from the solar radiation is normally required in a 
Mediterranean climate, it allows to have two sheltered façades towards North-East and North-West. 
The Eixample typology of two-façade sequenced dwelling, enjoying two orientations, benefits greatly 
from this urban structure. Therefore, the preservation of this typology should be enhanced to avoid 
losing its urban solar advantages. 

Furthermore, the presence of the courtyard and the dimensional proportions of the Eixample 
urban plot increase the overall surface of exposure, not only in the external façades, but also in the 
inner sides of the block, incrementing the possibilities for a passive use of the solar energy. 

The solar analysis demonstrated that the existing Eixample urban fabric offers different potential 
opportunities to enhance the employment of the solar radiation. Consequently, a structured analysis 
of the existing urban fabric allows to detect the areas of solar potential and their possible 
improvements. 

The positive solar characteristics of the Eixample district are closely related with its planning by 
I. Cerdà that, according to functional and hygienist design criteria, aimed at ensuring healthy and 
high-quality life conditions to all its inhabitants. Although the Eixample followed a process of intense 
building densification, its main morphological features are still recognizable and effective, both at the 
scale of the block and at the scale of the urban fabric. 

4. Materials and Methods 

The solar analysis has been carried out by means of the simulation software Heliodon 2, a digital 
tool which computes the energy collected by the buildings’ envelope during a determined period of 
time (day, month, season, year) and also reports the average values, if required [35]. In the present 
study, only the direct radiation has been taken into account. Possible effects of climate change are not 
considered in this case. 

 

Figure 5. Location of the studied sample and identification of the central unit in relation with the 
influencing surrounding. 
Figure 5. Location of the studied sample and identification of the central unit in relation with the
influencing surrounding.

Energies 2016, 9, 544  8 of 10 

 

Within the Eixample urban fabric, a homogeneous sample composed by nine blocks laid out in a 
3 × 3 layout has been selected (Figure 5). The model has been developed with the Computer Aided 
Design Software Autocad 2010 in three dimensions and real scale. The 3d sample has been modelled 
by following the principles defined by the Open Geospatial Consortium for the LoD2 scale, which 
considers a morphological detail scale with deviations smaller than 2 m compared with reality. This 
level of detail is considered appropriate based on several factors: Firstly, the availability of 
geometrical information on the analysed sector. Secondly, the technical potential of the used 
software, Heliodon and Autocad. Finally, and more important, the expected deviation from results 
that this simplification could involve [2] (Figure 6). 

 
Figure 6. 3D virtual morphological model of the homogeneous sample composed by 9 blocks of the 
Eixample urban fabric compared with an aerial photograph. 

The virtual model was built using the land register cartographic base, available for digital 
download at the website of the Barcelona City Council. A supervising field work was carried on, to 
validate the obtained geometry and the accuracy of the used base. The reduced extension of the 
sample and the regular topography of the terrain allowed considering the territory as completely flat. 
The influence of vegetation and urban furniture was disregarded, as the focus of the study was 
centred on the built environment [2]. 

The solar gains have been calculated for the central block in both summer (from 21 June to 20 
September) and winter (from 21 December to 20 March) season, considering the presence of the 
surroundings blocks which act as obstructions. 

Three main solar indicators are defined in order to assess the solar performance of the Eixample 
urban fabric, which are: 

 The Potential Solar Gains—G (kWh), which represent the global amount of energy cumulated 
by an exposed surface. 

 The Sun Factor—F (kWh/m2), which expresses the average solar flux per surface unit area. 
 The Influence of Obstructions—I (%), which evaluates the losses in potential solar gains due to 

the shadows cast by the neighbouring blocks. 

It is considered that the solar potential of an urban fabric does not simply correspond to the 
quantity of the potential solar gains, but it depends on the actual possibilities to exploit the energy 
collected for an active and/or a passive use. 

Therefore, in order to assess the extent by which the Eixample block could really exploit 
regarding its solar potential, it is necessary to study the distribution of the incoming direct radiation 
on the different parts of the block, which have been classified in five main categories: the roofs, the 
central courtyard ground, the external façades (facing the street), the internal façades (facing the 
internal courtyard) and the “residual surfaces”. The last group includes all the irregular elements of 
the block’s envelope where the employment of the solar energy collected is not considered feasible 
at all, such as the small patios, the stairwells, the projections and the folders of the façades etc. 

Figure 6. 3D virtual morphological model of the homogeneous sample composed by 9 blocks of the
Eixample urban fabric compared with an aerial photograph.

The virtual model was built using the land register cartographic base, available for digital
download at the website of the Barcelona City Council. A supervising field work was carried on,
to validate the obtained geometry and the accuracy of the used base. The reduced extension of the
sample and the regular topography of the terrain allowed considering the territory as completely flat.
The influence of vegetation and urban furniture was disregarded, as the focus of the study was centred
on the built environment [2].

The solar gains have been calculated for the central block in both summer (from 21 June to
20 September) and winter (from 21 December to 20 March) season, considering the presence of the
surroundings blocks which act as obstructions.

Three main solar indicators are defined in order to assess the solar performance of the Eixample
urban fabric, which are:

‚ The Potential Solar Gains—G (kWh), which represent the global amount of energy cumulated by
an exposed surface.



Energies 2016, 9, 544 9 of 11

‚ The Sun Factor—F (kWh/m2), which expresses the average solar flux per surface unit area.
‚ The Influence of Obstructions—I (%), which evaluates the losses in potential solar gains due to

the shadows cast by the neighbouring blocks.

It is considered that the solar potential of an urban fabric does not simply correspond to the
quantity of the potential solar gains, but it depends on the actual possibilities to exploit the energy
collected for an active and/or a passive use.

Therefore, in order to assess the extent by which the Eixample block could really exploit regarding
its solar potential, it is necessary to study the distribution of the incoming direct radiation on the
different parts of the block, which have been classified in five main categories: the roofs, the central
courtyard ground, the external façades (facing the street), the internal façades (facing the internal
courtyard) and the “residual surfaces”. The last group includes all the irregular elements of the block’s
envelope where the employment of the solar energy collected is not considered feasible at all, such as
the small patios, the stairwells, the projections and the folders of the façades etc.

5. Conclusions

This study shows the possibilities of applying a methodology into a real case study to translate
theoretical concepts regarding energy use in urban centres into architectural practical applications.
This methodology has been based on a structured analysis of the existing, extracting general functional
parameters of the urban tissue and obtaining possible urban morphological modifications based
on the existing characteristics and possibilities. Therefore, the new possible city model we present
based on the use of renewable energies is a reconversion of existing tissues through operative tools
based on methodological processes of analysis and strategy driven interventions. The analysis in
a morphological urban scale has been proved essential to extract the main characteristics of the
case study and develop a set of intervention strategies. This strategy has shown the importance
of addressing current energy problems from an urban scale instead of only focusing on building’s
optimization. Strategies developed on a greater scale, with a convenient analysis and methodology
to support them, can achieve more decisive results than disconnected interventions. On the other
hand, this study also displays the importance of addressing the urban scale not only from a typological
point of view but also from a morphological perspective, to be able to extract information from
typological deviation that might become crucial to fully analyse the tissue from an energetic point of
view. Nevertheless, further steps after the urban analysis are also advisable to exploit the possibilities
from a building scale, including the detailed collecting systems implemented for different uses (heating,
electricity, lighting ...).

Although this article develops a methodology based on the study of solar radiation due to its
important role in the field of renewable energies, the same structure could be applied to other energy
issues. Therefore, a set of strategies regarding energetic interventions in the existing could be built to
form a more precise set of operative tools to intervene in existing urban tissues.

Moreover, it should also be considered that by addressing urban morphology through the
energetic point of view other structural and social changes will also be triggered in urban centres.
Although the main present concern is related with environmental issues, it is important to take into
account other consequences of urban morphology transformation. Therefore, further investigations
should focus on developing these side effects to achieve a complete picture of the subject.

Acknowledgments: This work has been supported by the Spanish Ministry of Economy under project code:
BIA2013-45597.

Author Contributions: The five authors contributed equally to the present paper. Curreli, A. conceived and
designed the main part of the research work during the thesis development. Coch, H. supervised the thesis.
All authors wrote, reviewed and commented on the manuscript. All authors have read and approved the
final manuscript.



Energies 2016, 9, 544 10 of 11

Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The founding sponsors had no role in the design
of the study; in the collection, analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, and in the
decision to publish the results.

References

1. Droege, P. La Città Rinnovabile; Guida Completa ad una Rivoluzione Urbana; Edizioni Ambiente: Milano, Italy,
2008. (In Italian)

2. Curreli, A. El Acceso Solar a la Escala del Tejido Urbano. Ph.D. Thesis, Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya,
Barcelona, Spain, 25 January 2016.

3. De Pascali, P. Città ed Energia. La Valenza Energetica dell’Organizzazione Insediativa; Franco Angeli Edizioni:
Milano, Italy, 2008.

4. Butera, F.M. Energia e Tecnologia fra Uomo e Ambiente, 1st ed.; Città Studis.s.c.r.l.: Milano, Italy, 1992.
5. Butera, F.M. Della Caverna a la Casa Ecologica. Storia del Comfort e dell’Energia; Edizioni Ambiente: Milano,

Italy, 2004.
6. Benevolo, L. Storia dell’Architettura Moderna, 18th ed.; Laterza: Roma, Italy, 1960.
7. Mumford, L. La Cittá Nella Storia; Edizioni di Comunità: Milano, Italy, 1964.
8. Banham, R. The Architecture of the Well-Tempered Environment, 2nd ed.; University of Chicago Press: Chicago,

IL, USA; The Architectural Press Ltd.: London, UK, 1984.
9. Ewing, R. Characteristics, Causes and Effects of Sprawl: A Literature Review. In Urban EcologyAn International

Perspective on the Interaction Between Humans and Nature, 1st ed.; Marzluff, J., Shulenberger, E., Endlicher, W.,
Alberti, M., Bradley, G., Ryan, C., ZumBrunnen, C., Simon, U., Eds.; Springer USA: New York, NY, USA, 2008.

10. Banham, R. Los Angeles: The Architecture of Four Ecologies; Allen Lane the Penguin Press: London, UK, 1971.
11. Mumford, L. New York et l’Urbanisme; Editions Seghers: Paris, France, 1965.
12. Raydan, D.; Steeners, K. Environmental urban design. In Environmental Design of Urban Buildings:

An Integrated Approach; Santamouris, M., Ed.; Routledge: New York, NY, USA, 2006; pp. 1–35.
13. World Commission on Environment and Development. Our Common Future; Oxford University: Oxford,

UK, 1987.
14. Beatley, T. Green Urbanism: Learning from European Cities; Island Press: Washington, DC, USA, 2000.
15. Hagan, S. Ecological Urbanism: The Nature of the City; Routledge: London, UK; New York, NY, USA, 2015.
16. Lehmann, S. Green Urbanism: Formulating a series of holistic principles. Sapiens 2010, 3. Available online:

https://sapiens.revues.org/1057 (accessed on 25 April 2016).
17. Winter, C.J. Solar cities. Renew. Energy 1994, 4, 15–26. [CrossRef]
18. Gupta, V. Thermal efficiency of building clusters: An index for non air-conditioned buildings in hot climates.

Energy Urban Built Form 1987, 2, 133–145.
19. Ratti, C.; Raydan, D.; Steemers, K. Building form and environmental performance: Archetypes, analysis and

an arid climate. Energy Build. 2003, 35, 49–59. [CrossRef]
20. Sattrup, P.A.; Strømann-Andersen, J. Building typologies in northern European cities: Daylight, solar access

and building energy use. J. Archit. Plan. Res. 2013, 30, 56–76.
21. Compagnon, R. Solar and daylight availability in the urban fabric. Energy Build. 2004, 36, 321–328. [CrossRef]
22. Rasheed, A.; Robinson, D.; Narayanan, C.; Lakehal, D. On the effects of complex urban geometries on

mesoscale modelling. In Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on Urban Climate, Yokohama,
Japan, 29 June–3 July 2009.

23. Curreli, A.; Coch, H. 3-D geometrical modelling and solar radiation at urban scale: Morphological or
typological mock-ups? In Proceedings of the CISBAT2013 International Conference: Cleantech for Smart
Cities and Buildings form Nano to Urban Scale, Lausanne, Switzerland, 4–6 September 2013; pp. 1029–1034.

24. Jurelionis, A.; Bouris, D.G. Impact of Urban Morphology on Infiltration-Induced Building Energy
Consumption. Energies 2016, 9, 177. [CrossRef]

25. Rubio-Bellido, C.; Jesús, A.P.-A.; Sánchez-Montañés, B. A Simplified Simulation Model for Predicting
Radiative Transfer in Long Street Canyons under High Solar Radiation Conditions. Energies 2015, 8,
13540–13558. [CrossRef]

26. Coch, H.; Pardal, C.; Pagès-Ramon, A.; Isalgué, A.; Crespo, I. Better than optimum: Integrated:
The integration of renewable energy in architecture as an optimization factor. Renew. Energy Serv. Mank.
2015, 2, 569–579.

https://sapiens.revues.org/1057
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0960-1481(94)90059-0
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0378-7788(02)00079-8
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.enbuild.2004.01.009
http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/en9030177
http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/en81212383


Energies 2016, 9, 544 11 of 11

27. Permanyer, L. L’eixample, 150 Anys d’Història; Viena Edicions: Barcelona, Spain, 2008.
28. Cerdà, I. 1867—Teoría general de la Urbanización y Aplicación de sus Principios y Doctrinas a la Reforma y Ensanche

de BarcelonaImprenta Española: Madrid, Spain, 1867; Edition facsímile; Instituto de Estudios Fiscales: Madrid,
Spain, 1968–1971.

29. De Manuel, S.-M. Deu Lliçons Sobre Barcelona; Laboratori d’Urbanisme de Barcelona: Barcelona, Spain, 2008.
30. Busquets, J. Cerdà i la Barcelona del Futur; Centre de Cultura Contemporànea de Barcelona: Barcelona,

Spain, 2009.
31. Solà Morales, M. Els Eixamples. Treballs sobre Cerdà i el seu Eixample a Barcelona; Laboratori d’Urbanisme de

Barcelona: Barcelona, Spain, 1992.
32. Solà Morales, M. Cerdà/ Ensanche; Ediciones UPC: Barcelona, Spain, 2010.
33. Busquets, J. Projecte d’eixample vs. Eixample actual. In Treballs Sobre Cerdà i el seu Eixample a Barcelona,

1st Ed.; Busquets, J., Corominas, M., Eizaguirre, X., Sabaté, J., Eds.; Laboratori d’Urbanisme de Barcelona:
Barcelona, Spain, 1992.

34. Curreli, A.; Coch, H. Urban Layout and Façade Solar Potential: A case study in the Mediterranean Region.
ACE 2013, 21, 116–132.

35. Beckers, B.; Rodríguez, D. Helping architects to design their personal daylight. WSEAS Trans. Environ. Dev.
2009, 7, 467–477.

© 2016 by the authors; licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC-BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

http://creativecommons.org/
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/

	Introduction 
	Results 
	Case Study 
	Distribution of the Sun Factor (F) 
	Distribution of the Potential Solar Gains (G) 

	Discussion 
	Materials and Methods 
	Conclusions 

