












































Microsoft Word - PLEA_FinalPaper_ref_559.doc


PLEA 2008 – 25th Conference on Passive and Low Energy Architecture, Dublin, 22nd to 24th October 2008 

559: Building sensitivity to climatic fluctuations and user's 
actions: a challenge for high-tech buildings 

M.Palme, A.Isalgué, H.Coch, R.Serra 
 

Architecture, energy and environment. School of Architecture. Technical University of Catalonia (UPC) 
Barcelona, Spain. Corresponding author: massimopalme@hotmail.com 

 
Building sensitivity to climatic fluctuations and users’ actions: a challenge for high-

tech buildings  
Due to the current concern about energy consumption and CO2 emissions, buildings are 
increasingly insulated and equipped with controlling machinery. However, the effective 
energy consumption of high-tech buildings is often higher than expected, and users’ 
sensation of temperature comfort is not as good as it should be. One reason for the poor 
performance of these new buildings could be the high sensitivity to changes in weather and 
user-dependent variables. A sensitivity analysis can be conducted using thermal equations 
or a software simulation, or by directly analyzing real measurements. Sensitivity analyses 
show that the zone performance of high-tech buildings often varies in different spaces. This 
variation can be found in the Planes de Son centre located in the Catalan Pyrenees, which 
was built with low-energy strategies in mind. The performance of the different spaces 
depends very strongly on the orientation of the different zones that make up the building. 
This work analyzes data measured in 2006 and 2007 and shows that extreme sensitivity to 
changes is the factor that most contributes to the imperfect performance of the building. The 
results show that the south-facing glass façade does not perform as well as expected, 
despite abundant solar radiation. The dimensions of the building and the thermal systems 
are also analyzed to determine their influence on sensitivity. Potential ways of increasing the 
efficiency of the building are discussed, and a generic case is analyzed. In conclusion, the 
consumption and emissions of high-tech buildings could be further reduced if they respond 
appropriately to variations in weather and user actions.  
 
Keywords: energy consumption, sensitivity, users, climatic fluctuations 

 
 
1. Introduction  
Due to the current concern about energy 
consumption and CO2 emissions, buildings are 
increasingly insulated and equipped with 
controlling machinery. However, the effective 
energy consumption of high-tech buildings is 
often higher than expected and, importantly, they 
are not as comfortable for users as they should 
be. One reason for the poor performance of these 
new buildings might be their high sensitivity to 
changes in weather and user-dependent 
variables. Recently, some studies centred on the 
sensitivity of the building's thermal performance 
to changes in the various parameters that appear 
in the thermal exchanges of the building [1].  
In this work, we analyse the thermal sensitivity of 
well-insulated buildings in an elemental way. We 
use the Planes de Son centre in the Pyrenees as 
a case study and analyze measurements taken in 
this building and simulations of it. Finally, some 
conclusions are drawn.  
 
2. Elementary thermal sensitivity analysis 
This section analyses buildings’ sensitivity to 
fluctuations in the variables that influence thermal 
performance. A general sensitivity analysis can 
be performed by differentiating the balance 
equation: 

; 

  

 

 
where Ti is the internal temperature, Te is the 
external temperature, I is the solar radiation 
contribution (W/m3), D is the internal contribution 
(people and systems, W/m3), and G is the 
volumetric loss coefficient of the entire building 
(transmission and ventilation, in W/m3ºC). The 
equation shows that I and D fluctuations have a 
greater effect on internal temperature variation 
when the loss coefficient G is small. The loss 
coefficient varies, particularly when users carry 
out different activities in the building. The G2 term 
in the equation shows that a G fluctuation is 
greater when the G coefficient is small, and can 
easily be more significant than the I and D 
changes. 
For instance, assume a building is in a cold 
climate, Te= 2ºC; if the building is well insulated, 
G can be 0.35. If we have I= 3.5 W/m3; and D = 
3.5 W/m3, then Ti = 22ºC, which is a good result. 
But if G changes by 30% due to an increase in 
ventilation on a windy day (here G is low and the 
contribution of ventilation to G is relatively high), 
then Ti is nearer to 16ºC. Similarly, with the same 
initial G conditions on a cloudy day, the solar 
contribution becomes negligible, and the indoor 
temperature is nearly Ti = 12ºC. 



PLEA 2008 – 25th Conference on Passive and Low Energy Architecture, Dublin, 22nd to 24th October 2008 

 
 
3. A case study of sensitivity 
 
3.1 Introduction 
An analysis of thermal sensitivity is important, 
even if it is not exhaustive. The following factors 
must be considered: the accumulation in thermal 
mass, the spatial distribution of the internal 
temperature and the time-dependent 
displacement of the thermal wave in the walls. 
Therefore, it is important to perform a simulation 
in the design phase, and to analyse real data 
when the building is in use. 
The main objective of this study is to compare a 
general sensitivity analysis with data measured in 
a real building that was designed with low-energy 
strategies in mind by the architect Francesc Rius. 
The building is the Planes de Son Nature Centre. 
The data were collected in 2006 and 2007, as 
part of the EULEB project of the Intelligent 
Energy Europe Programme in collaboration with 
TramaTecnoambiental SA. 
 
3.2 Location 
The Planes de Son Nature Centre is located in 
the Catalan Pyrenees at 1350 m. above sea 
level. The “Fundació territori i paisatge” of the 
Caixa de Catalunya savings bank financed this 
building, which was designed and constructed to 
be sustainable. The architect Frances Rius was 
commissioned to achieve this objective. The final 
result was a south-oriented and semi-buried 
building that improves solar radiation income and 
avoids day-night fluctuations. The insulation 
values are also higher than average in this zone. 
 
Table 1. Average external temperature, solar radiation 
(horizontal plane) and relative humidity of the location 

 
 
The building is used as a nature centre where 
groups or individual users can be in close contact 
with nature for a period of time. Courses last from 
one day to two weeks and a lot of activities are 
arranged. The centre functions as an isolated 
hotel in the mountains, so all the facilities are 
provided in the main building. 
The location is 42ºN, 1ºE, 1350 m. The external 
temperature, the relative humidity and the 
radiation values are shown in Table 1 [2]. 

 
3.3 The zones of the building 
The building is divided into different zones with 
different uses and occupancies. These include:  

- The laboratory, located in the north, on the 
lower floor below ground level. 

- The auditorium, located in the north, on the 
lower floor below ground level. 

- The kitchen, located in the north, on the 
lower floor below ground level. 

- The living rooms, located in the south-west 
on the lower floor 

- The reception and the dining room, located 
in the south-east on the lower floor 

- The bathrooms, located in the north, on the 
lower floor below ground level. 

- The bedrooms, located in the south-east and 
south-west on the upper floor 

 

 
 
 
Figure 1. Planes de Son first and lower floor 
 

 
Figure 2. South-north section of the Planes de 

Son Centre 
 

 External 
average 
temperature 
(ºC) 

Solar 
radiation 
(horizontal 
plane) 
(kJ/m2) 

Relative 
humidity 
(%) 

January 4.8 7478 75.5 
February 3.4 10889 60.4 
March 3.6 15200 56.4 
April 8.7 18489 68.8 
May 11.5 21811 72.7 
June 14.1 23233 77.7 
July 19.5 23100 71.0 
August 16 20378 70.6 
September 10.3 16122 75.6 
October 12.2 12567 68.8 
November 8 8433 71.4 
December 3.4 7033 63.9 



PLEA 2008 – 25th Conference on Passive and Low Energy Architecture, Dublin, 22nd to 24th October 2008 

3.4 Materials 
The building was constructed using typical 
regional materials as far as possible. The north 
zone is completely below ground level and the 
roof is green and 1.5 m thick. The east façade is 
composed of 0.2 m thick concrete and 0,01 m 
wood insulation. The west façade is composed of 
0.2 m thick concrete without insulation. . The 
south façade is a light façade, made entirely of 
glass. Water and photovoltaic solar panels are 
located on the upper floor. Behind some of the 
glass on the lower floor and part of the upper 
floor is a high absorption panel, to increase the 
solar energy gain.  
After a year of occupancy, uncomfortable internal 
temperatures have been reported. The Nature 
Centre’s management was surprised when 
informed of the overheating problem in winter, 
leading to windows being opened during hours of 
solar radiation. Though the energy consumption 
was not far from the expected results, which 
indicates that the indoor temperature comfort was 
good, this does not tally with the users’ 
perceptions. 
To explain this behaviour, it is necessary to 
analyze the performance of the different zones 
throughout the year. 
 
3.5 Analyzed data 
Temperature sensors were placed at different 
points of the building to obtain measurements of 
its performance. Data were registered hourly from 
July 2006 to June 2007. In March 2007, both the 
superficial and radiant temperatures were 
recorded in different places and at different times. 
The daily minimum, maximum and average 
temperatures were obtained from data for various 
points. Then, the monthly absolute minimum, the 
absolute maximum, the average daily maximum 
and minimum and the monthly average 
temperatures were obtained. These data were 
used to undertake a zone analysis, in which the 
temperature of the different zones, the 
correspondence with the impulsion temperature 
of the heating system (a radiant floor) and the 
daily evolution of the supposed temperature 
comfort were compared. The data showed that 
variations in the performance of the different 
zones were very high. Therefore, a surface 
temperature analysis was undertaken for the 
most interesting places. Finally, the data were 
used to find an explanation for the claims of the 
centres’ staff and users. 
 
 
4. Results 
 
4.1 Sensitivity analysis 
The transmission and ventilation coefficients per 
unit volume can be calculated by [3]: 
 

 

 

And 
 

 

 
Table 2 shows the transmission coefficients per 
unit surface of the walls and the corresponding 
surfaces. 
 
Table 2. Transmission coefficients of the walls 
Wall U 

(W/m2ºC) 
S(m2) U.S (W/ºC) 

ext. east  2.9 23 66.7 
ext. west 4 60 240 
ext. south 0.48 192 92.1 
ext. north (buried) 0.38 478 181 
windows 1.7 267 453.9 
green roof 0.28 1200 336 

 
The floor is 4 meters under the ground. 
Consequently, it does not contribute to the 
transmission. 
With these values and the total volume of the 
building (7000 m2), the G coefficient is 0.2 
W/(m3ºC). 
The ventilation coefficient depends on the volume 
of air per person needed to guarantee comfort. It 
varies from 0.29 to 0.87 W/(m3ºC) in normal use 
conditions, depending on the occupation density 
of the zones. Users can open lower floor windows 
and open or close a thermal protection system in 
the upper floor bedrooms. Therefore, the users’ 
actions can change the ventilation coefficient 
values considerably.  
The radiation term I depends strongly on the 
absorption panels. An absorption coefficient of 
0.8 can be considered very high. Data measured 
on site demonstrate that the absorption level is 
very good.  
With equation [4]: 
 

 
 
and considering the values in Table 1 (to convert 
data from the horizontal plane to the vertical 
southern plane, a coefficient of 1.67 can be used 
in winter and a coefficient of 0.45 in summer), I 
assumes the values shown in Table 3. 
 
Table 3. Irradiation values (W/m3ºC) 
month Jan Feb March April May June 
I(W/m3) 5.5 5.6 5.3 4.8 4.4 3.9 
month July August Sept Oct Nov Dec 
I(W/m3) 3.8 3.9 4.2 4.6 5.2 5.3 
 
These values were obtained from average values 
of radiation incoming in a horizontal plane. This 
means that the I fluctuation can be very high. The 
real values of I change range from 0 (no direct 
radiation incoming) to 10 or more watts per cubic 
meter. 
The internal contributions can be estimated as 58 
W per person, and 8 kW from the computers, 
lights and other electrical apparatus. For an 
average occupancy of 80 people, the D value is 



PLEA 2008 – 25th Conference on Passive and Low Energy Architecture, Dublin, 22nd to 24th October 2008 

1.8 W/m3. Notice that the heating-cooling power 
was not considered in the D coefficient 
evaluation. The building is supposed to have zero 
energy performance.  
With these values, it was possible to determine a 
sensitivity coefficient for each fluctuation. For 
example, the sensitivity to a change in the 
incoming solar radiation from 5 to 10 W/m3 is: 
 

 

 
for an external temperature of 10ºC and a 
ventilation term of 0.3 W/(m3ºC). Changes due to 
users’ actions, such as a fluctuation in the G 
ventilation term from 0.3 to 0.6 W/(m3ºC), can be 
represented by: 
 

 

 
The values of the changes in the internal 
temperature (40% for a fluctuation in the solar 
radiation and 35% for a fluctuation in the 
ventilation coefficient) are very high. In 
comparison, a traditional building, constructed 
using typical regional techniques and materials 
(granite walls, partial wood insulation, small 
windows with wood protections, low shape 
coefficient), has a G transmission coefficient near 
to 1, and an extremely high accumulation of heat 
in the thermal mass. Its sensitivity coefficient is 
0.2 for a fluctuation in incoming solar radiation 
and 0.05 for a fluctuation in the ventilation term, 
in the same conditions as the Planes de Son 
evaluation.  
 
4.2 Simulation 
As the above sensitivity analysis is not 
exhaustive, to confirm the results an Ecotect 
software simulation was performed. The heating 
demand was small, but there was a cooling 
demand due to the incoming solar radiation. In 
fact, the solar radiation energy is not well 
distributed in the building and the accumulation in 
mass is lower than expected. A zone analysis 
shows that the south-facing zones have a highly 
different performance to the north-facing zones 
and to the zones protected from the incoming 
radiation. The south-facing zones require cooling, 
when only ventilation is available. The net result 
is that thermal energy which cannot be collected 
is simply dissipated without being used. 
 
4.3 Measured data analysis 
The sensitivity analysis and the Ecotect 
simulation suggest that the Planes de Son 
building has a bad distribution of the solar power 
incoming throughout the year. The data 
measured on site confirm this hypothesis. Figure 
3 shows the monthly average temperature, and 
Figure 4 shows the absolute maximum 
temperature. The lower floor, south-facing zone 
has a very different performance to the other 
zones, including the upper floor zones that also 

face south. The reason for this difference in 
performance is the high incoming solar radiation. 
In fact, the incoming radiation depends on the 
orientation and, clearly, on the obstruction of the 
façade. On the upper floor, the thermal panels for 
warm water occupy nearly 60% of the surface. 
On the lower floor, the whole façade is occupied 
by windows, which are the cause of overheating 
in this zone. As explained by the Centre’s staff, 
people always feel warm in the south-facing zone 
of the lower floor, especially in winter. 
 

 

 
 

Figure 3. Monthly average temperature in various 
zones of the building 

 

 

 
 

Figure 4. Monthly absolute maximum 
temperature in various zones of the building 

 
 
Figures 5 and 6 show the temperature evolution 
on 13 January 2007 in the laboratory and in the 
dining room. The temperature in the dining room 
fluctuated from 22 to 29ºC, while in the laboratory 
it only varied from 19.5 to 20 ºC.  



PLEA 2008 – 25th Conference on Passive and Low Energy Architecture, Dublin, 22nd to 24th October 2008 

 
Figure 5. Temperature in the laboratory on 13 

January 2007 
 
 

 
 
Figure 6. Temperature in the dining room on the 

13 January 2007 
 
The main cause of the building’s performance 
problems seems to be the irregular distribution of 
absorbed energy. In March 2007, surface 
temperatures were measured to confirm this 
hypothesis. Figure 7 shows an absorption panel. 
It is located in the middle of the south façade on 
the ground floor. On the ground floor the panels 
are in function every time. On the first floor, users 
dispose of a wood insulated flap, but the 
instructions of use have a different meaning 
(there is an advice of close the flap during the 
night but not during the day). The panels directly 
heat their immediate spaces, but not the most 
internal parts or the massive part of the building, 
which are too far away. On the first floor the 
panels are smaller, because of the presence of 
the water panels in the façade. Table 4 shows the 
external temperature, the temperature of the 
glass (internal and external) and the absorption 
panel temperature in different conditions of 
incoming solar radiation. The temperatures of the 
absorption panel and of the glass increased very 
rapidly when the sun was out. On 4 March 2007, 
which was a sunny day, the temperature of the 
absorption panel changed from 18ºC at 8.00 am 
to 78ºC at 1 pm. The temperature on the inside of 
the glass increased from 10 to 54ºC in this time. 
These rapid changes mean that the energy is not 
correctly accumulated. The absorption zones 
communicate directly with the internal zones of 
the building, so the air moves towards the interior 
and generates the sensation of overheating. A 
significant part is immediately returned to the air 

between the panel and the glass. This generates 
an increase in the internal temperature in winter 
in the south-facing zones of the building, and 
discomfort to the users.   
 
 
Table 4. External temperature, glass temperature and 
absorption panel temperature registered on site 
day 
time 

T ext 
(ºC) 

T glass 
external 
(ºC) 

T glass 
internal 
(ºC) 

T absorption 
panel (ºC) 

2/3/07 
16.00 

20 30 40 56 

2/3/07 
17.00 

18 24 32 40 

2/3/07 
18.30 

16 18 22 28 

2/3/07 
21.00 

8 12 18 20 

3/3/07 
8.00 

9 10 15 17 

3/3/07 
10.00 

12 14 30 38 

3/3/07 
13.00 

13 15 28 38 

3/3/07 
22.00 

9 8 10 15 

4/3/07 
8.00 

9 8 10 18 

4/3/07 
9.30 

15 18 24 38 

4/3/07 
12.00 

18 28 33 54 

4/3/07 
13.00 

20 38 54 78 

 

 
Figure 7. Absorption panel on the south-oriented 

façade. 
 
 
 



PLEA 2008 – 25th Conference on Passive and Low Energy Architecture, Dublin, 22nd to 24th October 2008 

5. Conclusions 
The sensitivity analysis, the ecotect software 
simulation and the analysis of the data measured 
on site explain the poor performance of the 
Planes de Son building. Ineffective distribution of 
the solar energy causes overheating on the 
south-facing lower floor. The zero energy heating 
performance obtained in the simulation is not 
real: the system is always functioning, and the 
north zones are not heated sufficiently with solar 
power. The thermal mass is also concentrated in 
the north of the building, where absorbed energy 
is not transferred. The dimensions of the building 
affect the function of the absorption: if the 
distance between the windows and the north 
walls were lower, the thermal mass would be able 
to accumulate. Below are some potential 
solutions: 

- Close off part of the windows to obtain warm 
air between the glass and the absorption 
panel. This air has to circulate in tubs or 
plenums and heat the north zones of the 
building.  

- Increase the number of water solar panels. 
Currently, the radiant floor is not the only 
energy source for the heating system. 
Increasing the number of solar panels could 
reduce the sensation of overheating on the 
lower floor. 

- Transfer the solar energy to the building’s 
north zone using a transition phase material, 
which conserves the latent energy in the 
phase transition. 

- Protect the windows on the lower floor. This 
solution does not improve the performance 
of the building, but will make it more 
comfortable for users. 

The following general conclusions can be drawn: 
- The insulation of buildings is not always 

consistent with the solar energy absorption. 
This relationship depends on the geometrical 
arrangement of the thermal mass. Passive 
absorption systems must be designed 
accurately in terms of their dimensions and 
strategies. 

- Increasing the insulation leads to higher 
sensitivity to climatic and user-dependent 
fluctuations. Users must be prepared to use 
the building control systems, which include 
windows and protection systems. 

- In the design phase, when a real data 
analysis is not possible, a sensitivity analysis 
has to be considered as an instrument for 
assessing the performance of the 
construction. However, simulation programs 
do not always provide a realistic view of the 
situation. 

- An appropriate orientation of the building is 
the most important factor for zero energy 
performance. However, the dimensions of 
the building and its zone divisions must also 
be considered to achieve zero energy. 

An energy demand analysis is not sufficient to 
evaluate the performance of a building. The zonal 
distribution of temperature, climatic fluctuations 
and users’ actions must also be considered. The 
case of the Planes de Son building demonstrates 

that imperfect temperature distribution generates 
user discomfort and a deviation from the 
calculated performance. A sensitivity analysis can 
be a rapid and simple instrument for assessing a 
design, and is associated with the current 
dynamic simulations.   
Users play an essential role in obtaining real zero 
energy performance of the building. For an 
exhaustive evaluation of the relevance of the 
user’s actions on the thermal performance of 
buildings in general, see [5]. Users’ actions 
depend on their perceptions of whether the 
temperature in the rooms is comfortable. 
Therefore, a study of the definition of comfort in 
dynamic conditions is needed for future 
architecture. For a preliminary study of the 
dynamical comfort, see [6]. The definition of a 
dynamical comfort could lead to the project of 
buildings with a relative self-control over the 
zones that compound it. Alternatively, a control 
system that dynamically regulates all the 
elements of a building could be considered.  
 
6. Acknowledgements 
This study was made possible by the UPC 
research grant programme and 
TramaTecnoambiental, SA. We are also grateful 
for the use of the Planes de Son facilities and the 
help from this centre’s management. 
 
7. References 
1. Saporito, A., Day, A.R., Karayannis T.G., 
Parand F.(2001)  Multi-parameter building 
thermal analysis using the lattice method for 
global optimisation; Energy and buildings 33, p. 
267-274, 
2. Catalan Meteorology Service (2008) 
http://www.meteocat.com 
3. Spain. CTE Código Técnico de la Edificación 
(2008). Ministerio de Vivienda, Spain 
4. Serra, R.; Coch, H. (1995) Arquitectura y 
energía natural; Edicions UPC; Barcelona  
5. Palme, M.; Isalgue, A.; Coch, H.; Serra, R. 
(2006) On the influence of users’ actions on 
thermal performance of buildings; 4ª EPIC 
Conference proceedings, Lyon, France 29 
November – 1 December 2006, p. 746-750 
6. Palme, M.; Coch, H.; Isalgué, A.; Marincic, I.; 
Fanchiotti, A. and R. Serra (2007) Dynamic 
sensation of comfort in buildings: the temperature 
changes effects; 2ª PALENC Conference 
proceedings, Crete, Greece 27-29 September 
2007, p. 13-18 
 
 


