






















































Side-View Atmospheres under Outdoor Midday High Luminance


buildings

Article

Side-View Atmospheres under Outdoor Midday
High Luminance

Urtza Uriarte 1,*, Rufino J. Hernández 2, Joan L. Zamora 1 and Antonio Isalgue 1

1 Architecture Technology Department, Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya·Barcelona-Tech, Av.
Diagonal 649-651, 08028 Barcelona, Spain; joan.lluis.zamora@upc.edu (J.L.Z.); antonio.isalgue@upc.edu (A.I.)

2 Architecture Department, University of the Basque Country, Plaza Oñati 2, 20018 Donostia-San Sebastián,
Spain; rufinojavier.hernandez@ehu.es

* Correspondence: urtza.uriarte@upc.edu; Tel.: +34-615-73-2693

Academic Editor: Yuehong Su
Received: 30 July 2016; Accepted: 24 November 2016; Published: 20 December 2016

Abstract: This work deals with daylighting for indoor quality atmospheres, considering building skins
and side-views. We also tested the vision perception provided by highly glazed façades. Several Spanish
restaurants were analyzed, and two were assessed and measured under outside midday high luminance.
The selected pictures can be identified as restaurants via MIT Scene Recognition software and are used
to demonstrate working, stressful, and socializing atmospheres. Light and vision detailed analysis was
performed defining three workplanes—“table”, “person”, and “outside”—from the viewpoint of the
user. The obtained DGP (daylight glare probability) for the first case (facing southeast) shows a higher
glare probability than the second (facing north). In both restaurants, there is notable spatial contrast
and high information content. If, in the overall perception, the adaptation from the intermediate
workplane is considered, the DGP is lower than if only one workplane is considered. The conducted
indicative survey shows that there is a high light contrast, and there are some undesirable visual
elements. The studied fully glazed façades tend to provide fraught atmospheres. These would be
useful for some stimulating activities; however, for calm restaurants that offer tasting menus with
quality food, it seems that the studied fully glazed façades may not be suitable.

Keywords: glazed façade; daylight; discomfort glare; hospitality; spatial contrast; visual comfort

1. Introduction

Daylighting is a design parameter that allows for the configuration of different indoor atmospheres
with low energy consumption [1]. Activities with side-lit spaces are very common. It is one of the most
ancient lighting applications owing to easy, practical, and nearby aperture on the façade. Usually, this
light is provided by a façade and is complemented by an outside view. This kind of view could be
called a side-view. On the one hand, in an office open-plan environment, it is proven that occupants
generally want a visual connection to the outdoors [2]. In addition, daylighting and outdoor views
increase efficiency in activity and provide stress relief [3]. Moreover, according to some psychological
studies, it is easier to concentrate if there are fewer objects to pay attention to [4]. Therefore, if occupants
are not comfortable, energy consumption will tend to rise, increasing electric lighting demand [5,6].

On the other hand, tasting, chatting, and having an outside view are very common activities
involved in the restaurant industry. In restaurants, the visual quality of an atmosphere is important.
However, not all façade designs can achieve a balanced concentration level on these particular
aforementioned activities. In these activities of tourist areas, visual discomfort is socially tolerated.
Cultural habits affect a user’s perception, but conditions without well-being are often accepted [7].
Intimacy is important for a calm and reserved atmosphere and provides an ideal atmosphere for
thinking, reflecting, and meditating [8].

Buildings 2016, 6, 53; doi:10.3390/buildings6040053 www.mdpi.com/journal/buildings

http://www.mdpi.com/journal/buildings
http://www.mdpi.com
http://www.mdpi.com/journal/buildings


Buildings 2016, 6, 53 2 of 14

In the modern age with new materials for building structures as metal and concrete, façades ceased
to be bearing walls of stone. In addition, electric lighting, HVAC systems, and control over physical
environments have facilitated the glazing of façades [9]. At the same time, interest in landscapes and
cityscapes has increased the demand for glazed façades.

In recent decades, outdoor views at restaurants have increased [10]. Cityscapes, landscapes,
and seascapes as scenery have become valuable. In addition, the gastronomic sector has evolved
considerably; as a result, the dining experience has become a part of our social lives [11]. Often, these
two activities are shown to be integrated. Therefore, restaurant-goers prefer sitting where they are
provided with an exterior side-view.

Highly glazed buildings are often designed to provide great access to the view and to admit
daylight. However, in high luminance environments (i.e., midday), it tends to be difficult to attain
clear outside views without disturbance owing to glare [12]. These environments also tend to provide
high information content, related to spatial contrast, potentially causing a decrease in concentration
levels for particular activities [13]. In addition, not all of the transparent surface is used to provide
views and light, causing privacy loss.

Daylight glare methods have been used in office activities [14]. Although outside views are in
high demand in the hotel industry, food light intensity, color, and lighting effects have not been studied
much at restaurants.

This research proposes a quality atmosphere analysis for future daylighting designs in any outdoor
location in midday high luminance contexts, keeping comfort with a low amount of energy [15].
This study tends to be indicative for the design of all new buildings, including restaurants. It is not
intended for a particular restaurant case study. The suggestions made herein are for outside midday
high luminance contexts, owing to common outside conditions throughout the year in Spain. This time
point is common, because snacks such as tapas and pinchos are often eaten outside with high luminance.
The sun position at this time is high enough to avoid direct sunlight, but it is possible to have very high
luminance on some surfaces (with high amounts of light reflection). In addition, the specific goal is to
optimize skins according to the outside view and concentrate on the internal ambiance for comfortable
eating and chatting. Furthermore, the final objective is to provide recommendations on glazed façades
for restaurants (see Figure 1) and to take this into account for the possible integration of restaurant
façades with overall building envelope designs [16]. Consequently, whether classical glare methods
are useful for restaurants is tested. Accordingly, two restaurants from Spain with glazed façades are
selected, one with a southeast orientation and one with a north orientation, to check glare probability
and spatial contrast.

Buildings 2016, 6, 53    2 of 14 

Intimacy  is  important  for a calm and reserved atmosphere and provides an  ideal atmosphere  for 

thinking, reflecting, and meditating [8]. 

In  the modern age with new materials for building structures as metal and concrete,  façades 

ceased to be bearing walls of stone. In addition, electric lighting, HVAC systems, and control over 

physical  environments  have  facilitated  the  glazing  of  façades  [9]. At  the  same  time,  interest  in 

landscapes and cityscapes has increased the demand for glazed façades.   

In recent decades, outdoor views at restaurants have increased [10]. Cityscapes, landscapes, and 

seascapes  as  scenery  have  become  valuable.  In  addition,  the  gastronomic  sector  has  evolved 

considerably; as a result, the dining experience has become a part of our social lives [11]. Often, these 

two activities are shown to be integrated. Therefore, restaurant‐goers prefer sitting where they are 

provided with an exterior side‐view. 

Highly glazed buildings are often designed  to provide great access  to  the view and  to admit 

daylight. However, in high luminance environments (i.e., midday), it tends to be difficult to attain 

clear  outside  views without  disturbance  owing  to  glare  [12].  These  environments  also  tend  to 

provide  high  information  content,  related  to  spatial  contrast,  potentially  causing  a  decrease  in 

concentration  levels  for particular activities  [13].  In addition, not all of  the  transparent  surface  is 

used to provide views and light, causing privacy loss. 

Daylight glare methods have been used in office activities [14]. Although outside views are in 

high demand  in  the hotel  industry,  food  light  intensity, color, and  lighting effects have not been 

studied much at restaurants. 

This  research proposes  a quality  atmosphere  analysis  for  future daylighting designs  in  any 

outdoor location in midday high luminance contexts, keeping comfort with a low amount of energy 

[15]. This study tends to be indicative for the design of all new buildings, including restaurants. It is 

not  intended  for a particular  restaurant  case  study. The  suggestions made herein are  for outside 

midday high luminance contexts, owing to common outside conditions throughout the year in Spain. 

This time point is common, because snacks such as tapas and pinchos are often eaten outside with 

high  luminance. The  sun  position  at  this  time  is  high  enough  to  avoid direct  sunlight,  but  it  is 

possible to have very high  luminance on some surfaces (with high amounts of light reflection). In 

addition, the specific goal is to optimize skins according to the outside view and concentrate on the 

internal ambiance for comfortable eating and chatting. Furthermore, the final objective is to provide 

recommendations on glazed façades for restaurants (see Figure 1) and to take this into account for 

the  possible  integration  of  restaurant  façades  with  overall  building  envelope  designs  [16]. 

Consequently, whether classical glare methods are useful for restaurants is tested. Accordingly, two 

restaurants from Spain with glazed façades are selected, one with a southeast orientation and one 

with a north orientation, to check glare probability and spatial contrast. 

 

Figure 1. Glazed façades of restaurants without overall building façade integration. In the first row,
restaurants with glazed façades in Zarautz (nearby Bilbao); in the second row, restaurants with glazed
façades in La Barceloneta (neighborhood of Barcelona).



Buildings 2016, 6, 53 3 of 14

2. Material and Methods

2.1. Selected Cases

Selected case studies are related to an activity where the concentration of outside vision, taste,
and chatting with daylighting is required [17]. Before analyzing the two restaurants selected, several
other restaurants in La Barceloneta, a neighbourhood of Barcelona, and Zarautz, a town next to Bilbao
(both in Spain), were studied to observe the most common patterns. The location, the position, and the
façade were considered for each restaurant.

In La Barceloneta, almost half of the façades analyzed are highly glazed, almost all of them
are located on the seafront (facing approximately south), and all of them are on the ground floor.
In Zarautz, nearly half of the façades analyzed are highly glazed, almost all of them are located on the
seafront (facing approximately north), and most of them are on the ground floor (see Figure 2).

Buildings 2016, 6, 53    3 of 14 

Figure 1. Glazed façades of restaurants without overall building façade integration. In the first row, 

restaurants with  glazed  façades  in Zarautz  (nearby  Bilbao);  in  the  second  row,  restaurants with 

glazed façades in La Barceloneta (neighborhood of Barcelona). 

2. Material and Methods 

2.1. Selected Cases 

Selected case studies are related to an activity where the concentration of outside vision, taste, 

and chatting with daylighting is required [17]. Before analyzing the two restaurants selected, several 

other  restaurants  in La Barceloneta,  a neighbourhood of Barcelona,  and Zarautz,  a  town next  to 

Bilbao (both in Spain), were studied to observe the most common patterns. The location, the position, 

and the façade were considered for each restaurant.   

In La Barceloneta, almost half of the façades analyzed are highly glazed, almost all of them are 

located on  the seafront  (facing approximately south), and all of  them are on  the ground  floor.  In 

Zarautz, nearly half of the façades analyzed are highly glazed, almost all of them are located on the 

seafront (facing approximately north), and most of them are on the ground floor (see Figure 2). 

 

Figure 2. Analyzed restaurants in Spain prior to the two main case studies. (top) Restaurants of La 

Barceloneta (a neighborhood of Barcelona); (bottom) Restaurants of Zarautz (nearby Bilbao). 

Accordingly, many restaurants have glazed façades, are on the seafront, and are on the ground 

floor.  The  two  restaurants  selected  follow  this  description, which  is  the most  common  pattern 

among all restaurants analyzed. Thus, they are representative of the restaurants that provide outside 

views and place value on activities such as tasting and chatting. Pictures and scene recognition tools 

have been used to ensure that the restaurants selected are representative. 

2.2. Measuring Instruments 

We  used  two measuring  instruments. The  first  is  a digital  camera  (Canon EOS  600D, with 

Canon objective EFS 18–55mm, Canon, Tokyo, Japan) fitted with a circular fisheye lens (Gloxy; Front 

Filter Size, 67 mm; conversion factor, 0.42×; thread Size, 46 mm, Gloxy, Tokyo, Japan). The second 

instrument  is  a device  to measure  the  illumination  level  (the Hagner Digital Photometer TP200, 

B.Hagner AB, Solna, Sweden). The measuring range is 0.1–200,000 Ix, and the accuracy is ±3% (±1 in 

last digit). The  luminance meter  (cd/m2)  acceptance  angle  is  approximately  1/30°. The  limits  are 

Figure 2. Analyzed restaurants in Spain prior to the two main case studies. (top) Restaurants of La
Barceloneta (a neighborhood of Barcelona); (bottom) Restaurants of Zarautz (nearby Bilbao).

Accordingly, many restaurants have glazed façades, are on the seafront, and are on the ground
floor. The two restaurants selected follow this description, which is the most common pattern among
all restaurants analyzed. Thus, they are representative of the restaurants that provide outside views
and place value on activities such as tasting and chatting. Pictures and scene recognition tools have
been used to ensure that the restaurants selected are representative.

2.2. Measuring Instruments

We used two measuring instruments. The first is a digital camera (Canon EOS 600D, with Canon
objective EFS 18–55mm, Canon, Tokyo, Japan) fitted with a circular fisheye lens (Gloxy; Front Filter
Size, 67 mm; conversion factor, 0.42×; thread Size, 46 mm, Gloxy, Tokyo, Japan). The second instrument
is a device to measure the illumination level (the Hagner Digital Photometer TP200, B.Hagner AB,
Solna, Sweden). The measuring range is 0.1–200,000 Ix, and the accuracy is ±3% (±1 in last digit).
The luminance meter (cd/m2) acceptance angle is approximately 1/30◦. The limits are sufficient
to verify the measurements taken in our study, as the margins have not been exceeded in any case
(see Figure 3).



Buildings 2016, 6, 53 4 of 14

Buildings 2016, 6, 53    4 of 14 

sufficient to verify the measurements taken in our study, as the margins have not been exceeded in 

any case (see Figure 3). 

 

Figure 3. The two restaurants that have been selected in accordance with the most common pattern 

found among all restaurants analyzed. The picture on the left is a restaurant in La Barceloneta (Ca la 

Nuri). The picture on the right is a restaurant in Zarautz (Beach). 

2.3. Methodology 

The methodology aims to demonstrate that the pictures are identify the restaurant, that there is 

a probability of glare, that there is a high spatial contrast, and that there might be an uncomfortable 

light atmosphere in the restaurant. The steps of this process are indicated in Table 1. 

Table 1. Description of the steps of the methodology used. 

Steps Description

1. Recognition 

An additional test for the recognition of the workplane 

according to the representative and relevant information 

of the restaurants 

2. Daylight Glare Probability (DGP) 
A calculation of the DGP index and glare sources of each 

workplane 

3. Spatial Contrast  A calculation of spatial contrast of each workplane 

4. Indicative survey 
Indicative questions related to the outside view, the 

daylight glare, and the concentration level 

1. The most common preference when dining in restaurants is next to the window having a view. 
The  two  pictures  of  the  frontal  view  for  each  restaurant  have  been  added  to  an  online 

application,  the MIT Scene Recognition Demo  [18],  to  confirm  that  the  selected pictures are 

recognized as a restaurant and if they could be assumed as representative of other restaurants. 

2. Basic glare metrics  (CIE glare  index  (CGI), Daylight glare  index  (DGI), Unified glare  rating 
(UGR), Visual comfort probability (VCP), and Daylight glare probability (DGP)) are intended 

for differentiating glare from daylight: Daylight glare  index (DGI) [19,20] and Daylight Glare 

Probability  (DGP).  However,  only  DGP  incorporates  vertical  eye  illuminance  as  a 

non‐contrast‐based aspect of the metric. As the daylight performance is provided by a highly 

glazed  façade,  there  should be a correlation between  the vertical  illuminance and  the visual 

luminance. Therefore, the DGP index results could make sense [21]. The DGP is defined as [22] 

DGP c E c log 1
L , ω ,
E P

c   (1)

where: 

E : vertical eye illuminance (lx) 
L : luminance of source (cd/m2) 
ω : solid angle of source (−) 
P: position index (−) 

Figure 3. The two restaurants that have been selected in accordance with the most common pattern
found among all restaurants analyzed. The picture on the left is a restaurant in La Barceloneta
(Ca la Nuri). The picture on the right is a restaurant in Zarautz (Beach).

2.3. Methodology

The methodology aims to demonstrate that the pictures are identify the restaurant, that there is
a probability of glare, that there is a high spatial contrast, and that there might be an uncomfortable
light atmosphere in the restaurant. The steps of this process are indicated in Table 1.

Table 1. Description of the steps of the methodology used.

Steps Description

1. Recognition
An additional test for the recognition of the workplane according to
the representative and relevant information of the restaurants

2. Daylight Glare Probability (DGP) A calculation of the DGP index and glare sources of each workplane
3. Spatial Contrast A calculation of spatial contrast of each workplane

4. Indicative survey
Indicative questions related to the outside view, the daylight glare,
and the concentration level

1. The most common preference when dining in restaurants is next to the window having a view.
The two pictures of the frontal view for each restaurant have been added to an online application,
the MIT Scene Recognition Demo [18], to confirm that the selected pictures are recognized as
a restaurant and if they could be assumed as representative of other restaurants.

2. Basic glare metrics (CIE glare index (CGI), Daylight glare index (DGI), Unified glare rating
(UGR), Visual comfort probability (VCP), and Daylight glare probability (DGP)) are intended for
differentiating glare from daylight: Daylight glare index (DGI) [19,20] and Daylight Glare Probability
(DGP). However, only DGP incorporates vertical eye illuminance as a non-contrast-based aspect
of the metric. As the daylight performance is provided by a highly glazed façade, there should
be a correlation between the vertical illuminance and the visual luminance. Therefore, the DGP
index results could make sense [21]. The DGP is defined as [22]

DGP = c1·Ev + c2· log
(

1 + ∑
i

L2s,i·ωs,i
Ea1v ·P2i

)
+ c3 (1)

where:

Ev: vertical eye illuminance (lx)
Ls: luminance of source (cd/m2)
ωs: solid angle of source (−)
P: position index (−)
c1 = 5.87 × 10−5; c2 = 9.18 × 10−2; c3 = 0.16; a1 = 1.87



Buildings 2016, 6, 53 5 of 14

The possible scaling of glare obtained by the DGP value can be stated as follows:

Imperceptible: DGP ≤ 0.35
Perceptible: 0.35 < DGP ≤ 0.40
Disturbing: 0.40 < DGP ≤ 0.45
Intolerable: DGP ≥ 0.45

Evalglare, a Radiance-based tool for glare evaluation, was used to calculate the above index.
In addition, with this tool, there is an option of attaining a glare source image to check the glaring
surfaces of the scene.

The three fields that are involved in the activity have been calculated to detect whether there is
appreciable glare [23]. In addition, we have correlated all results to ensure the overall glare perception.

3. The spatial contrast calculates the difference in brightness between each pixel and its four
neighboring pixels. It takes an average of local contrast values across the composition and
measures the cumulative sum of the local contrast values [24].

4. As indicated, eight people were polled for the satisfaction survey. Each person had normal vision
(some myopia was the only visual impairment for two people). All had university degrees. Six
questions were asked to each participant. All of them were done under aforementioned context,
eating and chatting activities next to the façade with outside view.

3. Calculation

In reference to the workplanes, the relevance of the definition of the most representative local
visual fields that contribute to the overall visual field is important to add. According to the managers
of restaurants, almost all customers prefer an outside view. Tables adjacent to the façade are the most
requested [25], and tables for two people usually have outside views, glare probability, a front view,
spatial contrast, a need for concentration on tasting and chatting, and privacy. Accordingly, tables for
two people that are adjacent to glazed façades are chosen (see Figure 4).

Buildings 2016, 6, 53    5 of 14 

c 5.87 10   ;  c 9.18 10   ;  c 0.16  ;  a 1.87 

The possible scaling of glare obtained by the DGP value can be stated as follows: 

Imperceptible: DGP ≤ 0.35 

Perceptible: 0.35 < DGP ≤ 0.40 

Disturbing: 0.40 < DGP ≤ 0.45 

Intolerable: DGP ≥ 0.45 

Evalglare,  a Radiance‐based  tool  for  glare  evaluation, was  used  to  calculate  the  above 

index. In addition, with this tool, there is an option of attaining a glare source image to check 

the glaring surfaces of the scene. 

The  three  fields  that are  involved  in  the activity have been calculated  to detect whether 

there is appreciable glare [23]. In addition, we have correlated all results to ensure the overall 

glare perception.   

3. The  spatial  contrast  calculates  the  difference  in  brightness  between  each  pixel  and  its  four 
neighboring  pixels.  It  takes  an  average  of  local  contrast  values  across  the  composition  and 

measures the cumulative sum of the local contrast values [24]. 

4. As  indicated,  eight people were polled  for  the  satisfaction  survey. Each person had normal 
vision  (some myopia was  the  only  visual  impairment  for  two  people). All  had  university 

degrees.  Six  questions  were  asked  to  each  participant.  All  of  them  were  done  under 

aforementioned context, eating and chatting activities next to the façade with outside view. 

3. Calculation 

In reference to the workplanes, the relevance of the definition of the most representative local 

visual fields that contribute to the overall visual field is important to add. According to the managers 

of  restaurants, almost all customers prefer an outside view. Tables adjacent  to  the  façade are  the 

most requested [25], and tables for two people usually have outside views, glare probability, a front 

view, spatial contrast, a need for concentration on tasting and chatting, and privacy. Accordingly, 

tables for two people that are adjacent to glazed façades are chosen (see Figure 4). 

 

Figure 4. Workplane description. The three representative workplanes of dining activity next to the
façade with illuminance measurement points and descriptions of pictures taken.



Buildings 2016, 6, 53 6 of 14

Describing the work scene with three workplanes is a better representation of reality. The visual
field is better described by taking into account different workplanes rather than only one. Usually, the
human brain works by contrasting values, not with absolute values. Thus, analyzing only extreme
views as outside or down is not practical because the perception of the luminance level is affected by
the previous vision.

Therefore, the extreme window or table luminance values are smoothed by intermediate face view,
in contrast to the classical method of the luminance source against the background luminance [26].
The adaptation of the vision and mind is important. Thus, it could be interesting and more practical
to add an earlier workplane’s luminance data to the glaring methods. Dynamic state methods can
approximate the overall real visual field more so than steady state methods [27,28].

Finally, the illuminance measurements were taken in each workplane (see Figure 3). In addition,
outside horizontal and vertical illuminance data were measured. Vertical illuminance data (see Table 2)
was used as reference data for the DGP index [29].

Table 2. Illuminance data (in lx) of each workplane.

Set points Ca La Nuri Beach

Eh 82,000 61,000
Ev 13,200 9900

Eh1 2350 420
Ev2 4100 610
Ev3 9350 1250

3.1. Recognition

As the front view, i.e., the face, is the picture that better describes the overall vision field, showing
parts of the three workplanes, the intermediate workplane of each restaurant is selected to test if the
information content of the picture is representative of the restaurant and what information has been
used as identification data.

After adding the front view workplane, i.e., the face, of each restaurant to the MIT Scene
Recognition Demo online application, the results of Ca La Nuri show the following: it has an indoor
environment; it has Restaurant Kitchen (0.12), Restaurant (0.12), Airport Terminal (0.09) Cockpit
(0.07) and Gallery (0.07) semantic categories; and it has Enclosed Areas, Man-made, No Horizon,
Cloth, Electric Indoor Lighting, Working, Semi-Enclosed Area, Research, Stressful, and Socializing
SUN (Scene UNderstanding) scene attributes. In addition, the results of the Beach restaurant show
the following: it has an indoor environment; it has Coffee Shop (0.19), Restaurants Kitchen (0.13),
Restaurant (0.11), Bar (0.09) and Ice Cream Parlor (0.08) semantic categories; and it has the following
scene attributes: Man-made, No Horizon, Enclosed Area, Cloth, Working, Glass, Semi-Enclosed Area,
Electric Indoor Lighting, Natural Light, and Glossy SUN scene attributes.

3.2. DGP

Three pictures have been analyzed as representative for each restaurant; in the first row, the Ca La
Nuri restaurant (pictures taken in 21 July 2014 at 10:00 Solar Time with Clear Sky, lat. 41.3◦ N long.
2◦ E), and in the next row, the Beach restaurant (pictures taken in 8 September 2015 at 10:00 Solar Time
with Clear Sky, lat. 43◦ N long. 2◦ W). Each picture corresponds to each workplane (see Figure 5);
the left ones to the first workplane, the table through the down view; the middle ones to the second
workplane, the face through the front view; and the right ones to the third workplane, the window
through the outside side-view.

The three workplanes, i.e., the table, the face, and the window of each restaurant have been tested
with Evalglare, a Radiance-based tool for glare evaluation [30]. Vertical illuminance data (in lx) of
each workplane has been used as reference data. The DGP index of each view has been compared to



Buildings 2016, 6, 53 7 of 14

attain the overall glare perception. Note that the window workplane DGP value tends to be slightly
overestimated because the DGP index is used for an indoor luminance range.

Buildings 2016, 6, 53    7 of 14 

of each workplane has been used as reference data. The DGP index of each view has been compared 

to  attain  the  overall  glare  perception. Note  that  the window workplane DGP  value  tends  to  be 

slightly overestimated because the DGP index is used for an indoor luminance range. 

Finally, for each photograph glaring source surfaces are detected, which were used to obtain the 

DGP index and to show which surfaces need to be studied for glaring (see Tables 3 and 5). 

Table 3. Three local workplanes (table, face, and window) and the mean Daylight Glare Probability 

(DGP) index according to the overall workplanes.   

 

Restaurants 
Workplane DGP (in %) 

1 (table)  2 (face)  3 (window)  Overall (mean)

Ca La Nuri  30  40  71  47 

Beach  18  20  26  21 

Buildings 2016, 6, 53    8 of 14 

 

Figure  5.  Pictures  and  results  of  the DGP  index  of  each workplane  picture  using  the  Evalglare 

Radiance‐based  tool.  (top)  pictures;  (bottom)  results  of Evalglare. Note  that  the  tool  is  valid  for 

illuminance higher or equal to 380 lx and the DGP index higher or equal than 0.2. Each picture has 

been tested adding measured vertical illuminance in lx (E), as an –i parameter. Colored surfaces in 

green are glare source surfaces. The tested photographs are HDR pictures obtained from WebHDR 

online software of Axel Jacobs [31].   

3.3. Spatial Contrast 

The bright  contrast of one  scene, as  illuminance data on  surfaces,  is another parameter  that 

contributes  to glaring. However,  the geometry  and dimension of  this  contrast  in  the  space have 

different  perception  results.  The  spatial  contrast  describes  the  local  contrast  according  to  pixel 

number and contrasting neighboring pixels. 

Sometimes the classical high contrast perception concept [32] is not as disturbing as many high 

local  bright  contrasts.  This  means  that  many  different  brightness  details  can  bring  a  higher 

perception of disturbance [33]. As a consequence, the spatial contrast could work as an information 

content indicator in the area. 

Therefore,  the  front  view  has  been  selected  because  it  is  the  scene  that  better  sums  up  the 

workspace. The  front picture of  each  restaurant  is divided  into  three horizontal  equal parts,  the 

bottom  part,  the  central  part,  and  the  top  part.  From  each  part,  the  relation  between  the  pixel 

brightness was studied, as described in Table 4. 

Table 4. Spatial contrast of the second workplane (the face) of each restaurant. The results are shown 

as percentages. 

Contrast Parameters  Bottom  Central  Top  Global 

Spatial Contrast 
Ca La Nuri  0.54%  0.79%  0.74%  0.69% 

Beach  0.72%  1.11%  0.54%  0.79% 

Deviation/Mean 
Ca La Nuri  105.11%  82.74%  94.81%  94.23% 

Beach  111.49%  73.55%  95.28%  96.91% 

Figure 5. Pictures and results of the DGP index of each workplane picture using the Evalglare
Radiance-based tool. (top) pictures; (bottom) results of Evalglare. Note that the tool is valid for
illuminance higher or equal to 380 lx and the DGP index higher or equal than 0.2. Each picture has
been tested adding measured vertical illuminance in lx (E), as an –i parameter. Colored surfaces in
green are glare source surfaces. The tested photographs are HDR pictures obtained from WebHDR
online software of Axel Jacobs [31].



Buildings 2016, 6, 53 8 of 14

Finally, for each photograph glaring source surfaces are detected, which were used to obtain the
DGP index and to show which surfaces need to be studied for glaring (see Table 3 and Figure 5).

Table 3. Three local workplanes (table, face, and window) and the mean Daylight Glare Probability
(DGP) index according to the overall workplanes.

Restaurants
Workplane DGP (in %)

1 (Table) 2 (Face) 3 (Window) Overall (Mean)

Ca La Nuri 30 40 71 47
Beach 18 20 26 21

3.3. Spatial Contrast

The bright contrast of one scene, as illuminance data on surfaces, is another parameter that
contributes to glaring. However, the geometry and dimension of this contrast in the space have
different perception results. The spatial contrast describes the local contrast according to pixel number
and contrasting neighboring pixels.

Sometimes the classical high contrast perception concept [32] is not as disturbing as many high
local bright contrasts. This means that many different brightness details can bring a higher perception
of disturbance [33]. As a consequence, the spatial contrast could work as an information content
indicator in the area.

Therefore, the front view has been selected because it is the scene that better sums up the
workspace. The front picture of each restaurant is divided into three horizontal equal parts, the bottom
part, the central part, and the top part. From each part, the relation between the pixel brightness was
studied, as described in Table 4.

Table 4. Spatial contrast of the second workplane (the face) of each restaurant. The results are shown
as percentages.

Contrast Parameters Bottom Central Top Global

Spatial
Contrast

Ca La Nuri 0.54% 0.79% 0.74% 0.69%
Beach 0.72% 1.11% 0.54% 0.79%

Deviation/Mean
Ca La Nuri 105.11% 82.74% 94.81% 94.23%

Beach 111.49% 73.55% 95.28% 96.91%

3.4. Indicative Survey

As a precursory survey, eight people were polled at the restaurants; four women aged 25–35,
and four men, two aged 30–35 and two aged 50–55. The surveyed were seated at a table next to the
glazed façade, in the same position and with the workplanes defined previously. They were asked the
following questions: QA: Does the outside view disturb you? QB: Does the front and outside view
interaction disturb you? QC: Is there a high contrast between outside and inside lighting? QD: Are
you able to see a clear outside view? QE: Are there undesirable visual elements in the outside view?
QF: Do you think you would have more concentration and privacy with a less outside luminance
(brightness) and fewer visual elements? (see Figure 6)



Buildings 2016, 6, 53 9 of 14

Buildings 2016, 6, 53    9 of 14 

3.4. Indicative Survey 

As a precursory survey, eight people were polled at the restaurants; four women aged 25–35, 

and four men, two aged 30–35 and two aged 50–55. The surveyed were seated at a table next to the 

glazed façade, in the same position and with the workplanes defined previously. They were asked 

the  following questions: QA: Does  the outside view disturb you? QB: Does  the  front and outside 

view interaction disturb you? QC: Is there a high contrast between outside and inside lighting? QD: 

Are you able to see a clear outside view? QE: Are there undesirable visual elements in the outside 

view? QF: Do  you  think  you would  have more  concentration  and  privacy with  a  less  outside 

luminance (brightness) and fewer visual elements? (see Figure 6) 

 

Figure 6. Conducted survey polling eight people at the restaurants. Results for the questions QA–QF 

in %. 

4. Results 

The explanation of the results will follow in the preceding steps: recognition, DGP index and 

glare sources, spatial contrast, and surveys. 

Both case studies are recognized as restaurants. In addition, accoding to MIT Scene Recognition 

Demo online application the analysed pictures have the following SUN scene attributes: working, 

research,  stressful,  socializing, glass,  and natural  light. Thus,  they  are  related  to  the workplanes 

selected,  the  DGP,  and  the  spatial  contrast.  The most  information  content  used  by  the  tool  is 

gathered from the central part of the pictures. 

Regarding the DGP index, although it was made for other purposes such as offices and indoor 

luminance ranges, the index works to obtain the trend of glare prediction in restaurants. First, the 

DGP results of the Ca La Nuri workplanes are as follows: table: imperceptible glare; face: perceptible 

glare; window: intolerance glare (see Figure 5). Thus, on the one hand, in the front view there is a 

low probability of glare. However, if a person moves toward the window, the glare probability will 

increase.  On  the  other  hand,  the  outside  view  is  glaring.  This  makes  sense  because  a  high 

concentration level is required to define the atmosphere of the area. However, taking into account 

the  adaptation  from  the  front  view,  the perception  of  glare  is  significantly  lower. Note  that  the 

cultural habits  increase glaring  tolerance. Accordingly,  considering workplane  combinations,  the 

glaring prediction  is approximates more  to  the glaring perception  (see Table 3). Therefore,  in  the 

overall visual field, there is a probability of glare (mean DGP 47%, disturbing), due to many large 

outside  luminous  surfaces. The main  glare  sources  are  the  sky  and  reflections  from  the  ground 

outside,  although  only  the  umbrellas  are  selected  (see  Figure  5).  Second,  the DGP  of  the Beach 

workplanes  are  as  follows:  table:  imperceptible  glare;  face:  imperceptible  glare;  window: 

imperceptible  glare  (see  Table  3).  Thus,  there  is  a  low  probability  of  glare  (mean  DGP  21%, 

imperceptible). However,  if there were  less shading elements, the outside view would have some 

Figure 6. Conducted survey polling eight people at the restaurants. Results for the questions QA–QF in %.

4. Results

The explanation of the results will follow in the preceding steps: recognition, DGP index and
glare sources, spatial contrast, and surveys.

Both case studies are recognized as restaurants. In addition, accoding to MIT Scene Recognition
Demo online application the analysed pictures have the following SUN scene attributes: working,
research, stressful, socializing, glass, and natural light. Thus, they are related to the workplanes
selected, the DGP, and the spatial contrast. The most information content used by the tool is gathered
from the central part of the pictures.

Regarding the DGP index, although it was made for other purposes such as offices and indoor
luminance ranges, the index works to obtain the trend of glare prediction in restaurants. First, the
DGP results of the Ca La Nuri workplanes are as follows: table: imperceptible glare; face: perceptible
glare; window: intolerance glare (see Figure 5). Thus, on the one hand, in the front view there is a low
probability of glare. However, if a person moves toward the window, the glare probability will increase.
On the other hand, the outside view is glaring. This makes sense because a high concentration level is
required to define the atmosphere of the area. However, taking into account the adaptation from the
front view, the perception of glare is significantly lower. Note that the cultural habits increase glaring
tolerance. Accordingly, considering workplane combinations, the glaring prediction is approximates
more to the glaring perception (see Table 3). Therefore, in the overall visual field, there is a probability
of glare (mean DGP 47%, disturbing), due to many large outside luminous surfaces. The main glare
sources are the sky and reflections from the ground outside, although only the umbrellas are selected
(see Figure 5). Second, the DGP of the Beach workplanes are as follows: table: imperceptible glare;
face: imperceptible glare; window: imperceptible glare (see Table 3). Thus, there is a low probability of
glare (mean DGP 21%, imperceptible). However, if there were less shading elements, the outside view
would have some glaring probability as would the front view. In this case, the glare sources are also
the sky and the ground outside (see Figure 5).

With reference to spatial contrast, in both restaurants, at the central part of the picture of the
second workplane according to the front view (see Figure 5), there is more spatial contrast (see Table 4).
This means that it is the most heterogeneous part; as a result, that part has more information content.
However, the standard deviation of the luminance is higher at the bottom part. Thus, the contrast is
higher, but it is the most homogeneous part. There are large surfaces; the outdoor luminous ground
and the indoor dark ground, with very different luminance values. It has a high contrast, but a low
amount of information content. Finally, the top part has a low contrast between the clear sky and the
luminous ceiling, as well as a low amount of information content.



Buildings 2016, 6, 53 10 of 14

As for the survey, taking into account that it is a preliminary pool, the results indicate that
there is a high contrast between inside and outside lighting, causing glare probability. In addition,
they demonstrate that there are undesirable visual elements. Lastly, people think that with less
outside luminous surfaces and visual elements, they will have more concentration on activity and in
consequence more privacy (see Figure 6).

5. Discussion

The side-view could be an interesting aspect to take into account in daylighting studies in any
location because it is part of the most common visual atmospheres of different activities.

The results of the recognition tool show that the atmosphere could be stressful, and it has features
of working, researching, and socializing. These features do not seem to include quality concentration
on the outside view, tasting, and chatting. In addition, the “glass” and “natural light” features are
related to the studied context.

In the future, it will be interesting to test the following: first, regarding glaring methods, if glare
methods are valid for side-views in the hotel industry and if adding an initial illuminance value and
a required concentration level on the activity improves dynamic visual perception. There are some
results about experimental researches on discomfort glare produced by daylight that discrepancies
between comfort indexes [34]. Second, if spatial contrast as the geometry and the dimensions of surface
parameters and information content affect glaring, visual comfort, and thus concentration level. Third,
to confirm if there is a quantitative relation between the central spatial contrast and the bottom and
top parts according to the studied context, the table view, the face view, the window view, the glazed
façade, the clear outdoor ground, the dark indoor ground, the clear ceiling, and the dining equipment.
Fourth, confirm if there is a quantitative relation between the bottom luminance deviation and the top
and central parts. Finally, if the glazed façades at restaurants can be split by separating the outside view
from the lighting [35] with the combination of windows and Complex Fenestration Systems [36–38].
In order to achieve a balance between spatial contrast and light level. So, a balance between outside
view, glare probability, spatial contrast, light level and concentration level on tasting and chatting [39].

Add that apart of indoor and outdoor luminance contrast the color temperature of the light
is another parameter that contributes to vision comfort [40]. Usually with side-lighting without
redirecting systems, the inside light perception is darker than the view through the window. Sometimes,
with enough daylight level, users want to switch the electric lighting. However, it is not to increase
the light level, it is insignificant compared with the daylight flux, but it is significant for the inside
atmosphere (reddish). If inside facings are cool (bluish), as it is at midday, the daylighting color
temperature is “bluish,” and the inside is dark, there can be no comfort vision according to Kruithof’s
curve [41–43]. In Table 5, the mean RGB based on 255 and their CIE xy chromaticity values of the
front view pictures are shown. The color temperature is obtained according to Planckian black-body
radiators and the Planckian locus (see Figure 7).

Table 5. RGB and xy (CIE 1931) chromaticity values of the second workplane (the face) for each restaurant.

Restaurants RGB Bottom Central Top Overall

Ca La Nuri

R 68.148 98.480 80.069 82.232
G 65.414 97.024 79.253 80.564
B 81.027 108.208 76.976 88.738
x 0.3223 0.3273 0.3362 0.3286
y 0.3047 0.3188 0.3369 0.3204

Beach

R 50.304 108.595 58.564 72.488
G 47.679 106.286 57.125 70.364
B 50.180 115.095 57.739 74.338
x 0.3347 0.3399 0.3348 0.3323
y 0.3259 0.3226 0.3316 0.3258



Buildings 2016, 6, 53 11 of 14

Buildings 2016, 6, 53    11 of 14 

Table  5. RGB and xy  (CIE 1931)  chromaticity values of  the  second workplane  (the  face)  for each 

restaurant. 

Restaurants RGB  Bottom  Central  Top  Overall 

Ca La Nuri 

R  68.148  98.480  80.069  82.232 

G  65.414  97.024  79.253  80.564 

B  81.027  108.208  76.976  88.738 

x  0.3223  0.3273  0.3362  0.3286 

y  0.3047  0.3188  0.3369  0.3204 

Beach 

R  50.304  108.595  58.564  72.488 

G  47.679  106.286  57.125  70.364 

B  50.180  115.095  57.739  74.338 

x  0.3347  0.3399  0.3348  0.3323 

y  0.3259  0.3226  0.3316  0.3258 

 

Figure 7. From the CIE 1931 chromaticity diagram of the Wyszecki and Stiles book (Figure 1(3.10)) 

[44] we locate the x and y coordinates of each restaurant’s second workplane picture, and the three 

parts of each picture. We obtain eight color temperature data, and relatively high color temperatures 

(typical from natural light) are detected. 

All CIE xy values are in the white color region with a mean of approximately 6150 K, and this 

colour temperature could be not comfortable for the Beach restaurant, although it is at the limit, with 

420 lux at the table’s set point, but, for the Ca La Nuri restaurant, the ambience could be pleasant 

with 2350 lux according to the Kruithof curve. However, the comfort vision remains uncomfortable 

according  to  the  background  luminance,  because  the  indoor  dark  depths  could  cause  [21]  the 

perception of a gloomy atmosphere. In addition, in deep areas, the light level tends to be low, and, 

according to Kruithof’s curve, a  low  light  level requires warm  light for a comfortable appearance. 

Warming the overall space could be achieved with a more comfortable visual perception. In addition, 

it seems that customers like a more warm food color [45]. However, in other particular contexts, the 

cool color of the food could be ordered. Thus, color management could give users satisfaction and 

vision comfort with  low energy consumption  [46,47]. Thus,  in  the  future,  it will be  interesting  to 

analyze this parameter. Other wider surveys could help to test the visual perception results of the 

used methodology with more accuracy. 

6. Conclusions 

In  any  location,  in  an  outdoor  midday  high  luminance  context,  according  to  the  spatial 

recognition results, the additional test of a recognition tool shows indications that the pictures have a 

Figure 7. From the CIE 1931 chromaticity diagram of the Wyszecki and Stiles book (Figure 1(3.10)) [44]
we locate the x and y coordinates of each restaurant’s second workplane picture, and the three parts of
each picture. We obtain eight color temperature data, and relatively high color temperatures (typical
from natural light) are detected.

All CIE xy values are in the white color region with a mean of approximately 6150 K, and this
colour temperature could be not comfortable for the Beach restaurant, although it is at the limit, with
420 lux at the table’s set point, but, for the Ca La Nuri restaurant, the ambience could be pleasant
with 2350 lux according to the Kruithof curve. However, the comfort vision remains uncomfortable
according to the background luminance, because the indoor dark depths could cause [21] the perception
of a gloomy atmosphere. In addition, in deep areas, the light level tends to be low, and, according to
Kruithof’s curve, a low light level requires warm light for a comfortable appearance. Warming the
overall space could be achieved with a more comfortable visual perception. In addition, it seems that
customers like a more warm food color [45]. However, in other particular contexts, the cool color of the
food could be ordered. Thus, color management could give users satisfaction and vision comfort with
low energy consumption [46,47]. Thus, in the future, it will be interesting to analyze this parameter.
Other wider surveys could help to test the visual perception results of the used methodology with
more accuracy.

6. Conclusions

In any location, in an outdoor midday high luminance context, according to the spatial recognition
results, the additional test of a recognition tool shows indications that the pictures have a “working”
semantic category and a “stressful” scene attribute. Therefore, studied highly glazed façades could
tend to provide fraught atmospheres. It would be useful for some stimulating activities; however, for
calm restaurants, which offer tasting menus with quality food, it seems that the studied highly glazed
façades may not be very suitable. The information content could be an interesting aspect to consider in
future studies. The formal composition of building façades, including restaurant façades and other
activities, should take this into account, i.e., a recommendation for the design aspects of highly glazed
façades emerge from here.

The daylight glare probability index could be useful for glare prediction in the hotel industry.
In the studied context, there is a correlation between vertical illuminance and visual luminance owing
to the highly glazed façade light performance. Therefore, the DGP results cohere. On the one hand, next
to the south glazed façade, there is a high probability of glare, whereas, in the north orientation, there
is a lower glare probability. In both, the exterior horizontal surfaces, the outside ground, and the sky
are the most probable glare sources (see Figure 5). On the other hand, in both climates, there is notable



Buildings 2016, 6, 53 12 of 14

spatial contrast (see Table 4) and, as a result, a high content information probability. According to the
results of the recognition tool, the central part of the pictures contains the most relevant information.

Regarding perception, taking into account the activity of users, with the adoption of three
workplanes, the overall glare perception could change; as a result, glare probability tended to be lower.
According to mean DGP, the perception of intolerant glare probability for the third workplane of the
outside view through the window in the Ca La Nuri restaurant is reduced. The mean DGP is close to
the disturbing glare probability, due to the contribution of the intermediate front view workplane’s
DGP. In spite of a high demand from the hotel industry, the tolerance for light comfort is relatively
high. A dining atmosphere with a highly glazed façade seems that it does not very properly offer an
optimal visual comfort with a clear outside view and an adequate concentration level on tasting and
chatting. In conclusion, the required concentration level on the activity, the initial luminance value and
thus the initial illuminance data, and the spatial contrast could be interesting indicators to consider in
daylight glare methods. This study could be useful for other activities that require three workplanes,
namely, a down view (e.g. tablet/paper), a front view (e.g. person), and a far view (e.g. entrance).

It seems that, as a next step, a side-window that provides a framed outdoor side-view and
fewer outdoor luminous surfaces could decrease glare probability, undesirable elements, spatial
contrast, and information content, and could increase the concentration level probability and privacy.
Complex fenestration systems could increase indoor light levels and decrease the light contrast. Less
but better distributed light, providing an accurate illuminance value to each workplane, would help to
improve the indoor atmosphere. Color temperature could improve visual comfort as well. The three
systems could help to keep comfort with low energy consumption. For future studies, a split façade
could provide an accurate atmosphere with a side-view under outdoor midday high luminance and a
lower probability of glare. Note that the bounded side-view could cause a greater local contrast due to
an unchanged high outdoor luminance. However, an accurate side-view size and direction, according
to the user’s point of view, could provide a nice outdoor view and a light and comfortable atmosphere
and maintain a good concentration level.

Acknowledgments: The authors are grateful to the teams of the MIT Space Recognition in line demo software, the
WebHDR online software, and the DGP index for facilitating access to the tools. U. U. acknowledges M. Bodart
and C. Cauwerts of the Architecture et Climat research team of the Université Catholique de Louvain for hosting
and offering the means for many of the calculations. Thanks are given to the Restaurant Association and to the
cooperation of the analyzed restaurants. This work has been supported by the PhD training program of the
Basque Government and the Spanish MICINN under project ENE2009-11540. Part of this work is part of the PhD.
Thesis of U.U.

Author Contributions: All the authors contributed equally to the article. J.L.Z., R.J.H., and U.U. designed the
study of patterns at restaurants; U.U. performed the study, took the pictures, calculated the Daylight Glare
Probability, and conducted the survey; A.I. calculated spatial contrast, chromaticity values, and considered scene
recognition software; U.U. wrote the article and extracted the conclusions in collaboration with all other authors.

Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

References

1. González, J.; Fiorito, F. Daylight design of office buildings: optimisation of external solar shadings by using
combined simulation methods. Buildings 2015, 5, 560–580. [CrossRef]

2. Konis, K. Evaluating daylighting effectiveness and occupant visual comfort in a side-lit open-plan office
building in San Francisco, California. Build. Environ. 2013, 59, 662–677. [CrossRef]

3. Silvester, J.; Konstantinou, E. Lighting, Well-Being and Performance at Work; Centre for Performance at Work,
City University London: London, UK, 2010.

4. Taylor, S.E.; Fiske, S.T. Salience, attention, and attribution: top of the head phenomena. Adv. Exp. Soc. Psychol.
1978, 11, 249–288.

5. Fontoynont, M.; Ramananarivo, K.; Soreze, T.; Guldhammer, S.K. Economic feasibility of maximising
daylighting of a standard office building with efficient electric lighting. Energy Build. 2016, 110, 435–442.
[CrossRef]

http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/buildings5020560
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.buildenv.2012.09.017
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.enbuild.2015.09.045


Buildings 2016, 6, 53 13 of 14

6. Irulegi, O.; Torres, L.; Serra, A.; Mendizabal, I.; Hernández, R. The Ekihouse: An energy self-sufficient house
based on passive design strategies. Energy Build. 2014, 83, 57–69. [CrossRef]

7. Zumthor, P. Atmospheres: Architectural Environments, Surrounding objects; Birkhäuser: Basel, Switzerland, 2006.
8. Caminada, G.A. Cul Zuffel e L’aura Dado; Quart Luzern: Luzern, Switzerland, 2005.
9. Byrd, H. Post-occupancy evaluation of green buildings: The measured impact of over-glazing. Archit. Sci. Rev.

2012, 55, 206–212. [CrossRef]
10. Heung, V.; Gu, T. Influence of restaurants atmospherics on patron satisfaction and behavioral intentions.

Int. J. Hosp. Manag. 2012, 31, 1167–1177. [CrossRef]
11. Ariffin, H.F.; Bibon, M.F.; Abdullah, R.P.S.R. Restaurant’s atmospheric elements: What the customer wants.

Procedia–Soc. Behav. Sci. 2012, 38, 380–387. [CrossRef]
12. Young, S.J.; Young, Y.G.; Tai, K.J. View types and luminance effects on discomfort glare assessment

from windows. Energy Build. 2012, 46, 139–145.
13. Altomonte, S.; Ken, M.G.; Tregenza, P.R.; Wilson, R. Visual task difficulty and temporal influences in

glare response. Build. Environ. 2016, 95, 209–226. [CrossRef]
14. Wienold, J. Daylight Glare in Offices. Ph.D. Thesis, Universität Karlsruhe, Karlsruhe, Germany, 2009.
15. Napier, J. Climate based façade design for business buildings with examples from central London. Buildings

2015, 5, 16–38. [CrossRef]
16. Trubiano, F. Performance based envelopes: A theory of spatialized skins and the emergence of the integrated

design professional. Buildings 2013, 3, 689–712. [CrossRef]
17. Wardono, P.; Hibino, H.; Koyama, S. Effects of interior colors, lighting and decors on perceived sociability,

emotion and behavior related to social dining. Procedia–Soc. Behav. Sci. 2012, 38, 362–372. [CrossRef]
18. MIT Scene Recognition Demo. Available online: http://places.csail.mit.edu/demo.html (accessed 24 March 2016).
19. Hopkinson, R.G. Glare for daylighting in buildings. Appl. Ergon. 1972, 3, 206–215. [CrossRef]
20. Chauvel, P.; Collins, J.B.; Dogniaux, R.; Longmore, J. Glare from windows: current views of the problem.

Light. Res. Technol. 1998, 30, 89–93. [CrossRef]
21. Hirning, M.B.; Isoardi, G.L.; Garcia-Hansen, V.R. Prediction of discomfort glare from windows under

tropical skies. Build. Environ. 2016. [CrossRef]
22. Wienold, J.; Christoffersen, J. Evaluation methods and development of a new glare prediction model for

daylight environments with the use of CCD cameras. Energy Build. 2006, 38, 743–757. [CrossRef]
23. Uriarte, U.; Hernández, R.J.; Zamora, J.L. Light and outside vision at restaurants. In Proceedings of the 10th

Conference on Advanced Building Skins, Bern, Switzerland, 3–4 November 2015.
24. Rockcastle, S.; Andersen, M. Measuring the dynamics of contrast and daylighting variability in architecture:

A proof-of-concept methodology. Build. Environ. 2014, 84, 320–333. [CrossRef]
25. Aguilar, A.; Uriarte, U.; Isalgue, A.; Coch, H.; Serra, R. Luminances and vision related to daylighting.

In Proceedings of the World Renewable Energy Forum (WREF), Denver, CO, USA, 13–17 May 2012.
26. Ruggiero, F.; Serra, R.; Dimundo, A. Re-interpretation of traditional architecture for visual comfort.

Build. Environ. 2009, 44, 1886–1891. [CrossRef]
27. Einhorn, H.D. A new method for the assessment of discomfort glare. Light. Res. Technol. 1969, 1, 235–247.

[CrossRef]
28. Yamin Garretón, J.A.; Rodriguez, R.G.; Ruiz, A.; Pattini, A.E. Degree of eye opening: A new discomfort

glare indicator. Build. Environ. 2015, 88, 142–150. [CrossRef]
29. Karlsen, L.; Heiselberg, P.; Bryn, I.; Johra, H. Verification of simple illuminance based measures for indication

of discomfort glare from windows. Build. Environ. 2015, 92, 615–626. [CrossRef]
30. Reinhart, C.F.; Wienold, J. The daylighting dashboard—A simulation based design analysis for daylit spaces.

Build. Environ. 2011, 46, 386–396. [CrossRef]
31. WebHDR. Available online: http://www.jaloxa.eu/webhdr/index.shtml (accessed on 29 January 2016).
32. Osterhaus, W.K.E. Discomfort glare assessment and prevention for daylight applications in office environments.

Sol. Energy 2005, 79, 140–158. [CrossRef]
33. Kim, W.; Tae, A.H.; Tai, K.J. A first approach to discomfort glare in the presence of non-uniform luminance.

Build. Environ. 2008, 43, 1953–1960. [CrossRef]
34. Bellia, L.; Fragliasso, F.; Stefanizzi, E. Daylit offices: A comparison between measured parameters assessing

light quality and users’ opinions. Build. Environ. 2016. [CrossRef]

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.enbuild.2014.03.077
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00038628.2012.688017
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhm.2012.02.004
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.sbspro.2012.03.360
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.buildenv.2015.09.021
http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/buildings5010016
http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/buildings3040689
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.sbspro.2012.03.358
http://places.csail.mit.edu/demo.html
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0003-6870(72)90102-0
http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/096032718201400103
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.buildenv.2016.08.005
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.enbuild.2006.03.017
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.buildenv.2014.06.012
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.buildenv.2009.01.006
http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/14771535690010040201
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.buildenv.2014.11.010
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.buildenv.2015.05.040
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.buildenv.2010.08.001
http://www.jaloxa.eu/webhdr/index.shtml
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.solener.2004.11.011
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.buildenv.2007.11.016
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.buildenv.2016.08.014


Buildings 2016, 6, 53 14 of 14

35. Konis, K.; Lee, E.S. Measured daylighting potential of a static optical louver system under real sun and
sky conditions. Build. Environ. 2015, 92, 347–359. [CrossRef]

36. Ruck, N.; Aschehoug, O.; Aydinli, S.; Christoffersen, J.; Edmonds, I.; Jakobiak, R.; Kischkoweit-Lopin, M.;
Klinger, M.; Lee, E.; Courret, G.; et al. Daylight in Buildings: A Source Book on Daylighting Systems and
Components; A Report of IEA SHC Task 21; ECBCS Annex 29: Berkeley, CA, USA, 2000.

37. Linhart, F.; Scartezzini, J.-L. Minimizing lighting power density in office rooms equipped with anidolic
daylighting systems. Sol. Energy 2010, 84, 587–595.

38. Selkowitz, S.; Lee, E.S. Advanced Fenestration Systems for Improved Daylight Performance. In Proceedings
of the Daylighting’ 98 Conference, Ottawa, ON, Canada, 10–13 May 1998.

39. Hoffmann, S.; Lee, E.S.; McNeil, A.; Fernandes, L.; Vidanovic, D.; Thanachareonkit, A. Balancing daylight,
glare, and energy-efficiency goals: An evaluation of exterior coplanar shading systems using complex
fenestration modeling tools. Energy Build. 2016, 112, 279–298. [CrossRef]

40. Bodart, M.; Peñaranda, R.; Deneyer, A.; Flamant, G. Photometry and colorimetry characterisation of materials
in daylighting evaluation tools. Build. Environ. 2008, 43, 2046–2058. [CrossRef]

41. Kruithof, A.A. Tubular luminescence lamps for general illumination. Philips Tech. Rev. 1941, 6, 65–96.
42. Viénot, F.; Durand, M.-L.; Mahler, E. Kruithof’s rule revisited using LED illumination. J. Mod. Opt. 2009, 56,

1433–1446. [CrossRef]
43. Talotte, C.; Ségrétain, S.; Gonac’h, J.; Le Rohellec, J. Improvement of lighting ambience on board

trains: Experimental results on the combined effect of light parameters and seat colours on perception.
In Proceedings of the 9th World Conference on Railway Research (WCRR), Lille, France, 22–26 May 2011.

44. Wyszecki, G.; Stiles, W.S. Color Science: Concepts and Methods, Quantitative Data and Formulae; John Wiley & Sons, Inc.:
New York, NY, USA, 1982.

45. Okuda, S.; Okajima, K.; Arce-Lopera, C. Visual palatability of food dishes in color appearance, glossiness
and convexo-concave perception depending on light source. J. Light Vis. Environ. 2015, 39, 1–7. [CrossRef]

46. López-Besora, J.; Isalgué, A.; Coch, H.; Crespo, I.; Alonso, C. Yellow is green: An opportunity for energy
savings through colour in architectural spaces. Energy Build. 2014, 78, 105–112. [CrossRef]

47. Bodart, M.; De Herde, A. Global energy savings in offices buildings by the use of daylighting. Energy Build.
2002, 34, 421–429. [CrossRef]

© 2016 by the authors; licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC-BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.buildenv.2015.04.024
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.enbuild.2015.12.009
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.buildenv.2007.12.006
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/09500340903151278
http://dx.doi.org/10.2150/jlve.IEIJ150000561
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.enbuild.2014.04.011
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0378-7788(01)00117-7
http://creativecommons.org/
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.

	Introduction 
	Material and Methods 
	Selected Cases 
	Measuring Instruments 
	Methodology 

	Calculation 
	Recognition 
	DGP 
	Spatial Contrast 
	Indicative Survey 

	Results 
	Discussion 
	Conclusions 

