























































Template and Instructions for Preparation of Full Paper for PLEA 2007


PLEA2012 - 28th Conference, Opportunities, Limits & Needs Towards an environmentally responsible architecture Lima, Perú 7-9 November 2012 

 

 

Built-Form, Mass and Energy 
Urban fabric performance  

 

Michele Morganti
1
, Anna Pages-Ramon

2
, Antonio Isalgue

2
, Helena Coch

2
, Carlo Cecere

1
  

 
1
SOSlab, Faculty of Engineering, DICEA Department Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy

 
 

2
Arquitectura, Energia i Medi Ambient, School of Architecture, UPC, Barcelona, Spain  

 

 
ABSTRACT: The link between urban form and building energy demand is a complex balance of morphological, 
constructive, utilization and climatic factor. Especially in the European compact city, where existing areas prevail on 

much more energy-efficient new settlements, it is evident that operative ways to transform efficiently the building stock 

have to be found. This paper explores the existence of a relation between built mass and energy demand depending on 

urban form. Focusing on the compact city of Mediterranean climate, tests on different case studies simulations are 

carried out. Results presented and discussed, point out that mass has strong relevance on energy demand and plays 

an important role in reducing energy consumptions. This paper is a preliminary report of an ongoing research study 

about one possible way to comprehend “metabolic rate” scaling law - the relationship between power and mass of a 

complex system in its process - concerning urban fabric. This knowledge-base could help verify the accordance with 

this rule on urban scale and give hints to conscious and effective built environment transformations towards more 

efficient conditions. 

Keywords: Built-form, Energy demand modelling, Energy performance, Urban fabric, Building mass. 

 

 

INTRODUCTION   

In recent years rapid population growth in urban areas 

has established city as the first-rate contemporary human 

habitat, at the same time giving rise to some concerns 

about its “unsustainable” condition. 

Currently it is widely known that in Europe complex 

activity referring to the built environment is responsible 

for 75% of GHG (Green House Gases) emissions and for 

69% of final energy consumption [1, 2]. Recent studies 

agree that there is an inevitable need to reduce GHG and 

to take advantage of the opportunity to obtain complete 

self-sufficiency through renewable energy by the middle 

of this century [3, 4]. This is an extremely complex 

process simultaneously requiring improvement in energy 

performance in built environments, in order to reduce 

global energy demand. 

Especially in European compact cities, new settlement 

models are still in negligible proportion compared to 

dimension of the ordinary city, in whose goal of the 

Sustainable Design is to be achieved. Then, it is 

important to have indications on the investment and 

effects of upgrade the built stock. Moreover it is now 

widely accepted that urban scale has a first rate 

importance in the building design process and its 

correlated energy performance. 

Residential building stock is responsible for 65% of 

final energy consumption in buildings [5]. Urban form, 

due to the obvious connection with morphology and 

building systems, both at the urban and building scale, 

mostly affects energy performance [6]. Our aim is to 

study urban fabric energy demand, beginning with 

building aspects. Studying building behaviour through 

simulations can represent one possible method in 

improving energy performance. Estimation of the effects 

of built-form on mass and energy demand is the main 

focus of this paper. Here we explore the existence of a 

relation or at least a trend, between built mass and energy 

demand. The purpose should be correlated to mass-

energy relation of different urban fabrics. 

 

 

BACKGROUND 

Recently, researchers have considered the influence of 

complex environmental interactions occurring in the 

urban context. Currently research efforts are focusing on 

methods and techniques for energy simulation in order to 

understand and, at the same time, approach different 

levels, from the building to urban ones [7, 8, 9, 10]. 

Analytical methods that allow both use at various scales 

and suitability to describe typologically uniform urban 

fabrics, are crucial in this manner.  

It has been observed that scaling laws are useful in 

describing the complex structure of urban systems: e.g. 

supply networks, transport and especially energy 

consumption [11, 12, 13]. It is understood that modern 

cities have a metabolic rate (mass-power ratio) that 

approximately follows the living organism scaling laws 

[13]. Nevertheless, it has not been verified that this 

connection remains the same while studying the 

phenomena at the urban and building scale and what kind  



PLEA2012 - 28th Conference, Opportunities, Limits & Needs Towards an environmentally responsible architecture Lima, Perú 7-9 November 2012 

 

 
Figure 1: Aerial images of case studies. 

of relationship exists between mass and power, or energy  

depending on typologies and urban form. 

Regarding the building scale, recent studies have 

ascertained the existence of an interaction between built-

form typology and energy consumption, suggesting a 

classification based on chronological, dimensional and 

morphological factors [14]. 

The eventual interaction between the mass of different 

built-form typologies and the energy consumption has 

not yet been explored. Once established that mass is a 

parameter firmly connected to both built-form and 

“metabolism”, it could turn out to be the connection 

between typology and energy performance. This aspect is 

even more relevant in the context of European compact 

city where we can easily find urban fabrics consisting of 

fundamentally uniform morphological and typological 

elements. The latter elements, as well as the other two 

components of urban space - road networks and land 

plots - are the most influential factors of energy 

performance within an urban system.  

 

 

BUILT-FORM, MASS AND ENERGY AS A 

PERFORMANCE EVALUATION TOOL 

Apart from testing the existence of a relation or a trend 

between building mass and energy demand, depending 

on built-form, our aim is to establish some key elements 

of a knowledge-base for future analysis on conformity 

with the metabolic rate scaling law at the urban scale. 

Firstly, some typical urban fabrics were chosen, 

consisting of “conventional” typology as a basic 

component. Secondly, by using corresponding models, 

mass and energy performance were evaluated in order to 

ascertain suitable parameters that clearly express a 

connection. This study is an initial approach for using 

parameters (representative of built-form) as energy 

performance evaluation tools on a homogeneous urban 

texture. 

 
 

CASE STUDIES 

This study compares five residential typologies, different 

in construction period, morphology and construction 

system. Focusing on the metropolitan area of Barcelona, 

tests through different case study simulations were 

carried out, to represent conventional dwelling models 

making up different and widespread urban fabrics built 

during the historical reference period (Fig. 1, Fig. 2, 

Table 1).  

 

A - Historic Row House (1900) - Two level dwelling, 

with narrow façades of 5 m (length/width ratio L/W ≈ 

0.4). The structure consists of load-bearing walls (15÷40 

cm) above-ground masonry continuous foundation; dry 

stone drain; floors with wooden beams and brick vaulted 

ceiling; Catalan ventilated roof without thermal 

insulation. 



PLEA2012 - 28th Conference, Opportunities, Limits & Needs Towards an environmentally responsible architecture Lima, Perú 7-9 November 2012 

 

 

 
Figure 2: Plans for case studies. 

B - Contemporary Row House (2000) - Three level 

house (and underground level) with L/W ≈ 2, consisting 

of hollow brick load-bearing walls on concrete base 

slabs; external cavity walls with thermal insulation; one-

way slab with ceramic filler block; flat concrete roof with 

thermal insulation. 

 

C - Historic Apartment Block (1900) - We have 

referred to this as a typical model of the Eixample island 

during the first expansion period and regulated by urban 

ordinance. The building has six stories (height 24 m) 

with planned dimensions 12x24 m (L/W ≈ 0.4) and 

internal courtyards. As in case A, the structure consists of 

load-bearing walls (15÷40 cm) above-ground masonry 

continuous foundation; dry stone drain; floors with 

wooden beams and brick vaulted ceiling; Catalan 

ventilated roof without thermal insulation. The “galeria” 

of the internal façade is a typical architectural element 

pointed out for our interests. Depending on the façade 

orientation and season, it could be used as an indirect 

solar capitation system or as a simple balcony [15]. 

 

D - Historic Apartment Block (1960) - Nine level 

apartment block connected by L/W ≈ 0.3. The 

construction system is based on 14 cm hollow bricks 

load-bearing walls on a concrete continuous foundation; 

one-way slab with ceramic filler block; external cavity 

walls and flat concrete roof without thermal insulation 

[16]. 

 

E - Contemporary Apartment Block (2000) - Six 

story dwelling, each dwelling faces only one side 

(“bilateral back to back” type) with L/W ≈ 2. The 

structure is made up of concrete columns and two-way 

concrete slab; above-ground isolated footing on pile 

foundation and base slab; external cavity walls and flat 

concrete roof both with thermal insulation. 

 

 
Table 1: Data for case studies 

     

Case 

study 

Constru-

ction 

period 

Height/ 

width 

ratio 

GSI*              

(m
2
/m

2
) 

FSI**      

( m
2
/m

2
) 

 
     

A 1900 1.47 0.45 0.87 

B 2000 0.30 0.16 0.62 

C 1900 1.21 0.49 2.92 

D 1960 0.41 - 1.27 0.13 0.77 

E 2000 0.83 0.37 2.43 
     

*   Coverage (GSI): built up area / base land area 

** Building intensity (FSI):  gross floor area / base land area 
 
 

    

 

 

MASS AND ENERGY ANALYSIS  

The methodology of this study focuses on morphological 

aspects relating to mass and energy performance. 

Therefore, the models developed mainly take into 



PLEA2012 - 28th Conference, Opportunities, Limits & Needs Towards an environmentally responsible architecture Lima, Perú 7-9 November 2012 

 

account parameters concerning building mass and their 

energy demand. All other variables, except for those 

relating to mass and energy of different typologies, have 

been excluded to modelling. Consequently, to verify real 

influence of built-form on energy performance, we 

started considering only heating/cooling demands that 

were most directly attributable to built-form. The study 

does not have fully diagnostic aim, i.e. to provide exact 

energy demands and mass, but rather to study the value 

of this connection. The boundary clearly defined is the 

building envelope. It corresponds, in some cases, to the 

building studied, otherwise in other cases to the island or 

to part of it. 

The buildings analysed are the main components of 

various existing urban fabrics in the European compact 

city. The climate of reference is the Mediterranean 

environment of Barcelona. In order to prevent formal and 

building system singularities and spatial inconsistencies 

of selected buildings from affecting interpretation of the 

results, the cases underwent a process of filtering. 

Conventional and coherent solutions were applied, as 

substitution of the original solutions, if necessary. 

Mass evaluation is based on calculation of effective 

mass of the built elements without considering associated 

mass due to the construction process, which is not part of 

the building. The mass of supply networks, 

urbanizations, exterior spaces and movable elements that 

could be considered building elements (e.g. furniture, 

electrical household appliance, etc.), were not included in 

the calculation. All building systems were taken into 

account using default weight values [17]. The mass 

assessment process started from finding volume and 

density properties of different construction materials. 

Facing complex recent components we used the IteC 

Database, which disassembles construction elements 

regarding weight and material [18]. All components were 

grouped into building subsystems (e. g., foundation, 

structure, envelope, etc.), while simultaneously 

estimating the impacts of singular subsystems on the 

overall value. Results shown are expressed in metric 

Tons referring to thermal conditioned areas as specific 

weight (Tm/m
2
).  

Energy demand was evaluated by modelling on Lider 

(v. 1.0 July 2009), a program associated with the Spanish 

Technical Building Code approved in March 2006 [19]. 

The derived demand values were separated into two 

components: heating and cooling. Taking into account 

eight possible orientations mean, minimum and 

maximum values were obtained. Modelling of all 

building subsystems, fixed shadows (balconies, walls, 

etc.) as well as internal partitions were carried out 

starting from detailed acquired data for each selected 

case. Urban obstructions were taken into account by 

modelling effective urban fabric geometrical properties. 

Concerning user dependent factors, i.e. hygrometry, 

ventilation rate and movable solar protections, default 

values were attributed. The latter is taken into account by 

simulation through two solar mean reduction factors 

(summer and winter). Lider provides energy demand 

measured in kWh/(m
2
year). The surface considered 

refers to a thermally conditioned area. 

 

 

RESULTS 

The results presented and discussed are three parted. 

First, the building mass evaluation process is presented 

and analysed, then energy demand for heating and 

cooling is also presented, and finally their relationship is 

explained. 

 

Table 2 shows the built mass referring to useful floor 

area. First of all we can observe that recent buildings (B - 

E) are heavier (expressed as specific weight) than 

historical buildings constructed before 1960 (A - C - D). 

Moreover, the apartment blocks (C - D - E) are slightly 

lighter per unit area than row houses (A - B). Therefore, 

the heavier building is case B (recent row house) while 

the lighter building is case C (historic apartment block). 

 

 
Table 2: Built mass. 

  

Case study Mass (Tm/m
2
) 

 

  

A 1.53 

B 2.58 

C 1.11 

D 1.24 

E 1.65 
  

  

 
 

The mass of the modern cases (Tm/m
2
 of thermal 

conditioned areas) is greater mainly because of mass 

properties in construction systems based on concrete 

flooring and also because of more unconditioned spaces 

in the buildings - especially underground car park-. 

Table 3 shows results regarding annual energy demand 

referring to heating and cooling of different urban 

fabrics. Also in this parametric representation it is 

possible to observe a clear distinction between historic 

buildings (A - C - D) and recent buildings (B - E). The 

former have envelopes without thermal insulation, while 

the latter are built according to thermal regulations that 

restrict heat transmission coefficients (U). As further 

proof, case B and E have a conditioning energy demand 

of about 40 kWh/m
2
y, roughly  half that of the other 

cases (Table 3).  

Cooling energy demands of the historic urban fabric 

is low, 15% of heating demand, while in the case of 

contemporary urban fabric; cooling demand represents 

over 50% of heating demand. This is mainly due both to 

the presence/absence of thermal insulation, and to urban 

form properties, e.g. density, geometry, orientation. The 

first issue - along with modern envelopes which have 



PLEA2012 - 28th Conference, Opportunities, Limits & Needs Towards an environmentally responsible architecture Lima, Perú 7-9 November 2012 

 

lower thermal inertia -, produces higher cooling 

demands, while the second affects solar radiation access.  

Results due to possible different orientations illustrate 

that variation is broader in modern building than in 

historic buildings. Historic buildings demonstrate similar 

energy performance, while contemporary buildings are 

more sensitive to orientation shifts. For example, case E 

shows great variation: the worst orientation has an 

energy demand 84% greater than the best orientation. 

 

 
Table 3: Heating and cooling energy demand. 

      

 Heating  
(kWh/ 

m
2
year)  

Cooling  
(kWh/ 

m
2
year) 

Heating and cooling        
(kWh/m

2
year) 

 Average Min. Max. 
      

      

A 86.88   3.22 90.10 86.57 93.12 

B 21.85 13.32 41.04 33.17 47.01 

C 79.33   8.17 87.50 85.48 89.28 

D 77.52   5.74 83.26 78.29 89.28 

E 22.34 11.75 39.64 25.74 47.23 
      

      

 

 

Table 4 and Figure 3 show the existing tendency 

between mass properties and building energy demand. 

Referring to thermally conditioned areas, results point 

out that mass has strong relevance on energy, as a rough 

approximation described by the fitting as: 

 

y = 98.952 x
-1.998 

 

where y represents the energy demand (kWh/Tm year) 

and x the built mass (Tm/m
2
 of thermal conditioned 

area). 

 

 
Table 4: Built mass and energy demand. 

   

Case study Mass          

(Tm/m
2
) 

 

Energy demand         

(kWh/Tm year) 
 

   

A 1.53 58.9 

B 2.58 15.9 

C 1.11 78.9 

D 1.24 67.0 

E 1.65 24.1 
   

   

 

Hence the greater the mass per conditioned square meter  

an urban fabric has, the less energy demand it 

demonstrates for heating and cooling per mass unit. 

Furthermore, the expression exponent near -2 suggests 

that mass plays an important role in reducing energy 

consumption (if it were -1 means that energy per unit 

area was constant). The reason for this should be due to 

the relationship between mass and energy for modern 

and historic urban fabrics. Modern urban fabrics have 

much heavier built-form building systems (mass per 

conditioned unit area) and at the same time (because of 

thermal regulation) they have a lower energy demand. 

 
 

 
Figure 3: Relation between built mass and energy demand. 

Dots, computed and experimental values; continuous line, 

least-squares fit. 

 
 

CONCLUSIONS 

This study provides a preliminary knowledge-base on 

finding a relationship between mass and energy 

consumption of different urban fabrics. 

The analysis carried out on case studies prove that 

there is a relation between mass and energy demand (for 

heating and cooling) in the Mediterranean climate urban 

fabrics, which adopt built-form typologies and 

constructive systems widely spread in the Barcelona 

metropolitan area. 

Nevertheless future studies that increase the number 

of case studies (without considering it part of the 

identification of the relationship) and expand the research 

field to include mass and energy, are required. Moreover 

for a complete comprehension of metabolism of urban 

fabric, more built-forms and behaviour climates should 

be analysed.  

Other aspects are also to be considered, e.g. transport, 

lighting, hot water, electrical appliances, etc., which 

could lead to verifying accordance with this rule on the 

urban scale and give hints to conscious and effective 

built environment transformations, moving towards more 

efficient conditions. 

 

 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

This work has been supported by MICINN project 

ENE2009-11540. M. M. acknowledges Sapienza 

University of Rome for PhD fellowship. 

 

 

y = 98.952x-1.998

R² = 0.8533

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

0 1 2 3 Tm/m2

kWh/   

Tm year



PLEA2012 - 28th Conference, Opportunities, Limits & Needs Towards an environmentally responsible architecture Lima, Perú 7-9 November 2012 

 

REFERENCES 
1. Sudjic, D., Burdett, R., London School of Economics and 

Political Science (2007) The Endless city : the urban age 

project by the London School of Economics and Deutsche 

Bankk's Alfred Herrhausen Society, London: Phaidon. 

2. Agency, I. E., IEA. and OECD (2008) World Energy 

Outlook 2008, [online], available: 

http://www.worldenergyoutlook.org/2008.asp [accessed 12th 

April 2012]. 

3. OMA and ECF (2010) Roadmap 2050: A practical guide to 

a prosperous, low carbon Europe, [online], available: 

http://www.roadmap2050.eu/ [accessed 12th April 2012]. 

4. WWF, Ecofys, OMA and Stephan, S. (2011) The energy 

report:100% renewable energy by 2050, [online], available: 

http://wwf.panda.org/what_we_do/footprint/climate_carbon_en

ergy/energy_solutions/renewable_energy/sustainable_energy_r

eport/ [accessed 12th April 2012]. 

5. Market Observatory for Energy. and European 

Commission. Directorate-General for Energy and Transport. 

(2010) Europe's energy position: markets & supply, Market 

Observatory for Energy report, Luxembourg: Publications 

Office of the European Union. 

6. Ratti, C., Baker, N. and Steemers, K. (2005) 'Energy 

consumption and urban texture', Energy and Buildings, 37(7), 

762-776. 

7. Strømann-Andersen, J. and Sattrup, P. A. (2011) 'The urban 

canyon and building energy use: Urban density versus daylight 

and passive solar gains', Energy and Buildings, 43(8), 2011-

2020. 

8. Zhang, J., Heng, C. K., Malone-Lee, L. C., Hii, D. J. C., 

Janssen, P., Leung, K. S. and Tan, B. K. (2012) 'Evaluating 

environmental implications of density: A comparative case 

study on the relationship between density, urban block typology 

and sky exposure', Automation in Construction, 22(0), 90-101. 

9. Compagnon, R. (2004) 'Solar and daylight availability in  

the urban fabric', Energy and Buildings, 36(4), 321-328. 

10.  Morganti, M., Coch, H. and Cecere, C. (2012) 'The effect 

of urban obstructions in Mediterranean climates: built form ty- 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

pology, density and energy', ACE: Architecture, City and 

Environment, 19, 13-26 [online], available: http://www-

cpsv.upc.es/ace/Articles_n19/articles_pdf/ACE_19_SA_10.pdf 

[accessed 19th July 2012]. 

11.  Kühnert, C., Helbing, D. and West, G. B. (2006) 'Scaling 

laws in urban supply networks', Physica A: Statistical 

Mechanics and its Applications, 363(1), 96-103. 

12.  Lämmer, S., Gehlsen, B. and Helbing, D. (2006) 'Scaling 

laws in the spatial structure of urban road networks', Physica A: 

Statistical Mechanics and its Applications, 363(1), 89-95. 

13.  Isalgue, A., Coch, H. and Serra, R. (2007) 'Scaling laws and 

the modern city', Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its 

Applications, 382(2), 643-649. 

14.  Dascalaki, E. G., Droutsa, K. G., Balaras, C. A. and 

Kontoyiannidis, S. (2011) 'Building typologies as a tool for 

assessing the energy performance of residential buildings – A 

case study for the Hellenic building stock', Energy and 

Buildings, 43(12), 3400-3409. 

15.  Paricio Casademunt, A. (2008) Secrets d'un sistema 

constructiu : l'Eixample, 2a ed., Barcelona: Edicions UPC. 

16.  Díaz Gómez, C. (1991) Aproximació a l'evolució i al 

comportament derivat de les tècniques constructives utilitzades 

en els tipus edificatoris exempts destinats a habitatge econòmic 

a Catalunya (periode 1954/1976), (Tesis), Universitat 

Politècnica de Catalunya. 

17.  CIES – Centre d’iniciatives per a l’edificació sostenible. 

Treballs de recerca previs per a la redacció del Llibre Blanc 

per a l’Etiquetatge Verd dels productes per a la contsrucció. 

Departament de Medi Ambient de la Generalitat de Catalunya. 

[unpublished] 

18.  ITeC - Institut de Tecnologia de la Construcció de 

Catalunya. (2012) Bedec PR/PCT. [online], available: 

http://www.itec.cat/nouBedec.c/bedec.aspx [accessed March 

and April 2012]. 

19. Spain - Ministerio de Vivienda.  (2006) CTE - Código 
Técnico de la Edificación. Madrid: Boletín Oficial del Estado. 

11 vol.  

http://www.itec.cat/nouBedec.c/bedec.aspx

