














































Architectural repercussions of the air conditioning installations


Architectural repercussions of the air conditioning installations

C. Cabello and H. Coch
Departamento de Construcciones Arquitectonicas – ETSAB-UPC

ABSTRACT
This work aims to present an analysis of architectural repercussions involved in choosing a certain 
climatic system for an office block. The intention is to unite techniques and the building itself. 
Independently  of  the  bioclimatic  design  criteria  for  office  work,  these  buildings  require  active 
technical systems for their air conditioning. We should only consider the air conditioning option that 
allows for regulation of areas and the maximum energetic effectiveness (VAV, fan coils, ducted fan 
coils, etc). The choice of the final system has serious considerations for both the architect and the 
building.

In this study a representative office floor plan is proposed. Among its features are: an open-plan, 
certain height, core services and glass retaining wall. For this plan, the different air conditioning 
systems  are  analysed  focusing  on the  consequences  on  the  architecture  (space  occupied,  spatial 
distribution, visual impact, user comfort, etc). These aspects will be studied afterwards for the whole 
building.

This work will allow us to have a summary of the architectural repercussions of each system so 
that the architect can take decisions before designing the installation.

Key words: installation, architecture, air conditioning, office block.

1. INTRODUCTION
This  work  aims  to  present  an  analysis  of  architectural  repercussions  involved  in  choosing  a 
hygrothermal conditioning system in an office block with the intention of managing to integrate the 
technique with the building. These systems are understood to be  able to achieve levels of thermal 
comfort for the user. Thus, the desired well-being can only be achieved in these workplaces if the air  
conditioning  –  heating  and  cooling  –  and  ventilation  systems  considered  are  acting  on  the 
temperature and humidity of the environment equally and, also, on the air quality. 

Aside from the design criteria of a bioclimatic nature to be taken into account in a tall building, all 
office blocks need active technical systems for their air conditioning. 

From among all the possible air conditioning systems, it is decided which are to be considered 
appropriate for office blocks (Variable refrigerant flow, Variable air volume, etc.). The choice of the 
final system has serious considerations for both the architect and the building. 

2. ANALYSIS
The intention is not to study air conditioning installations in the same manner as is done in technical 
books – design, layout and calculation – but rather to evaluate the architectural effects that are caused 
by choosing one particular  air  conditioning system.  While  the  integration  of  installations  into  a 
building is considered as a whole, the integration of thermal conditioning systems, in particular, is a 

1



distinct matter – an element (and not alone, naturally) that creates architecture.  “While, in reality,  
there is no real conflict between technique and art, a technical standpoint can favour the creation of  
a more attractive aesthetical form and, on the contrary, an aesthetical approach to a technical or  
scientific problem that can lead to a less rigid solution”1.

How is it possible to consider refrigeration, heating or ventilation without looking at installations 
for plumbing, sanitation and electricity? It is yet more difficult to detach hygrothermal conditioning 
installations from domotics, regulation, etc. or from the fire prevention systems. It is complicated to 
separately study the installations in a building, particularly when the intention is to design integrated 
complexes. However, while the cross-over between one and the other is clear, the decisions taken in 
air conditioning installations are the factors that will have most influence on the configuration and 
workings of the building. 

Given that the use of this type of installation is obligatory when considering offices and as the 
block is a model that is easily systematised, office blocks constructed in the first decade of the 20th 
century in Spain – and, due to their relative  geographical closeness to the authors, specifically the 
triangle formed by Barcelona, Zaragoza and Madrid – have been chosen as the area of study. As it is 
only  possible  to  establish  the  basic  principles  from  a  combination  of  intellectual  analysis  and 
practical application of what happens with air conditioning installations, the installations of various 
emblematic buildings have been examined, among them:
- Torre Llacuna, Barcelona (project from 2001)2
- New headquarters of Gas Natural, Barcelona (2006)3.
- World Trade Center, Zaragoza (2008)4.
- Cuatro Torres Business Area (CTBA), (2007-2009), Madrid5. 
- Office block in the Aragonia building, Zaragoza (2010)5.

All of the cited buildings correspond to a representative model of one floor in an office block: an 
open-plan,  certain  height,  core  services  and glass  retaining  wall.  With  such a  configuration,  the 
different air conditioning systems employed were analysed, studying the architectural consequences 
arising from the choice of each of them (space occupied, spatial organisation, visual impact, user 
comfort, etc.). The elements analysed for the one floor are broadened, later, to cover the whole block. 

If all the installations in a building were regulated by a broad, complex and variable regulation, 
there is no doubt that in Spain many of the aspects regulated by the Rules for Thermal Installations in 
Buildings  (R.I.T.E.)7 would  affect  architectural  considerations  when  designing  an  office  block. 
Assuredly, the Basic Safety Document, in situations of fire, (DB SI)8 from the Building Technical 
Code (Spain), which is strongly linked with hygrothermal conditioning installations, is one of the 
regulations that most condition design in a tall building. 

2

                    
Fig. 01. Glass Tower. (Madrid) Fig. 02. WTC (Zaragoza) Fig. 03. LlacunaTower (Barcelona)

                    



In  office  blocks,  the  current  regulations  regarding the  area  of  fire  prevention  have  lead  to  a 
significant increase in the area occupied by core services – those which normally consist of two 
staircases,  lifts,  installation  rooms  and utility  shafts,  in  addition  to  the  corresponding ventilated 
lobby.  However, the  demands of the DB SI regarding the sectioning of buildings are what most 
condition the organisation of air conditioning installations. 

In order to fulfil the R.I.T.E. technical requirements and of all the possible alternatives for thermal 
air conditioning, the office blocks under consideration – glass-fronted buildings all – can only be 
equipped with those that allow for control by zones and maximum energy efficiency. The aim is to 
consume what is needed for optimum comfort at all times. 

However, the need to bring in treated air from outside and energy recovery are the requirements 
that have the greatest impact – particularly spatially – on buildings. 

As regards the fluid energy carrier that reaches office areas, the systems considered to be adequate 
for conditioning these buildings are:
- Of the water-air systems: fan coils, inductors and cooling units. 
- Of  water-only  systems:  unventilated  fan  coils.  This  requires  separate  installation  of  an  air 

recovery system. 
- Of the systems using refrigerating gases as a heat-transporting fluid:  the Variable  Refrigerant 

Flow (VRF) – using Inverter Technology. 
- Of the air-only systems: those with varying flow, i.e. those that are Variable Air Volume (VAV).

When considering the generation of cold or heat, boilers, compression-cycle refrigeration, air and 
water refrigerated heat pumps and heat exchangers are the high performance equipment that should 
be examined9. 

In  order  to  structure  the  explanation  of  the  architectural  repercussions  that  air  conditioning 
installations have on an office block, it is considered that whatever the system may be there will 
always  be an origin,  a transport  factor  and a receiver.  The origin is  the heat  or cold-generating 
equipment and this is where the transport flow originates. The transportation components consist of 
pipes or  ducts which transport the heat-transporting fluid – water, air or refrigerant – and impose 
resistance in the circulation to the receivers. The receivers are the elements which receive the fluid 
transported: air treatment units (ATUs) and terminal units found in the areas to be air-conditioned1.

The installations in general, but above all those for hygrothermal air conditioning, determine the 
building  in  which  they  are  housed.  However,  the  networks  of  services  and the  air  conditioning 
systems  should  not  be  considered  a  nuisance  that  must  be  hidden and do not  form part  of  the  
architecture; instead, a place should be found for them. Only from knowledge of the installations, 
their configuration and their repercussions on construction can the subservient and servicing areas be 
integrated as analysed by Louis I. Kahn, who wrote of the Richards Memorial laboratories project: 
“I do not like ducts and piping. In fact, I utterly hate them, but because of this I feel that they must be  
given their place. If you only hated them and were not careful, then I believe they would invade the  
building and destroy it completely”10.

The consequences of the implementation of the air conditioning systems on an office block have 
effects in the following architectural aspects of the building: 
- Spatial repercussions.
- Construction repercussions.
- Environmental and user comfort repercussions.
- Formal or aesthetic repercussions.

3

              
Fig. 04. General patterns.



The magnitude of these effects will be analysed in the origin, the transportation systems and the 
receivers in hygrothermal conditioning installations.

3. SPATIAL REPERCUSSIONS
These are undoubtedly the most important for the building. Not only does the block need to be given 
enough space to emplace the equipment, networks and the other components of the installations, but 
also these spaces must guarantee good maintenance of these installations and the possibility of future 
modification or expansion. 

Thus, a guarantor of a good result is the  over-sizing of shop premises, utility shafts, horizontal 
galleries, false ceilings and raised access floors, particularly when the complete range of installations 
in the building has yet to be resolved. 

3.1. Origin
When considering the basic schematics for the air conditioning 
system in a building (whatever that system may be), the first 
decision is  the location of the energy generators.  It is  just  as 
valid to have cold groups that serve not just the office blocks but 
also the whole of the different building areas constructed (over 
6,000 Kw of cold) – as is the case of the Aragonia complex by 
R. Moneo – as to consider an installation divided into two levels 
(WTC by  Aranaz  Associates)  or  to  decentralise  the  external 
units according to floors as with the new Gas headquarters by E. 
Miralles/ B. Tagliablue. The varying degree of centralisation or 
decentralisation creates different spatial requirements: these can 
range  from  reserving  one  or  more  mechanical  plants  in  the 
building  for  this  purpose  –  shared  with  the  rest  of  the 
installations – to the roof(s) of the block or specific rooms on 
each floor (size approximately 7 m2 in the Gas headquarters). 
The floors for installations can be located in the basement of the 
building or through the block depending on the degree to which 
the installation is divided. In order not to make the installation 
more  complicated,  only  coolers  or  water-refrigerated  heat 
pumps  should  be  placed  in  the  basement;  where  there  are 
boilers, there should be a smoke evacuation pipe in the roof. 

In  the  case  of  ventilation  installation,  the  ventilators  are 
located on the roof. The tendency is to introduce the necessary 
air  for  each  floor  naturally  or  mechanically  –  in  which  case 
smaller ventilators are placed in the false ceilings of the offices. 

3.2. Transport
The transport systems occupy different spaces depending on the 
fluid to be displaced around the block – water, refrigerant or air 
– and the level of centralisation/decentralisation of the block. 

The  centralised  hygrothermal  conditioning  installations 
require vertical  utility shafts and horizontal  galleries to house 
the pipes – in the case of hydraulic circuits – or ducts – if air is 
being transported. If the level of centralisation refers to each of 
the floors in the block, the networks run through the accessible 
false ceilings or the raised floors. 

4

Fig. 05. Mechanical plants situation



If there are vertical columns, then the most typical is that these are configured together with the 
core  services  –  correctly  sized  –  without  weakening  the  fire  resistance  of  the  lift,  stairs  and 
independent lobby enclosures so as to maintain complete accessibility – as described by F. Rafeiner 
in his study in 196911. Other innovative solutions include housing the vertical fluid transportation 
within the façade of the building or in raised walls. 

Almost all administrative buildings have accessible false ceilings and floors for the distribution of 
air conditioning installations – and the other installations – around each of the office floors. As an 
example, there is the Glass Tower which has 70 cm of false ceiling and 40 cm of raised floor. 

The larger volume occupied by the air ducts – compared to the water or refrigerant circuits – and 
the  need  for  sectioning  every  three  floors  (requiring  the  emplacement  of  accessible  fire  doors) 
reduces the use of air distribution systems to the floors in most cases. Energy transportation through 
the block is normally achieved through hydraulic or refrigerant circuits. 

The regulatory needs to bring in treated air from outside and to recover heat prior to expelling the 
extracted air complicates the air networks and demands greater spatial consideration.

The entrance of the renewing air through the framework thickness of each of the floors avoids the 
use of large ducts – as has happened in the Glass Tower. 

The  greatest  limiter  to  be  considered  in  the  VRF  systems  is  the  maximum  length  of  the 
refrigeration  pipes  –  see  the  corresponding  Spanish  regulation  to  AENOR – to  which  L.  Jesús 
Arizmendi referred as follows: “Currently, the maximum distance between the exterior unit and the  
longest  between  interior  units  is  of  100 m measured along  the  refrigerant  pipe.  Vertically,  the  
maximum allowable distance is of 50 m between the exterior and the interior units and of 15 m  
between two interior units connected to the same exterior unit12”.

The energy transport  networks  – pipes  and air  ducts  belonging to  the office air  conditioning 
system – are complex – circuits weaving back and forth – as well as having independent extraction 
for the services areas and the pressurisation of the stairs and independent lobbies, should these lack 
natural ventilation. 

5

Fig. 06. Facilities Llacuna Tower. Water-air system. Unventilated Fan coils.



3.3. Receivers
There are many types of interior units on the market: ceiling-mounted, vertical floor units, horizontal 
on the ceiling, wall-mounted, embedded in the false ceiling and connected directly to diffusers and 
grilles. There is a clear trend towards placing the terminals in the false ceiling – depending on the 
space available. There are also slim-line models on the market with a height of 300 mm. 

One final consideration might be a VRF-AIR system – placing interior units in the false ceiling or 
in specific rooms – not going into offices – and, from there, distributing to all areas via a network of 
ducts, diffusers and grilles which would distribute the air to all areas. 

The grilles and diffusers are normally housed in a false ceiling, but they can also be placed in a 
raised floor – and they do not require space specially set aside. 

4. CONSTRUCTION REPERCUSSIONS 
The effects  of the implementation of air  conditioning installations  on construction aspects of an 
office block are important and basically refer to three areas: the structure calculations for the block; 
the solution to the enclosing elements to avoid noise pollution to nearby buildings and within the 
building  itself;  and  the  definition  of  the  support  system  elements  required  to  avoid  noise  and 
vibrations being transmitted within the building itself. 

The  correct  dimensions  of  the  structure  anticipating  the  exact  location  of  the  equipment  – 
particularly  the  roofing  thickness  or  floors  of  the  mechanical  plants  –  are  necessary  as  the 
emplacement of the generators depends on this. 

While  office  blocks  require  large  urban  areas  due  to  their  heights,  the  noise  caused  by  the 
machines must not be permitted to reach neighbouring buildings. Thus, in the case of emplacing the 
machines on flat roofs, it is necessary to have the construction definition of the enclosing element for 
the  roof  so  that  it  serves  as  an  acoustic  dampener  so  as  to  avoid  transmitting  noise  to  those 
neighbouring buildings. In the case of raised rooms located in the middle floors of the block, their 
enclosures must be solved; these have two important purposes: allowing the air in from outside to 
refrigerate the machines and shielding them from noises that could be transmitted to other buildings 
– with all the difficulties this implies.
Furthermore, emplacing the machines in the middle floors requires a specific definition of all the 
enclosing  elements  in  those  floors  –  floors,  ceilings  and  walls  –  so  as  to  avoid  noise  being 

6

Fig. 07. Facilities headquarters of Gas Natural. System VRF. Ventilated fan coils.



transmitted aurally to office floors located below and above those containing installations.  Thus, 
enclosures of a certain mass, soundproofed ceilings and so forth are required. 

The decentralisation of machines by floor multiplies the problem but it does reduce the intensity. 
Where there are rooms on each floor with exterior units or ATUs, a good solution is to place them so 
they form part of the core services, so that the stairs, lifts, bathrooms and other areas with fewer 
acoustic requirements than the offices can soften the noise impact of the equipment. Locating the 
installation rooms in the basement simplifies these matters. 

The  corrective  measures  performed  to  support  the  thickness  of  the  machines  require  special 
attention. There must be a mounting support or independent floating metal structure for each set, able 
to support the static and dynamic charges from the sets and to greatly reduce the transmission of 

sounds and vibrations via the structure. The slabs or structures 
–  absolutely  flat  –  lie  upon  high-density  vibration-acoustic 
soundproofing,  which  works  better  if  it  is  not  a  single 
continuous piece. 

The  utility  shafts,  horizontal  galleries  and  false  roofs 
should  be  sufficiently  soundproofed.  The  crossing  of  pipes 
through the constructed areas is solved through anti-vibration 
systems. 

In order to achieve the sound levels required by Spanish 
regulations13 for  administrative  buildings,  in  addition to  the 
construction methods defined in this section, good execution 
of the installations is necessary as well as the use of systems 
which conform to the requirements  of DB-HR – emplacing 
flexible and muffling components on machines, pumps, pipes 
and  ducts14.  However,  the  use  of  adequate  materials  and 
accessories available on the market neither require spatial nor 
construction considerations of note. 

The double façade retaining wall used in the Glass Tower 
or  the  Space  Tower,  for  example,  is  a  construction  system 
that, in addition to its vocation as a passive air conditioning 
element, works completely to provide new air and the air for 
the air conditioning system. 

7

                    
Fig. 08. Gas Natural Building. Ed. Pencil Fig. 09. WTCZ

                    

Fig. 10. Aragonia Tower



5. ENVIRONMENTAL AND USER COMFORT REPERCUSSIONS
In  this  section,  the  main  functions  of  hygrothermal  conditioning  installations  are  considered: 
achieving  the  temperature  and  quality  of  air  necessary  in  the  office  so  that  the  individual  is 
comfortable and can perform their work to the best of their abilities. There are many repercussions of 
air conditioning installations, but those that affect living conditions have the greatest consequences 
on the building’s users. There will also be mention of the noise generated by these installations. 

The question of comfort is a complex topic that would require a paper of its own considering the 
number of parameters it covers, the subjective character of the receivers, etc. Thus, this paper will 
only consider a few matters that are relevant to the administrative building. 

5.1. THERMAL COMFORT
Of all the conditioners in the design of office blocks, there are two aspects that determine the comfort 
parameters for each workplace: the façades of the buildings – all glass or a predominance of large 
windows in all directions – and the organisation of the large open-plan floors of the office block, 
with inner and outer areas with a large amount of sunlight.  The air conditioning systems should 
achieve  the  optimum  air  temperature  for  the  needs  in  each  area  –  having  heating  and  cooling 
available simultaneously – which will in turn determine the type of installation to use. The control 
systems should have a good number of zones covered and a large number of areas managed so as to 
consume the energy needed at the time, adapting to the different areas and the needs of the majority 
of people who are in the offices. 

Proper thermal comfort can only be achieved through correct distribution of temperatures and air 
speeds, control of the humidity and adequate air quality – i.e. a distribution of air to all parts of the 
offices – within the occupied area.

The Spanish regulations which decree the comfort parameters and how to calculate these are the 
R.I.T.E and the UNE-EN ISO 7730 REGULATION. 

It  must  be  considered  that  while  the  occupied  area  is  viewed as  a  parallel  plan  to  the  floor 
measuring 1.70 – 2.00 m, the majority of the users remain seated in their workplaces and it is this 
area at 0.60 m from the floor that is the critical zone which must be closely examined. Direct action  
upon  the  user’s  body  by  a  propulsion  discharge  pump  at  a  temperature  below  the  ambient 
temperature is typical. The correct organisation of terminal units, grilles, diffusers and nozzles and 
the adequate speed to promote air flow are essential. Interior unit designs have been developed that 
optimise the interior propulsion of the air. 

The interior  VRF system units,  fan coils  and ducted  fan coils  located  inside offices  must  be 
equipment that allows individual control in each of the areas in accordance with the user’s needs. 
The UI ventilators must have frequency changers so as to adapt to the distinct situations of partial  
charge. 

8

Interior design conditions7.
Season Operational temperature ºC Relative humidity %
Summer 23 - 25 45 - 60
Winter 21 - 23 40 - 50

Minimum level of external air for ventilation7.
Category dm3 /s per person dp (air quality)
IDA 2 (Offices) 12.5 1.2

Air speed12.
Summer Winter

m/s 0.18-0.24 0.15-0.20



Multi-split  systems  allow an  exterior  unit  to  be  connected  to  various  different  interior  units, 
without this meaning individual control being given up. Regulation of interior units can also be done 
from a central control board in accordance with conditions outside, among other parameters. 

The most recent blocks in Madrid are examples of innovative strategies in the intent to optimise 
user comfort. The active façade of the Glass Tower as a component that accentuates external climate 
conditions and the emplacement of fan coils around the edges of the offices promote good energy 
distribution. In the case of Space Tower, moving the air through ventilation in the false flooring and 
the panel and cold joist system in the roof boosts indoor air circulation. 

Whether or not the final user of the office block  is known, when an architect has to project a 
building of this type the flexibility of the spaces has always been a primary design criterion from the 
beginning right through to today. If the distribution of the receivers of the air conditioning is not 
conceived from that possible variability,  then the unexpected breaking down of an open-plan into 
individual offices could mean that particular users find themselves in a constantly uncomfortable 
situation which could lead to consequences of varying degrees. 

5.2. ACOUSTIC COMFORT
Although the sound level in indoor areas in the block depends on many elements, the air conditioning 
installations – generators, pumps, water and air circulating around the pipes and ducts – are one of 
the main producers of noise within the building. 

In order to achieve the acoustic comfort required and necessary for the user to be happy in the 
office (LeqA,T: 40-50dBA)14, all of the construction measures indicated in the previous section must be 
adopted. The coolers, fan coils and ducted fan coils must be of high quality and silent. The grilles 
and diffuser terminals must not generate a greater sound level than that permitted. 

6. FORMAL OR AESTHETIC REPERCUSSIONS
When the impact of air conditioning installations on building aesthetics is analysed, there arises a 
debate between hiding and revealing the energy. Furthermore, this double debate runs for both the 
exterior and the interior of the buildings. 

6.1. SHAPE OF THE BLOCKS
When deciding the position of the mechanical plants, the architect is considering the exterior image 
of the block – whether or not the rooms are visualised. Thus, there is the Glass Tower whose glassy, 

9

Fig. 11. Distribution air. Space Tower.



reflective envelope does not reveal what is happening within. Under artificial  light, the complete 
mimesis of the retaining wall façade dissolves and the different uses are revealed. The opposite case 
is  courtesy of N. Foster with the Caja Madrid Tower where the mechanical  plants and the core 
services can be seen, becoming relevant, and configuring the shape of the building. 

Complete or rhythmic enveloping and the aim not to reveal the installations implies opting for 
water condensate generators – being completely hidden is the option for the Aragonia complex. 

A middle ground is that of the WTC where the location of the machines on the roofs creates a 
solid finish for the blocks. The same option – using a light enclosure – is present in the Llacuna 
Tower in Barcelona, where the opaque strips stand out on the façades as they cover the framework,  
false ceilings and the installations. Solutions like opaque or mirrored glass allow ceilings and raised 
floors to be concealed. 

The strict air renewal regulation for offices means there has to be a formal consideration when 
positioning entry points for the air from outside. Either air should be taken from the roofs or, so as to 
avoid complex networks, it should be brought in on each floor. In the latter case, grilles could be 
emplaced as a specific element or integrated into parts of the  retaining wall – as happened in the 
Aragonia building or the Glass Tower. 

The option of decentralising the placement of the equipment and locating rooms down a vertical 
strip – as in the case of the new headquarter of Gas Natural – provide the opportunity to design a 
type  of special  grille,  allowing the necessary influx of air  while  being integrated with complete 
normality into the complex of glass façades. 

6.2. OFFICE AESTHETICS
The tendency when considering the exterior image of offices is to hide the energy, disguising the 
terminal  units,  grilles  and  diffusers  with  ceiling  strips.  Considering  the  option  of  leaving  the 
installations open is for other uses and other more expressionistic times. 

Nowadays, no office is conceived without a false ceiling or raised floor with the obvious intention 
of hiding the installations…or maybe leaving them open – for easier maintenance. 

On the market there are many types of interior units, the choice of which depends – aside from 
spatial requirements – a matter of aesthetics. There is a clear trend towards emplacing the terminal 
units in the false ceiling – achieving a minimal appearance in the room. The grilles and lineal fan 
coils are placed at the extremes of the floor so as to be as imperceptible as possible. The existence of  
the regulating components must not be forgotten – detectors, thermostats, etc. – as their presence is 
unavoidable. 

10

           
Fig. 12. Caja Madrid Tower. (Madrid) Fig. 13. Headquarters of Gas Natural (Barcelona). Ed. Pencil

                    



Prior to concluding, it is necessary to note that while the hygrothermal conditioning systems under 
study are global systems that guarantee the thermal conditions for the workplace environment,  it 
could still be necessary to have independent, specific systems for other subsidiary uses in the office 
block (auditoria, restaurant, etc.). 

7. CONCLUSIONS
Hygrothermal conditioning systems in a block are complex networks affected by a wide range of 
changing and complicated regulations, for which reason the basic principles of what occurs in air 
conditioning installations and the architectural repercussions that they can have on buildings must be 
known so as to correctly integrate them. 

Air  conditioning  installations  condition  the  building  in  which  they  are  implemented:  shape, 
volume, function, aesthetics and technology. 

Of all the building networks, the air conditioning installations occupy the most space. Therefore, 
predicting and over-sizing the floors, shop premises and spaces must happen from the very beginning 
of the project. 

Furthermore, specific construction solutions are needed for the enclosing elements for the rooms 
and chambers where the equipment and networks are located. 

Shape combined with function can lead to blocks with great expressive qualities. 
In common with the other installations in the building, the air conditioning systems condition the 

user’s feeling of comfort – the ultimate receiver of the architectural fact. The system must adapt to 
the variability of the system and uniformly distribute the energy around the area occupied by people. 

The installations  are technology and architecture and the much anticipated joining of the two 
disciplines  needs  to  be  achieved  among  us  all.  It  is  time  to  take  advantage  of  the  ideas,  the 
technological innovation, the new energies and so forth as ways of ensuring the installations generate 
architecture and are not to be considered a nuisance factor within the building. 

REFERENCES
1Serra, Rafael. (1996). Arquitectura i máquina. Ediciones UPC. p. 23.
2Ingeniería JSS (2001). 
3Varios. (2009).Arquitectura singular: Tipos de oficinas. Editorial Pencil.
4Data belonging to the writers.

info@wtczaragoza.com
5Varios. (2008).Rev. Arquitectura Viva. Nº 121. 

http://www.torredecristal.com/
http://www.torreespacio.com/

6Data belonging to the writers.
7ROYAL DECREE 1027/2007, from 2007, dated 20 July, with which the Thermal Installations in Buildings Regulation  

was  passed.  CORRECTION  of  errors  in  Royal  Decree  1027/2007,  dated  20  July,  with  which  the  Thermal 
Installations in Buildings Regulation was passed.

8Royal Decree 314/2006, dated 17 March, with which the Building Technical Code was passed (BOE 28 March 2006) 
and its corresponding correction of errors and modifications.

9Martín, Cesar. (2006). Tectónica 21. Las instalaciones y la arquitectura. pp. 4-27.
10  Banham, Reyner, (1975). La arquitectura del entorno bien climatizado. p. 282. Ediciones Infinito. Cited in (1964) in  

World Architecture I, p. 35.
11 Rafeiner, Fritz, (1969). Construcción de edificios en altura. pp. 130-131. Editorial Blume.
12  Arizmendi, L. Jesús. (2003).  Calculo y Normativa Básica de las instalaciones en los edificios. TII.. p.255 and figure 

9.10.
13 Royal Decree 1675/2008, dated 17 October, with which Royal Decree 1371/2007, dated 19 October was modified, in 

which the Basic Document “DB-HR Protection against noise” in the Building Technical Code was passed.
14Lidón, Francisco. (2008).  DB de protección frente al ruido (IV): Instalaciones. Article from the acoustic department at 

CAAT Valencia. 

11

http://www.torreespacio.com/
http://www.torredecristal.com/
http://www.torredecristal.com/
mailto:info@wtczaragoza.com

