















































1 
 

Graphical Approach to Assess Urban Quality: Mapping 

Walkability Based on the TOD-Standard 

Graphical expression through mapping can be an essential tool to conduct urban analysis, 

capable of expressing contextual spatial distribution and providing complementary information 

to numerical analysis. Although urban analytics are central for most issues in cities, mobility and 

transportation have traditionally been disciplines very tightly related with quantitative analysis. 

Mobility in urban areas has become a central issue due to its high impact in environmental, social 

and economic concerns. Multiple studies consider that walking presents social, health, economic 

and environmental benefits as a short distance transportation mode. As pedestrian displacements 

are characterized by presenting great adherence, the features of the environment where they are 

performed is key to guarantee their success and promote their use. To be able to design 

appropriate walking city conditions, it is necessary to undergo extensive analysis of existing 

urban areas and their walkability impact. In order to illustrate this, this study takes as a basis the 

Transit Orientated Development Standard (TOD Standard), a scoring instrument defined by the 

Institute for Transportation and Development Policy (ITDP), to evaluate the area of Saint-Lazare 

multimodal station in Paris. The aim of this work is to compare its quantitative and graphical 

results through georeferenced mapping and TOD Standard score based numerical data, in order 

to identify the complementary information provided by the mapping. The conclusions display the 

importance of using graphical analysis to be able to spot singular spatial distributions and 

influencing relations within the urban environment, often imperceptible in numerical values. 

Keywords 

Graphical expression; Urban analysis; Spatial distribution; GIS; Walkability; TOD Standard.  

 

1. INTRODUCTION 

 

1.1. Graphical expression as an analysis method 

Drawing is one of the most natural ways the human being has to express itself, to communicate 

and to record data. From Paleolithic parietal cave paintings or different types of ideograms, such 

as Egyptian hieroglyphs or Sumerian cuneiform, to the computationally enhanced Geographic 

Information Systems that our digital age offers, the human being has shown to rely on graphical 

expression.  

Graphical representation has been used as an analytical system to unfold relationships or achieve 

general overviews of dispersed data. For instance, the work of the English physician John Snow 

(1813-1858) [Snow, 1855] shows the importance of locating data and relying on ground plans to 

display situations in order to be able to convey information. Snow traced the source of a cholera 

outbreak, in London, through the graphical representation of the deceased geolocation. In a 

similar line, the civil engineer Charles Joseph Minard maps of Napoleon Russian campaign of 

1812-1814 [Robinson, 1967; Friendly 2002] show the possibility of combining graphs and mapping 

to gain a clearer panorama of relations and possible causation. Representation tools condition the 

way we see the world [Santamaria & Martínez, 2016] and, therefore, the decisions we take involving 

this reality and its future.  

Although maps and graphical data are not new in the toolset of our societies, current technologies 

seem to have allowed a new leap forward in this field by providing more available information 

and more powerful managing software. In the domain of mobility in general and walkability or 

TOD developments in particular, these technologies have often been claimed to be the opening 



2 
 

of new possibilities in terms of analyzing current and future developments and confronting them 

with TOD objectives [Leslie et al., 2007; Ackerson, 2005]. In a great range of TOD focused studies, 

current Geographical Information Systems (GIS) software are used as a tool to organize data 

regarding their geolocation, intersect different information through spatial relations and, from 

there, extract quantitative results. The graphical data provided in the process is often disregarded 

as an inevitable step in the way of collecting the real core results.  

 

1.2. Walkability and the TOD 

Walking is also the most natural way of moving for the human being. Our body, our sensorial 

perception and our mind have evolved for millions of years based on this displacement system 

[Pozueta et al., 2009]. The first cities were designed to ensure its proper development, as European 

centers still show nowadays by providing appropriate environments for moving by foot and 

reachable destinations at strolling pace [Southworth, 2005]. Walking is also the most adherent of 

our current transportation systems [Mezoued, 2016], ensuring a close and rich relation with the 

environment. The introduction of transit systems, with different kinds of propulsion methods, 

enabled these walkable environments to create connections with further contexts [Parcerisa & 

Rubert de Ventós, 2001]. However, the rise of the automobile age in the 20th century, with its 

consequent suburban based planning tendencies [Ewing, 1994], brought a decay period for both 

walking and transit systems [Montgomery, 2013]. Walking faded away to offer open access to 

motor propelled systems and transit infrastructures were dismantled to give way to individual 

freedom formally translated into cars.  

The 1973 oil crisis and 1979 energy crisis set under new considerations this energy-consuming 

moving system and sprawl based developments [Ewing, 1994]. However, the environmental 

concerns were only the firsts to arise regarding this model. Soon, social, health and economic 

issues were connected with these motor based environments [Jacobs, 1992]. Currently, multiple 

benefits have been claimed to be connected with walking [Southworth, 2005]: reduction of 

congestion, low environmental impact and conservation of energy without air and noise pollution 

[Newman & Kenworthy, 1999]; it is a socially equitable transportation mode and tends to promote 

sociability [Leyden, 2003], as well as mental and physical health [Frank et al., 2003; Ewing et al., 

2003; Pucher & Dijkstra, 2003]. Nevertheless, the close relation that walking establishes with the 

environment tends to work both ways; its adherence also brings as a consequence the need of a 

welcoming environment to ensure its performance [Kaufmann, 2011; Gehl, 2001]. Consequently, 

the car focused settings tend to be perceived as unpleasant by pedestrians. Therefore, reversing 

the mobility habits and bringing back walking can be difficult in certain environments [Gehl, 

2001]. 

The spreading of the suburban model and the sprawl based development raised great concerns, 

especially in the United States, regarding the results of the late developments [Ewing, 2008; Jacobs, 

1992] and the possible future of the American Metropolis [Calthorpe, 1993]. Soon, social 

movements grew together with new urban concepts, such as New Urbanism, Traditional 

neighborhood Developments, Pedestrian Pockets, Urban Villages or Compact Communities, 

seeking to offer alternatives to current urban realities [Carlton, 2009]. Although different strategies 

were used, their ideas were centered in fostering walkable environments, slow mobility systems 

(walking, bicycle) and transit use through the design of new urban developments and the 

rehabilitation of existing ones.  

It is in this context when the first Transit Oriented Development (TOD) concept appeared, 

introduced by Calthorpe in the 1980’s and becoming a planning referent in the United States 

through “The New American Metropolis” [Calthorpe, 1993]. It has been defined as “a mixed-use 



3 
 

community that encourages people to live near transit services and to decrease their dependence 

on driving” [Still, 2002]. 

The TOD Standard is a “tool to help shape and assess urban development. It focuses on 

maximizing the benefits of public transit and non-motorized mobility while placing the emphasis 

firmly back on the users: people” [ITDP, 2017]. This Standard is developed by the Institute for 

Transportation & Development Policy (ITDP) and it is addressed to “policy makers, planners, 

city officials, developers, architects, urban designers, landscape designers, civil engineers, civil 

society organizations, and the interested public” [ITDP, 2017]. In order to achieve its objectives, 

the TOD Standard presents eight main principles together with measurable indicators that allow 

to assess current and future developments regarding their affinity with transit and walkable 

environments. After the overall analysis, a final score is obtained for each of the metrics 

considered in the TOD. This score leads to a label that qualifies an urban area.  

Although the Transit Oriented Development objectives have scarcely been called into question, 

the possibility to apply the TOD Standard principles to different locations around the world has 

often been challenged. Several studies [Sung & Oh, 2011; Cerin et al., 2007; Leslie et al., 2007] have 

sought to prove its robustness in environments physically and socially different from the 

American urban centers that originated the concept. In order to do so, complementary analyzing 

methods have been used, such as surveys [Kelly et al., 2011; Cerin et al., 2007; Sun et al. 2016], 

multiple regression models [Sung & Oh, 2011] or in site measurements [Sun et al., 2016].   

 

1.3. Objective 

This work attempts to address the issue of abstraction when assessing complex urban realities. 

Although abstraction is essential in order to deal with data management and analytics, it is 

important to be aware of its limitations. Decisions are taken at each level of abstraction and these 

choices highly determine the final results obtained. Consequently, when assessing urban realities, 

being aware of the dangers of falling in over-simplifications and the consequences of making 

decisions based on partial models, should be acknowledged throughout the process. In addition, 

attempts of grasping their whole complexity should be made through different approaches and 

perspectives of information. This article argues that graphical representation through mapping 

can be an effective tool to add a different layer to purely numerical average-based analysis. It is 

especially important to address this issue in a moment when the availability of data and 

computational power are pressing urban decisions into relying on averages and scores of different 

parameters.  

A clear example of this can be appreciated in the TOD Standard, a tool to assess walkability and 

Transit Oriented Development based on scores and averages that might not fully convey the 

reality of the place. This tool aims at being able to assess urban realities worldwide and, therefore, 

it is interesting to use it as a case study. This article aims to review the TOD Standard principles 

through graphical expression means, translating data into information-based drawings and 

comparing the results with the TOD quantitative scores. In this way, the study intends to show 

the potential of data-based mapping to communicate information and complement quantitative 

statistical analysis. The objective is to reconsider the perceived consistency of mapping as a 

central analysis tool and put its validity at the same level than other methods, engaging in its 

inherent subjectivity of interpretation. The transportation field has traditionally been strongly 

connected with quantitative methods, such as Large Scale Urban Models]. However, multiple 

voices claim that these approaches have not been successful in modeling urban real circumstances 

[[Klosterman, 1994].  



4 
 

In order to perform this study, an area around a major transit node in Paris, Saint-Lazare Station, 

has been analyzed both purely numerically and graphically following the principles of the TOD 

Standard. Paris choice was motivated by the objective of studying a walkable city with a complete 

transit network. Saint-Lazare station area provided a region around a major multimodal transit 

station with a generally positive walking environment located in a central area of Paris. The 

comparison of these two analysis has provided the opportunity to outline the benefits of 

complementing a study with graphical display instead of relying only on summarizing numerical 

scores.  

 

2. METHODOLOGY  

 

2.1.  Tools and Data  

 

The cartographic analysis has been carried out by means of the Geographic Information System 

(GIS) software ArcMap, which allows to display and explore GIS datasets for a study area, to 

assign symbols and create thematic map layouts [Esri, 2017]. The main GIS Spatial Analysis tools 

that were used in this study are known as “Create Buffers”, “Summarize Within”, and “Connect 

Origin to Destination (Travel mode: Walking Time)”.These tools are of simple use and available 

in most GIS software, not demanding neither high GIS analysis skills or computation power. This 

approach responds to the aim of ensuring a similar analysis could be accessible for a wide range 

of collectives in the city. In line with this objective, the Data used in this study was all available 

in Open Data sources. 

 

2.2. Study of Saint-Lazare area, Paris. 

Paris is a reference city in terms of compactness, diversity, public space quality and extension and 

coverage of its subway [Parcerisa & Rubert de Ventós, 2001]. This transit system is complemented 

by a bus network, metropolitan rail, a bicycle and electrical car renting system and 6 terminus 

train stations. Saint-Lazare is one of this 6 multimodal train station located in the North-center of 

Paris.  

 

A TOD based study of 32 different transit stations in five cities around the world, carried out 

through course exercises of urbanism studies from the Architecture School in Granada (Spain), 

showed that Paris was the city with a higher average TOD score among the studied ones (London, 

Paris, Los Angeles, Santiago de Chile, Istanbul). The “Observatoire de la Mobilité en Île-de-

France” (OMNIL) supports this view with several data about users’ mobility habits. With 4.15 

trips per day, Parisians are the most mobile of the Île-de France region. In Paris, the part of the 

population subscribing to public transportation is 51%, compared with a 36% in the Île-de-France 

region. Parisians also own lower automobile equipment; more than half of Parisians households 

do not own a car, which is almost twice more than in the surrounding departments. Regarding the 

travel motivations, “Required trips”, defined by the OMNIL as associated with work or studies, 

represent only 38% of the total number. Among all the other travels not linked with work or 

studies, the prevailing category gathers leisure and activities motivated trips (18%), closely 

followed by the purchases motivated ones (16%). In terms of transport modes, walking is by far 

the most used by the Parisians. The percentage of walking over the other modes ranges between 

46% (home-leisure commutes) and 79% (home-purchases commutes). The only exception is the 

home-work commute for which they favor public transportation [OMNIL, 2013]. 

 

The Paris-Saint-Lazare Station, is one of the six great terminus railway stations in Paris. Located 

in the Europe neighborhood in the 8th arrondissement, it is the major head-end of the rail network 



5 
 

inherited from the “Companie des chemins de fer de l’Ouest” (1855-1909), serving most of the 

Normandie region and the west suburbs of Paris. The first current buildings of the station were 

built in 1840-1841, being expanded several times between 1852 and 1892, as rail traffic was 

developing and with the great expansion of 1889 for the Universal Exhibition in Paris [SNCF, 
2015].  

 

The development of rail traffic, together with the incorporation of city and regional transit systems 

and other uses, transformed Saint-Lazare from a classical terminus rail station into a Multimodal 

pole. A major restructuration project took place between 2003 and 2012, giving shape to this 

contemporary interpretation of a transportation node. A vast 10000 m2 commercial hall (Figures 

1 and 2) is now accessible from the lobby and connects the three levels of the subway, street and 

train platforms (Figure 3), receiving the commuting of the 27 train platform lines, the city and its 

other transit systems [SNCF, 2015]. There is a strong synergy between the train station and the 

commercial gallery as 68% of the visitors use the commercial facilities every time they traverse 

the station [NERA, 2016]. Nowadays, with about 100 millions of passengers a year (105.3 in 2015), 

Saint-Lazare is the second busiest train station of Paris and France (105 324 691 passengers 2015) 

and among the busiest transport stations in Europe. [ [dataset] SNCF Open Data, 2015]. 

 
 

      
Figure 1 and 2: Saint-Lazare central distribution and shopping hall. Sources: AREP Designlab (Fig.1), gqmagazine © 
François Renault/Photononstop (Fig.2). 

 

 
Figure 3: Longitudinal section of the station. Different levels interrelation. Source: AREP. 

 

The studied area, of 4.45 km2 around the station, straddles two administrative districts or 

“arrondissements”: the 8th and the 9th, being surrounded by important axes at the scale of the city 

(Batignolles, Malesherbes and Haussman Boulevards; and Saint-Lazare street). The area’s regular 

and dense urban fabric is disrupted by the presence of Saint-Lazare Station and its railways 



6 
 

(Figure 5). These elements physically divide the space, but also allow to open a large visual 

perspective, a special feature in Paris’ compact urban tissue (Figure 6).  

 

The residential density of the 8th and 9th arrondissement are respectively 10 064.68 inhbt/km² and 

27 281.65 inhbt/km² [INSEE, 2011]. This residential density is especially low in the 8th - compared 

with Paris average density of 21 067 inhbt/km² [INSEE, 2014], probably due to a major area being 

part of the Central Business District of Paris, which offers the largest office park of Paris [APUR, 

2007]. The average annual income in the 8th and 9th arrondissement, respectively 42 531€ and 32 

532€, are much higher than the 25 830€ average of Paris [INSEE, 2011]. The unemployment rate 

is also low compared with the 9.0 % baseline of Paris: 8.3% in the 9th district, and 6.0% in the 8th 

which is the lowest rate among all the 20 arrondissement [INSEE, 2012]. Regarding the socio-

economic classes, the rate of higher intellectual occupations is higher in those two 8th and 9th 

districts than the average of Paris (31.6% and 36.4% against 28.1%) and the rate of employees is 

lower (11.8% and 11.4% against 13.1%) [INSEE, 2012]. 

 

 
Figure 4: Saint-Lazare station (on the right) and its urban surroundings. Source: the autors. 

 

  
Figure 5 and 6: Depressed railways and the perspective they create. Sources: the autors (Fig.1), Mbzt © (Fig.2). 

 

In the two “arrondissements” intersected by the studied zone (8th and 9th), with 4.43 trips per 

day, residents are more mobile than the Paris average (4.15). The part of active travel modes (non-

motorized: walking, cycling, running, skateboarding, etc. [PHAC, 2014]) is 59.4%. The use of car 

is very low, only 6.8%, and about one third of the trips are made on public transportation (32.7%). 

Among the 1 611 000 trips made within Île-de-France by the inhabitants of the 8th/9th 

arrondissement, 26% are made within the area, 40% within Paris, and the rest toward other 

departments. Regarding the morning commutes, the 8th-9th zone is a receiver area, with a ratio 

between the numbers of received and emitted trips of more than 1.5, probably a consequence of 

the high number of jobs present in the area [OMNIL, 2013].  

 

The chosen scope of the station area of study is a linear crow-fly 500m radius buffer around each 

station’s entrance, which corresponds to a walking time of 10 minutes at an average speed of 

3km/h (Figure 8). The 3km/h speed is the one recommended in the TOD Standard, including the 

intersections waiting time. This speed is also consistent with the pedestrian speed considered in 

Paris by the City’s planning services, 1 m/s or 3,6km/h without waiting times [Le Parisien, 2010]. 

For the walking time or distance, the TOD Standard recommends to use a “reasonable walkable 



7 
 

distance” of the transit station, according to local standards. In this study, a walking time of 10 

minutes was chosen, a time period based on the proximity trips proposed in Marquet and Miralles-

Guasch study [Marquet & Miralles-Guasch, 2015]. This 10 minutes walking time together with a 3 

km/h speed, corresponds to the 500m radius scope of this study, similar to other works developed 

about compact cities [Sung & Oh, 2011]. A network analysis based service area was regarded as 

not appropriate, considering the TOD approximate approach to the definitions of these extents 

and the general aim of this work.  

 

     
Figure 7 and 8: Location in the city and perimeter of the studied zone. Source: planparis360.fr and the authors. 

 

 

The main data source was the site “Open Data Paris” [Open Data Paris], where the services of the 

City of Paris and their partners publish geolocated datasets. The Open Data website of the 

“APUR” (Atelier Parisien d’URbanisme) [Open Data APUR], an urbanism agency gathering local 

collectivities of the Ile-de-France region and working as a non-profit organization, was also 

extensively used. 

   

One specific dataset, concerning the location of transport stations and stops, was downloaded 

from “Open Data RATP”, the open data website of the autonomous operator of Parisian transports 

“RATP” (Régie Autonome de Transports Parisiens) [Open Data RATP]. The precise road plan of 

the studied zone was obtained in DWG format from the Direction de la Voirie et des 

Déplacements – Division des plans de voirie de la Ville de Paris, a municipality open service. 

The location of public projects was obtained from the Local Urbanism Plan (PLU) of Paris.  

Finally, when the data was not existent in any of the previously mentioned sources, layers were 

created on ArcMap based on direct observations through Google Street View or in the field. 

2.3 Measurement methods  

The measurements have been carried out following the TOD Standard version 2.1 [ITDP, 2014], 

which defines 8 “Principles” divided in “Metrics”. However, the existence of the TOD Standard 

3 [ITDP, 2017] should be acknowledged, as this version modifies certain metrics and measurement 

methods of the Standard.  

Principles Metrics 

1. WALK 

1.1.Walkways 

1.2.Crosswalks 

1.3.Visually Active Frontage 

1.4. Physically Permeable Frontage 

1.5. Shade & Shelter 

2. CYCLE 2.1. Cycle Network 



8 
 

2.2. Cycle Parking at Transit Stations  

2.3. Cycle Parking at Buildings  

2.4. Cycle Access in Buildings 

3. CONNECT 
3.1. Small Blocks 

3.2. Prioritized Connectivity 

4. TRANSIT 4.1. Walk Distance to transit 

5. MIX 

5.1. Complementary Uses 

5.2. Accessibility to Food 

5.3. Affordable Housing 

6. DENSIFY 6.1. Land Use Density 

7. COMPACT 
7.1. Urban Site 

7.2. Transit Options 

8. SHIFT 

8.1. Off-Street Parking 

8.2. Driveway Density 

8.3. Roadway area 

Table 1: Structure of the TOD Standard – The 8 Principles and their metrics. 

All the results and scores were obtained following the TOD Standard indications. 13 metrics need 

further explanations, either because the criteria were slightly modified to better adjust to the case 

study or because their complexity demands a more detailed explanation (1.1, 1.2, 1.5, 1.3, 2.2, 

2.3, 3.2, 5.1, 5.3, 6.1, 7.1, 8.1, 8.3).  

 

For the walkways metric (1.1), three widths were mapped: smaller than 1.40m, 1.40-1.80m and 

larger than 1.80. In Paris, the minimum width for a sidewalk to be wheelchair-accessible is 1.40m, 

free of all obstacles. However, it is recommended to let a 1.80m width for a comfortable walking 

and allow two wheelchairs to cross each other [Mairie de Paris, 2012].  

 

In the crosswalks metric (1.2), an intersection was considered “complete/crossable” when there 

were qualifying safe crosswalks in each street forming the intersection, on each of the two sides 

of the intersection (Figure 9a) as indicated in the TOD Standard. In addition, for this case, if one 

of the streets of the intersection was pedestrian or with only one car lane, and did not have a 

crosswalk on each side of the intersection, the intersection was also recorded as 

“complete/crossable”. Considering these cases as crossable responded to observations of the 

urban tissue and pedestrian behavior in the area (Figure 9b).  

 

  
Figure 9a: Intersections considered as “complete” or “incomplete”.  

 



9 
 

 
Figure 9b: Image of a type 2 “complete intersection”. Source: google street view 

 

 

In the case of the visually active frontage metric (1.3), when assessing isolated buildings in a plot, 

the construction - free space proportion was analyzed in order to classify the ensemble into “open 

space” or “building” type. In addition, the frontages of landscaped fenced-off spaces with visually 

permeable features were considered active, while the frontages overlooking railway spaces were 

considered inactive, due to not being an accessible open space. Opposite to the TOD Standard, 

visually open private patios and porches were considered as active, as their perceivable activity 

level was understood as equal as or higher than interior spaces visually connected through 

windows. Moreover, a complement to the visually active frontage (1.3) was added to the study in 

order to assess perceived activeness more thoughtfully. This new metric, the usable active 

frontage (1.3b), collects all visually permeable frontages that are also accessible by the pedestrian, 

such as commercial units or public buildings and offices. In this case, the TOD segmentation 

criteria was not applied bringing as a result a more detailed mapping where each plot was assessed 

individually and not as a percentage of a segment between two intersections. For the shade and 

shelter metric (1.5), bus stops and trees were the elements included in the study, as in the area 

there were no other fixed shade and shelter giving elements. The shade area around trees was 

approximated as a 6.6m radius buffer around the location point, the average radius of the most 

common trees in the area [Chanes, 2009].  

 

Regarding the cycle park at transit stations metric (2.2), the bike racks considered were those 

installed by the municipality and the shared Public Bike System stations (Vélib’ [Mairie de 

Paris/SOMUPI, 2010]). The information about the weather protected storage was not available at 

the open databases. All transit stations of the area were considered as “applicable transit stations”, 

as they have direct connection with Saint-Lazare, a “high-capacity” station. The shared Public 

Cars System stations (Autolib’ [Autolib’, 2017]) were also included, as the TOD parameters 

consider shared vehicle stations as transit stations. In order to measure the surface distance from 

a transit station, all the different accesses of the station were analyzed. Therefore, each transport 

station’s entrance or exit was subjected to the criterion of cycle parking presence within a 100m 

distance, increasing in this way the level of requirements. In the case of cycle parking at buildings 

metric (2.3), as in cycle park at transit stations (2.2) the only available data are those provided by 

the municipality. Other privately installed parking facilities might complement and enlarge the 

data considered.  

 

In the case of prioritized connectivity metric (3.2), covered streets and main tracks of public parks 

were considered as pedestrian paths that can generate intersections.  

 



10 
 

The Mix principle had several metrics that should be addressed in order to provide assessable 

results. In the case of the complementary use metric (5.1), three different types of use were 

identified within the area: housing (individual or collective), industrial or tertiary, and mixed-use 

(i.e a mix of the two previous categories in the same building). Regarding the accessibility to food  

metric (5.2), the following categories were selected as sources of fresh food according to the TOD 

Standard’s definition: fruits and vegetables stores, general alimentation stores, supermarkets and 

mini-markets, butcheries, organic food stores and catering stores, which in France tend to sell 

fresh food as well as processed one. In compact cities such as Paris, the 500m baseline can be 

lowered. In this line, buffers of a 200m and 100m radius were drawn around sources of fresh food, 

in order to visualize the proportion of buildings that are within these radial buffer areas. 

Nevertheless, it is to be noted that these displayed distances, even though more perceptible, are 

not walking distances. In the case of affordable housing (5.3), due to open data availability, only 

financed social housing was considered in the study, which includes the following categories: 

family dwellings, student residences, establishment of accommodation for dependent old people 

(EHPAD), transition centers, emergency shelters and hostels for young workers, migrant workers 

or disabled people. Only the number of social housing residential units within the selected IRIS 

(Îlots Regroupés pour l’Information Statistiques) was taken into account, giving thus a low overall 

number.  

 

In the case of the use intensify metric (6.1), the residential inhabitants density was allocated 

according to IRIS area units (Îlots Regroupés pour l’Information Statistiques) by the “INSEE” 

(National Institute of Statistics and Economic Studies). When their limits did not correspond to 

the delimited scope’s ones, the total number of inhabitants calculation only included the IRIS that 

had their centroid in the studied area. On the other hand, geolocated information about the 

numbers of jobs and visitors in Paris was not available in open data. To complement this 

information, the land use density was incorporated in the blocks where the Floor Area Ratio and 

the Gross Area Ratio were available.  

 

The urban site metric (7.1) quantifies the developable site or property area. In the case of Saint 

Lazare area, being part of the highly consolidated tissue in Paris center, there are not any 

unconstructed plots with constructing possibilities. Developing possibilities are based in 

restoration, adaptive reuse and rehabilitation strategies. Consequently, this principle was 

disregarded as not quantifiable in our location. To give an insight of the renewal pace of the area, 

plots with current public projects were included in the data. 

 

Regarding the off-street parking metric (8.1), an estimation based on professionals experience 

was made with the number of parking plots, the only available open data, and the average surface 

of a plot considered as 35m². In the case of the roadway area metric (8.3), the traffic area was 
estimated through the length of each lane, the number of lanes in each street section and the usual 

width of traffic lanes in Paris, being 3m [APUR, 2002]. The bus and taxi lanes, were recorded as 

traffic lanes as, even though it is prohibited, observations showed that a large amount of regular 

cars tended to use them and, therefore, they were perceived as traffic lanes from the pedestrian 

point of view.  
 

 

3. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 

 

This section will present both the quantitative results and the graphical results obtained and, 

subsequently, their comparative.  

 

3.1. Quantitative Results 

The Metrics, embedded in their principles, are those of the TOD Standard 2.0. The Results are the 

summary of the measurements, presented through percentages, distances and integers, following 



11 
 

the TOD Standard 2.0 indications. The TOD Standard’s baselines are the references used to 

translate these Results into Scores. Therefore, the final Score is a calculation based on the 

indications of the TOD Standard 2.0 

 

 Metric Saint-Lazare Station 

area results 
TOD Standard’s baseline Score 

1
.W

A
L

K
 

1.1.Walkways 97.9 % Less than 100% 0/3 

1.2.Crosswalks 71 % Less than 100% 0/3 

1.3.Visually Active Frontage 92.2% 90% or more 6/6 

1.3.b.Use Permeable Frontage 59.5%   

1.4.Physically Permeable 

Frontage 

3.08 Between 3 and 5 1/2 

1.5.Shade & Shelter 17.40 % Less than 75% 0/1 

2
.C

Y
C

L
E

 

2.1.Cycle Network [800m;1000m] More than 200m 0/2 
2.2.Cycle Parking at Transit 

Stations  

264 out of 338 Not all  0/1 

2.3.Cycle Parking at Buildings     

2.4.Cycle Access in Buildings Interior access allowed Not required 0/1 

3
.C

O
N

N
E

C
T

  
 

4
.T

R
A

N
S

IT
 

3.1.Small Blocks 25.4% over 190m  More than 10% 0/10 

3.2.Prioritized Connectivity 0.98% Above 0.5, below 1 1/5 

4.1.Walk Distance to transit Maximum 400m Less than 500m OK 

5
.M

IX
 5.1.Complementary Uses 51.9% Between 50% and 70% 5/10 

5.2.Accessibility to Food 100%  80% or more 1/1 

5.3.Affordable Housing 4.1% Less than 15% 0/4 

6
.D

E
N

S
IF

Y
 

7
.C

O
M

P
A

C
T

 6.1.Land Use Density 73871.65 users /km2 

Opéra baseline: 

62673.43 users/km2   

Higher than the baseline  15/15 

7.1.Urban Site    

7.2.Transit Options 30 points Maximum of 5 points 5/5 

8
.S

H
IF

T
 8.1.Off-Street Parking 5.3% 10% or less 10/10 

8.2.Driveway Density 1.7 2 or less 2/2 

8.3.Roadway area 6.7% 15% or less  8/8 

Table 2: Quantitative results from the TOD Standard scoring system. 

 

 

The walk principle (1) overall achieves positive results according to the TOD Standard, except 

for the shade and shelter metric (1.5). In the case of the walkways metric (1.1), the percentage of 

safe and wheelchair-accessible walkways, wider than 1.40m according to Paris regulations, is 

97.9 %. This score is the second top one, between 95% and 99% in the TOD Standard. However, 

Paris regulations consider 1.80m to be the minimum recommended width for a comfortable 

walking and allow two wheelchairs to cross each other.  In this case, the rate is 85.7%, less than 

the TOD Standard’ 90% minimal score for wheelchair accessible walkways. For the crosswalks 

metric (1.2), the percentage of intersections with safe, wheelchair-accessible crosswalks in all 

directions is 70.9%. Therefore, the metric does not obtain any points, as the TOD Standard only 

baseline is 100%. Regarding the visually active frontage metric (1.3), a 92.2% frontages are active 

ones, which is more than 90% and thus at the top TOD Standard score. In the case of the usable 

active frontage (1.3b), a more restrictive criterion, the rate of “use-permeable” frontages is 

reduced to 59.5%. 

For the physically permeable frontage metric (1.5), the average number of entrances per 100m of 

block frontage is 3.1, an intermediate score between 3 and 5 that obtains 1 out of 2 points.     

For the shade and shelter metric (1.5) only 17.4 % of the street segments are considered shaded 

or sheltered, which is way less than the 75% reference of the TOD Standard.  



12 
 

Cycle principle (2) 
In the case of cycle network (2.1) only 15.4% of the street segments have “safe cycling 

conditions”, which is way below the 90% reference for areas in development. Moreover, the 

maximum walk distance to a safe cycling street is between 800 and 1000m, which is way above 

the 200m maximum reference for station areas. For the cycle parking at transit stations metric 

(2.2), 74 station entrances (out of 338) do not fulfill the TOD Standard criterion, as cycle racks 

are not provided within 100m of the station entrance. Regarding cycle parking at buildings (2.3), 

there were no available data concerning the private cycle parking (inside buildings), only parkings 

in the public space and “Vélib’” stations were considered. For information, according to the city 

council recommendations, all the buildings above 250 m2 should have cycle parking. This would 

represent 94,7 % of the buildings, way more than the 25% baseline of the TOD Standard. For the 
metric cycle access in buildings (2.4), the city of Paris has not a specific regulation on the subject. 

However, in general, buildings allow the entrance of bicycles when there is a dedicated storage 

inside. When this is not the case, it depends on the condominium regulation, although it is 

generally allowed as long as bicycles are not stored in the common spaces [Mairie de Paris, 2017].  

 

Connect principle (3) 

For the small blocks metric (3.1), a total of 25.4% of the blocks within the station area are over 

the 190m in length. This measurement corresponds with the TOD Standard 2.0 category of ”More 

than 10% of blocks within the station area are over 190m in length” and , therefore, assigns the 

minimal TOD Standard score to the area (0). In the case of prioritized connectivity metric (3.2), 

the prioritized connectivity ratio of pedestrian intersections to motor vehicle intersections is 0.98, 

which falls into the second intermediate category “between 0.5 and 1” corresponding to one point 

in the scoring system. 

 

Transit (4)  

For the walk distance to transit (4.1), the maximum walking distance from a building entrance to 

a direct transit station is of approximately 400m, less than the 500m TOD Standard baseline. 

 

Mix (5)  

In the case of complementary use metric (5.1), the predominant use in the station is “tertiary or 

industrial”, that is to say no-residential. This use takes 51.9% of the total floor area, which is 

slightly more than the 50% and less than 70% the TOD Standard 2.0 reference. Consequently, 

following its directions, a scores of 5/10 is assigned. The second more frequent use is “mixed”. 

Overall, the area is contextually complementary. For the accessibility to food metric (5.2), 100% 

of the building entrances are within a 500m radius, considered as “within walking distance” by 

the TOD Standard, of a source of fresh food. In addition, 100% of the residential buildings are 

within a 200m radial distance to a source of fresh food – all buildings in the area except the “Opéra 

Garnier” – and 78.2% of the buildings are within a 100m walking distance to a source of fresh 

food. Therefore, considering the 500m baseline distance of the TOD Standard, it can be stated 

that the area is well provided with sources of fresh food. Regarding the affordable housing metric 

(5.3), 4.1% of all residential units in the area are considered affordable, less than the 15% minimal 

TOD Standard baseline for station areas. However, the criteria used in this study for affordable 

housing was very strict and, therefore, the results might be underestimated.  

Densify (6)  

For the use intensity metric (6.1), the total resident population of the area is 40733 inhabitants. 

The average concentration of jobs in the 8th arrondissement is 50 515 jobs/km2 and, in the 9th, 57 

264 jobs/km2. For the same job concentrations considered in the selected IRIS, the total number 

of jobs would correspond to 112 700. Therefore, the approximated “Use intensity” – without 

considering the visitors factor – for the selected IRIS of the zone is 155 827, or 73871.6 users/km2. 

As a comparison, a neighboring area around the metro station Opéra, with a similar use and also 

being part of the “business district” has a Use Intensity of 62 673.4 users/km2. At a slightly larger 



13 
 

scale, the 10th arrondissement, which includes the Gare du Nord and Gare de l’Est stations has a 

“Use intensity” of 59 270.6/km2 (94 474 inhabitants and 76 818 jobs). Finally, the municipality 

of Paris had 2 210 849 inhabitants and 1 937 600 jobs in 2015, which represents a Use intensity 

of 39 359.1/km2. Consequently, the Use Intensity of the studied zone is more than 5% higher than 

the various baseline intensities previously mentioned, which ensures the maximum points number 

in the TOD Standard’s scoring system.  

 

Compact (7)  

In the case of the transit options metric (7.2), 26 regular transit lines - 6 metro lines (lines 3, 7, 9, 

12, 13 and 14), 18 bus lines (lines 20, 21, 22, 24, 26, 27, 28, 29, 32, 42, 43, 53, 66, 68, 80, 81, 94, 

95) and 2 regional lines (RER A and E) – are present in the area, as well as a bike share system 

(“Vélib”) with 38 stations and a car sharing system (“Autolib”) with 19 stations. This ensemble 

exceeds the maximal TOD Standard score for the area.  

 

Shift (8)  

As for the off-street parking metric (8.1), the total area of off-street parking is 235095m², which 

represent 5.3% of the total area. This percentage is below 10% and thus gets the maximal score, 

as off-street parking is considered as “non-essential” and, in walkability terms, has a negative 

connotation. For the driveway density (8.2), the average number of driveways per 100m of block 

frontage is 1.7, a score below the limit of 2 that allows to get the points of this metric. Regarding 

the roadway area metric (8.3), the total approximated motor vehicle area represents 6.7% of the 

site area, which is less than the 15% threshold in the TOD Standard and thus achieves the 

maximum score.  

 

  



14 
 

3.2. Graphic Results 

The following figure summarizes the graphic results. Some principles, less complex than the 

others, have been joined in a single graphical representation for the sake of clarity and information 

condensation.  

 

 Figure 10: Maps displaying the 8 principles of the TOD Standard and their metrics generated with ArcGIS. Source: 

the authors 

  
 



15 
 

3.3. Discussion 

In order to illustrate the importance of considering graphical expression a key part of our analysis 

toolset, three main principles have been selected to discuss from this point of view: walk (1), 

cycle (2) and mix (3). Within these principles, several metrics have been highlighted in the 

discussion: visually active frontage (1.3), the use active frontage (1.3b), the shade and shelter 

(1.5), the cycle network (2.1), the cycle parking at transit stations (2.2) the cycle parking at 

buildings (2.3), the complementary uses (5.1), the accessibility to food (5.2) and the affordable 

housing (5.1).   

 

3.3.1 Walk 

 

Figure 11: Four of the metrics of the walk (1) principle, the walkways (1.1), the visually active frontage (1.3), the use 

active frontage (1.3b) and the shade and shelter (1.5).  

 



16 
 

Regarding the visually active frontage metric (1.3), the non- active façades can all be traced to 

specific locations. A more accurate observation of the area, allows to identify their connection 

with singular buildings, such as “Saint Lazare” train station, the “Opéra Garnier”, “l’Église de la 

Trinité”, “l’Église Saint-Agustin” and the “Lycée Chaptal”. Several conclusion can be drawn 

from these observations. Firstly, a certain kind of public buildings might be very opaque due to 

historical reasons such as visual or physical protection or available construction techniques.   

Secondly, since most of the opaque buildings are part of the public property, this might seem 

easier to address by public administrations. However, as historical monuments tend to be the ones 

offering opaque façades, if heritage is to be preserved, it may be difficult to change this situation. 

In any case, this diagnosis allows to evaluate these situations and invest in reinforcing active 

frontages in opposite and surrounding façades.  

 

In the case of the Use active frontage (1.3b), the spatial distribution allows to identify a group of 

blocs without any “use-permeable” facades, corresponding to a residential area, which was not 

possible with the visually active frontage metric, in which this area appears as active as the 

remaining of the studied perimeter. The graphical representation of the metric shows that façades 

that are no use-permeable are not evenly distributed around the area, but clustered in a specific 

residential location.  

 

For the Shade and Shelter metric (1.5), a similar conclusion can be drawn. Trees are not 

homogeneously distributed in the area, being concentrated along major avenues, around squares 

places and public parks. Consequently, although the TOD Standard quantitative score might be 

very low, in fact, tree’s shades are located in the most necessary spaces; open and public areas 

that are less protected from sun and other climate conditions. The graphical expression of this 

metric does not only contribute in detecting an uneven distribution but also assessing its relation 

with other elements of the urban environment. In addition, this observation might lead us to other 

conclusions, such as the importance of considering other sheltering elements like buildings and 

the street urban canyon [Garcia-Nevado et al., 2016; Rojas-Cortorreal et al., 2016].  

 



17 
 

3.3.2 Cycle 

 
Figure 12: This figure displays three of the metrics of the cycle (2) principle, the cycle network (2.1), the cycle parking 

at transit stations (2.2) and the cycle parking at buildings (2.3).  

 

In the case of the cycle principle and its three analyzed metrics, the graphical representation does 

not only show the uneven distribution but also the disconnection of networked elements. 

Regarding the Cycle network metric (2.1), the spatial disconnection of the “safe cycle paths” 

existent in the area shows the inexistence of a complete network and, therefore, prevents a feasible 

use of the bicycle as a transportation mode. The same quantity of “safe cycle paths” distributed 

forming a connected network in relation with cycle and transit stations, although still being scarce 

for the area, might bring more possibilities to use cycle for transportation. Consequently, the 

mapping of the path’s spatial distribution provides an information useful to complement the 

evaluation of the area’s cycling performance area.  

In the case of cycle parking at transit stations (2.2) and cycle parking at buildings (2.3), the 

mapping of the phenomena distribution in the space also provides complementary information to 

the mean area’s value. The observations that can be extracted from this case are similar to those 



18 
 

of the Walk principle, regarding the importance of accounting for spatial distribution when 

analyzing a location based phenomenon. However, the trends might be less clear visually in this 

case. For analysis in need of precise conclusions in this issue, spatial statistics tools could be used 

to further analyze and visualize this distribution. In addition, the use of network analysis and 

service areas would be highly recommended instead of bird fly buffers if the focus is placed to 

walkable accessibility and service areas.    

  



19 
 

3.3.3 Mix 

 
Figure 13: This figure displays the three metrics of the mix (5) principle, the complementary uses (5.1), the accessibility 

to food (5.2) and the affordable housing (5.1).  

 

For the complementary uses metric (5.1), the GIS map (Figure 13) highlights a very clear 

divergence between the southern and northern parts of the area, divided by the horizontal line 

extended from the station’s main façade. In the southern part, the tertiary and industrial uses are 

clearly dominant, while the northern part is constituted in great part by housing.  

 

In the case of the accessibility to food metric (5.2), the map allows to identify that the locations 

with less accessibility to food are the area of the “Opéra Garnier” and the area around the “Église 

Saint-Agustin”, two public buildings that, due to its use, have little need of fresh food. However, 

as in the case of the cycle parking at transit stations (2.2) and cycle parking at buildings (2.3) 

metrics, the use of network analysis would be highly recommended if the focus of the analysis 

was placed in walkable accessibility to certain facilities.  

 



20 
 

Regarding the affordable housing metric (5.3), the opposite observation can be made. The few 

located social housing are homogenously distributed around the area. However, it can be noted 

that the sides of the “grand boulevards” are avoided, an interesting observation considering that 

these streets is where, in general, most highly valued housing are located. Nevertheless, the 

cartography contributes to verify the homogenous distribution of social housing. The same score 

could have been obtained by an enclosed area of concentrated social housing within the analyzed 

zone isolated from the surroundings. In this case, the social reality would be radically different, 

not ensuring a genuine diversity within the neighborhood.  

 

The graphical representation of these principles allows for the identification of an irregular spatial 

distribution in all the cases. This irregularity can imply that some specific locations or cases might 

counterbalance the mean of the whole area.. Therefore, to only rely on the numerical value would 

not effectively convey the reality. Consequently, in order to obtain more accurate results, these 

outliners might be addressed specifically and analyzed apart from the general study. On the other 

hand, the irregularity might also be a consequence of zone-based diversity not connected with 

specifically located outliners but areas with different characteristics. In these case, the study could 

sub divide the area in meaningful zones in order to achieve more representative results. In 

addition, urban elements that constitute a network should not only be measured in quantity but 

also their interconnection needs to be taken into account. The cycle principle is especially clear 

in this case but other aspects of urban mobility follow similar principles, such as walkable paths, 

crosswalks or transit stations connection with their surroundings. Specific GIS tools could be 

useful to address these issues further, such as those within spatial statistics field [ref?] and network 

analysis [ref]. However, even if those methods would be implemented, it is important not to 

undermine the capacity of maps and graphical representation to clearly display geographical 

distribution and spatial relationships within the urban environment.  

 

The aim to understand the city in its whole should not lead us to a simplification of the reality as 

a result of partial or incomplete analysis. Although standardization, organization and 

classification can be useful tools to grasp a complex environment, it is important to be aware of 

everything that is not being measured or even cannot be measured [Radović, 2013]. Admitting that 

the TOD Standard succeeds in providing a simple tool to analyze urban areas regarding their 

walkability characteristics, professionals involved in city planning and design should be aware of 

its limitation in describing the complexity and diversity of perspectives within the urban 

environment. Consequently, though the TOD Standard offers a first indication of urban 

environments quality regarding walkability issues, complementary and diverse studies are needed 

in order to reach a more complete vision.  

 

4. CONCLUSION 

Cities are complex systems where different interests, needs, habits, experiences, cultures and 

perspectives meet. The understanding of the diverse layers conforming their reality is key to be 

able to make decisions that affect their – and our – future. Moreover, a great range of professionals 

from diverse backgrounds and stakeholders with different interests meet in the field of city 

making. Consequently, investing in improving both our analysis and communication tools is 

essential to face nowadays urban challenges.  

The evaluation of complex phenomena through average values, regardless of the graphical 

distribution can result in an analysis failing to meaningfully translate the urban scene. In urban-

environment parameters analysis, considering other indicators than average values – or at least 

being aware of the limited representability of the latter – is necessary. Using spatial statistics tools 

can be useful to avoid undermining the importance of clustering and dispersion. However, the 

display of maps and their graphical analysis can also offer precious information. It not only allows 



21 
 

the identification of outliners or distribution patterns of a given metric features, but also the 

understanding of its significance when overlaying it with other data layers of the urban space. 

 

Different observations should be addressed regarding the current study. Firstly, the availability 

and type of data can influence the possibility of measuring the TOD standard through its scoring 

system, both the numerical and graphical analysis. Consequently, it should be acknowledged that 

different locations might have different possibilities of accessing data and the data might have 

been collected in different ways. This situation can highly influence the results obtained, 

threatening the reliability of a cross sectional comparison. In addition, the TOD Score often relies 

in the definition of areal units that, using vector based analysis, fall prey to the Modifiable Areal 

Unit Problem (MAUP), regardless the system to display the results, numerical or graphical. This 

problem should be addressed in all kind of urban evaluation scoring systems.  

 

The current study has been limited to graphically represent recorded data through urban floor 

plans using GIS software. However, data can be collected and expressed in a great variety of ways 

[Radović, D., 2014a, 2014b]. In relation with graphical expression, section and visual perspective 

[Cullen, 1971] would be other methods useful to counterbalance the limitation of floor plans. 

Nevertheless, other communication systems, such as graphics, conceptual diagrams, text or 

media, might also be needed to avoid partial perspectives. In addition, data may be richer if 

coming from a great range of diverse sources, such as professional observations [Gehl, 2001], 

users’ perspectives and raw data gathering.  

Finally, in order to be able to make decisions regarding cities’ future, a thorough analysis of the 

existing is needed and these studies should aim for completeness and accurate reflection of the 

complex reality. Even more important, the need for extracting meaningful conclusions should not 

blur the great range of uncollectible or unmeasurable information that conforms the sensibility of 

a place [Smithson et al., 2016] that, although impossible to quantify, is to be acknowledged.  

 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

This work has been supported by the Spanish Ministry of Economy under project code: BIA2013-

45597-R. 

 

REFERENCES 

Publications 

- Ackerson, K. J. (2005). A GIS approach to evaluating streetscape and neighborhood walkability 
(Master’s thesis). Retrieved from University of Oregon Libraries website: 

http://hdl.handle.net/1794/1286 

- APUR (Atelier Parisien d’Urbanisme). (2002). Charte d’aménagement des espaces civilisés. Retrieved 
from http://www.apur.org/sites/default/files/documents/132.pdf. 

- APUR (Atelier Parisien d’Urbanisme). (2007). Le quartier central des affaires de Paris. Retrieved from 
http://www.apur.org/sites/default/files/documents/APBROAPU386.pdf 

- Calthorpe, P. (1993). The next American metropolis: Ecology, community and the American dream. New 
York, USA: Princeton Architectural Press. 

- Jacobs, J. (1992). The death and life of great American cities (Rev. ed). New York, NY: Vintage Books. 
- Carlton, I. (2009). Histories of transit-orientated development: Perspectives on the development of the 

TOD concept (Working Paper No. WP-2009-02). Retrieved from University of California, Berkeley, 

Institute of Urban and Regional Development website: https://iurd.berkeley.edu/wp/2009-02.pdf 

- Cerin, E., Macfarlane, D. J., Ko, H. H., & Chan, K. C. A. (2007). Measuring perceived neighbourhood 
walkability in Hong Kong. Cities, 24(3), 209–217. doi: 10.1016/j.cities.2006.12.002 

http://www.apur.org/sites/default/files/documents/APBROAPU386.pdf


22 
 

- Chanes, R. (2009). Deodendron. Árboles y arbustos de jardín en clima templado. Barcelona, Spain: 
Editorial Blume. ISBN: 9788480763684 

- Cullen, G. (1971). The concise townscape. New York, USA: Princeton Architectural Press. 
- Ewing, R. H. (2008). Characteristics, causes, and effects of sprawl: A literature review. In J. Marzluff et 

al. (Ed.), Urban Ecology: An International Perspective on the Interaction Between Humans and Nature 

(pp. 519-535). New York, USA: Springer US. doi: 10.1007/978-0-387-73412-5_34 

- Ewing, R. H., Schmid, T., Killingsworth, R., Zlot, A., & Raudenbush, S. (2003). Relationship between 
urban sprawl and physical activity, obesity, and morbidity. American Journal of Health Promotion, 18(1), 

47-57. 

- Friendly, M. (2002). Visions and re-visions of Charles Joseph Minard. Journal of Educational and 
Behavioral Statistics, 27(1), 31-51. doi: 10.3102/10769986027001031 

- Gehl, J. (2011). Life between buildings: Using public space. Washington, USA: Island Press. 
- Garcia-Nevado, E., Pages-Ramon, A., & Coch, H. (2016). Solar access assessment in dense urban 

environments: the effect of intersections in an urban canyon. Energies, 9(10), 1-12. doi: 

10.3390/en9100796 

- ITDP (Institute for Transportation & Development Policy). (2014). The TOD Standard v2.1. Retrieved 
20.02.2017 from https://www.itdp.org/tod-standard/ 

- ITDP (Institute for Transportation & Development Policy). (2017). The TOD Standard v3.0. Retrieved 
30/06/2017 from https://www.itdp.org/tod-standard/ 

- Kaufmann, V. (2011). The individual motilities that make the city. In Rethinking the city: Urban dynamics 
and mobility (pp.65-84). Lausanne, Switzerland: EPFL Press. 

- Kelly, C. E., Tight, M. R., Hodgson F. C., & Page, M. W. (2011). A comparison of three methods for 
assessing the walkability of the pedestrian environment. Journal of Transport Geography, 19, 1500-1508. 

doi: 10.1016/j.jtrangeo.2010.08.001 

- Klosterman, R. 1994, Large-Scale Urban Models Retrospect and Prospect. Journal of the American 
Planning Association, Vol 60, No. 1, Winter 1994. Chicago, IL  

- Le Parisien. (2010, October 1st). Feux tricolores: comment ça marche. Le Parisien, Île-de-France et Oise. 

Retrieved from http://www.leparisien.fr/beauvais-60000/feux-tricolores-comment-ca-marche-01-10-

2010-1089936.php 

- Leslie, E., Coffee, N., Frank, L., Owen, N., Bauman, A., & Hugo, G. (2007). Walkability of local 
communities: Using geographic information systems to objectively assess relevant environmental 

attributes. Health & Place, 13, 111-122. doi: 10.1016/j.healthplace.2005.11.001 

- Leyden, K. (2003). Social capital and the built environment: The importance of walkable neighborhoods. 
American Journal of Public Health, 93(9), 1546–1551. 

- Mairie de Paris. (2012). Plan de mise en accessibilité de la voirie et des espaces publics. Retrieved from 
http://www.vivre-paris.fr/docs_pdf/2012/2012-09_pave.pdf 

- Mairie de Paris. (2017). J’aménage les parties communes: Locaux vélos et poussettes. Retrieved from 
https://api-site-cdn.paris.fr/images/79799.pdf 

- Marquet, O. & Miralles-Guasch, C. (2015). The Walkable city and the importance of the proximity 
environments for Barcelona’s everyday mobility. Cities, 42 Part B, 258–266. doi: 

10.1016/j.cities.2014.10.012 

- Mezoued, A. (2016). L’in-adhérence spatiale du tramway d’Alger à l’échelle locale. In M. Srir (Ed.), 
Dynamiques urbaines à Alger : La (re)fabrication de la ville en questions (pp. 247-265). Paris, France: 

L'Harmattan. 

- Montgomery, C. (2013). Happy city: Transforming our lives through urban design. New York, USA: 
Farrar, Straus and Giroux. 

- NERA Economic Consulting. (2016). Étude des impacts socio-économiques des gares de SNCF Gares 
& Connexions. Retrieved from http://www.nera.com/content/dam/nera/publications/2016 

/160810%20GC%20impacts%20socio-%C3%A9conomiques%20%20-%20final%20v2.pdf 

- Newman, P. & Kenworthy, J. (1999). Sustainability and cities: Overcoming automobile dependence. 
Washington, USA: Island Press.  

- OMNIL (Observatoire de la mobilité en île-de-France). (2013). Enquête Globale Transport 2010-STIF-
OMNIL-DRIEA: La Ville de Paris. Retrieved from http://www.omnil.fr/IMG/pdf/egt2010_paris_bd-

2.pdf 

- Pozueta, J., Lamíquiz, F. J., & Porto, Matheus. (2009). La ciudad paseable. Madrid, Spain: Centro de 
Estudios y Experimentación de Obras Publicas. 

- Pucher, J., & Dijkstra, L. (2003). Promoting safe walking and cycling to improve public health: Lessons 
from The Netherlands and Germany. American Journal of Public Health, 93(9), 1509-1516.  

- Radović, D (Ed.). (2013). Measuring the non-measurable Workbook 1: Intensities in ten cities. Fujisawa, 
Japan: IKI (International Keio Institute) + flick studio. 

http://www.nera.com/content/dam/nera/publications/2016


23 
 

- Radović, D. (2014a). Subjectivities in investigation of the urban: The scream, the shadow and the mirror. 
Fujisawa, Japan: IKI (International Keio Institute) + flick studio. 

- Radović, D. (with Boontharm D.). (2014b). In the search of urban quality: 100 maps of Kuhonbutsugawa 
street, Jiyugaoka. Fujisawa, Japan: IKI (International Keio Institute) + flick studio. 

- Robinson, A. H. (1967). The thematic maps of Charles Joseph Minard. Imago Mundi: The International 
Journal for the History of Cartography, 21(1), 95-108. doi: 10.1080/03085696708592302 

- Rojas-Cortorreal, G., Roset, J., Navés, F., López-Ordóñez, C., and Crespo, I. (2016). El efecto del confort 
térmico producido por la especie arbórea almez en el espacio público. Architecture, City and 

Environment, 11(32), 187-202. doi: 10.5821/ace.11.32.4839.  

- Santamaria, M., Martínez, P. (2016). La ideación del territorio de Barcelona a través de su representación. 
Architecture, City and Environment, 11(32), 171-186. doi: 10.5821/ace.11.32.4838 

- Smithson, A., Smithson, P., and Risselada, M. (Ed.). (2016). The Space Between. Cologne, Germany: 
Walther Konig. 

- Snow, J. (1855). On the mode of communication of cholera (2nd ed).  London, England: John Churchill. 
- Southworth, M. (2005). Designing the walkable city. Journal of Urban Planning and Development, 

131(4), 246-257. doi: 10.1061/(ASCE)0733-9488(2005)131:4(246) 

- Still, T. (2002, Winter). Transit-orientated development: Reshaping America’s metropolitan landscape. 
On Common Ground, 3, 44-47.  

- Sun, G., Zacharias J., Ma, B., & Oreskovic, N. M. (2016). How do metro stations integrate with walking 
environments? Results from walking access within three types of built environment in Beijing. Cities, 56, 

91–98. doi: 10.1016/j.cities.2016.03.001 

- Sung, H., Oh, J.-T. (2011). Transit-oriented development in a high-density city: Identifying its association 
with transit ridership in Seoul, Korea. Cities, 28(1), 70–82. doi: 10.1016/j.cities.2010.09.004 

- Parcerisa, J., Rubert de Ventós, M. (2001). Metro: Galàxies metropolitanes - Galaxias metropolitanas - 
Metropolitan galaxies. Barcelona, Spain: Edicions UPC. ISBN 978-84-8301-655-8 

- Ventura, F. X. (2016). Espacio y movilidad: la arquitectura de los desplazamientos. Madrid, Spain: Los 
Libros de la Catarata. ISBN (ARQIA): 978-84-617-6715-1 ISBN (CATARATA): 978-84-9097-251-9 

 

Websites 

- Autolib’. (2017). Autolib’, Accueil. Retrieved 17.06.2017 from https://www.autolib.eu/fr/ 
- Esri (Environmental Systems Research Institute) Inc. (2017). ArcGIS Online Help. Retrieved 20.05.17 

from http://doc.arcgis.com/en/arcgis-online/ 

- INSEE (Institut National de la Statistique et des Études Economiques). Statistiques [Statistical datasets]. 
Retrieved 01/06/2017 from https://www.insee.fr/fr/statistiques 

- Mairie de Paris/SOMUPI. (2010).Vélib’, Accueil. Retrieved 17.06.2017 from www.velib.paris  
- Open Data Paris. Les données [Geolocalised datasets]. Retrieved 12/05/2017 from 

https://opendata.paris.fr/explore/ 

- Open Data APUR (Atelier Parisien d’URbanisme). Toutes les données [Geolocalised datasets]. 
Retrieved 12.05.2017 from http://opendata.apur.org/ 

- Open Data RATP (Régie Autonome des Transports Parisiens). Les données [Geolocalised datasets]. 
Retrieved 12.05.2017 from https://data.ratp.fr/explore/ 

- PHAC (Public Health Agency of Canada). (2014). Qu’est-ce que le transport actif? Retrieved 05.06.17 
from http://www.phac-aspc.gc.ca/hp-ps/hl-mvs/pa-ap/at-ta-fra.php 

- SNCF (Société Nationale des Chemins de Fer français), SNCF Gares & Connexions. Votre Gare : Paris 
Saint-Lazare, Histoire de la Gare. (2015). Retrieved 25.05.17 from https://www.gares-

sncf.com/fr/gare/frpsl/paris-saint-lazare/actualite/10151/histoire-gare/  

- SNCF Open Data. (2015). Fréquentation en gares [Dataset]. Retrieved 12.05.2017 from 
https://ressources.data.sncf.com/explore/dataset/frequentation-

gares/table/?q=Paris&sort=voyageurs_2014 

- Volusia County, Geographic information services. (2014). Buffer Analysis. Retrieved 20.05.17 from 
https://www.volusia.org/services/business-services/information-technology/geographic-information-

services/geographic-spatial-analysis/buffer-analysis.stml  

Software 

- ArcGIS for Desktop (Version 10.3.1) [Computer software]. Redlands, USA: Esri (Environmental 
Systems Research Institute). 

 

 

 

 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cities.2016.03.001

