












































AGS_e_Proceedings_AM07 (1).pdf


su
pp

or
tin

g 
pa

pe
rs

41

13. ABOUT INFORMATION SYSTEMS AS A KEY FOR THE 
SUSTAINABILITY STRATEGY. A CASE ON ENERGY 

EFFICIENCY OF UPC BUILDINGS
Didac Ferrer-Balas*, Galdric Ruiz Martorell*, Albert Cuchí Burgos†, Fabian López Plazas†.

*Center for Sustainability (CITIES), Technical University of Catalonia (UPC)
C/Jordi Girona, 31, Edifi ci TI, Campus Nord, 08034 Barcelona, Spain, didac.ferrer@upc.edu

†Escuela Técnica Superior de Arquitectura del Vallès. Technical University of Catalonia (UPC)

Key words: Information systems, Energy effi ciency, Sustainability, Buildings

1. Introduction
Defi nition of strategies and pathways towards sustainable models of resources use 
requires trustworthy and dynamic support of information. Without good information 
to start from it is impossible to establish diagnostics, to fi x objectives, and in the 
future to evaluate its fulfi lment and to reframe the defi ned strategies.

Information as simple registration and compilation of data is useless if it is not 
possible to analyze it in a suitable form. This requires it to be integrated in a structure 
that allows comparing historical data with value trends and standards in order to 
defi ne behaviour models and to predict future evolutions. When energy effi ciency 
targets are raised it is fundamental to have information systems that bring data with 
respect to, in one side, the needs to cover, and in the other, the resources that are used 
for it. This is the only manner to evaluate whether the system can be optimised or not.

2. UPC experience and SIRENA System
UPC is currently working on the implementation of an information system for energy 
and water resources (called “SIRENA”), based on a recent PhD work (“About 
the environmental impact of buildings: Analysis of buildings use incidence in the 
energy consumption”[1]), which used the university buildings as the research fi eld. 
This work focused on the analysis of the energy effi ciency by analysing the effect 
of various factors on the consumption. The developed methodology gave a central 
role to the information gathered about the building characteristics, their actual use 
and energy consumption. This information was classifi ed in two types. On one side, 
‘static’ information, related to architectural characteristics, use typology, energy 
sources and devices used.

On the other side, ‘dynamic’ information related to the use follow-up and the 
energy consumption (on-line registers).

From the results obtained, and based on the analysis of the data collected, it was 
possible to identify the factors that determine the consumption and their relative 
weight for each building category. Among the conclusions of this work, the authors 
underline the need of integrating a dynamic information system for monitoring the 
resources consumption of the buildings of the organization (the university in this 



42

particular case). This allows an easy and permanent assessment and converts it into a 
basic tool for targets defi nition and energy effi ciency policy implementation.

This research project has inspired the current information system (Fig. 1), a platform 
that integrates today various types of energy and water information related to UPC 
campuses buildings, and aims to go further and include other kinds of information 
relevant to sustainability. Up to now, this system is not only used for management 
purposes but also for research and educational matters also.

 Figure 1. Two screens of the SIRENA system (http://www.upc.edu/sirena)

References
[1] Lopez Plazas, Fabian (2006) “About the environmental impact of buildings: 

Analysis of buildings use incidence in the energy consumption”. PhD thesis, 
ETSAV, UPC (unpublished) 


