












































JIDA15_Actas nuevas.pdf


JIDA’15. III Jornadas de Innovación Docente en Arquitectura
Barcelona, ETSAB-UPC, 25-29 mayo, 2015

 

This work is licensed under a Creative Commons License CC BY-NC-ND 4.0                                               INICIATIVA DIGITAL POLITÈCNICA UPC

 
 
 

PROPEDEUTIC COURSE FOR A MASTER ON 
TECHNOLOGY IN ARCHITECTURE

J.Roseta, G. Rojasb & A. Rybkac
a Departament de Física Aplicada (ETSA Barcelona)

Universitat Politecnica Catalunya
jaime.roset@upc.edu

bDepartment de Construccions Arquitectòniques I
Universitat Politecnica Catalunya

gilkauris.maria.rojas@estudiant.upc.edu
cFaculty of Civil and Environmental Engineering and Architecture

Rzeszow University of Technology
akbyr@prz.edu.pl

SUMMARY

Masters dealing on Technology have an important problem in the usual case of 
students coming from very different countries. Due to the important dispersion on
how to teach technological contents for architects, very different initial levels are 
found. Any decision you take as a teacher will provoke either bored students or 
stressed students. It is likely that both types of students appear to be frustrated.

The aim of this work is to propose a PROPEDEUTIC MASTER matter to be 
passed for “new in the topic” candidates to attain main core of the master studies. 
A minimum time of 5 ECTS is proposed corresponding to 50 hours in the 
classroom and 75 hours work by the student. Impartation is proposed 2 weeks 
before the starting of the “main core” matters. As the syllabus is referred to, five 
10 hours lectures packages are proposed: Mathematics. Statics, Environmental 
Physics, Drawing, Philosophy of science.

Key words: Postgraduate studies, propedeutic, technology in architecture

242



 

 

1. INTRODUCTION

Escola Tècnica Superior d'Arquitectura de Barcelona (ETSAB) has more than 
1000 postgraduate students. Among them, about 300 per year are enrolled in 
Master courses and receiving lectures at the School. Approximately 80 students 
per year are taking matters related to Technology. (Figure 1)

Figure 1. Students flow structure.

Architecture studies programmes are rather diverse in different countries of the 
world. Particularly, in Technology topics, architects entitled from Spanish systems 
are, usually, more skilled in Technology than students coming from other 
latitudes. (Figure 2)

Figure 2. Escola Tècnica Superior d'Arquitectura de Barcelona. (ETSAB).

This better performance is, probably, due to the attributions that Spanish 
architects have doing jobs that, in other latitudes, and is done by Civil Engineers 

243



 

 

(Structural behaviour), Mechanical Engineers (Acclimatization) or Electrical 
Engineers (Electric Building Services). (Figure 2)

From this initial disparity, if teachers try to equalize them, they can provoke 
disinterest in some students and stressing of some others resulting in a loss of 
efficiency.  Some countries are making an important effort for granting students 
but, logically, they are exigent in the good profit these students have to show. As 
a consequence of this initial lack, some students do not obtain good marks with 
the consequence of not having good opportunities for possible granting of further 
studies (like PhD, for example). In the general frame of a new re-organisation of 
master studies at ETSAB, we will to contribute with a proposal for a new 
propedeutic matter.

Present paper is organised in sections. At the second section, we will expose a 
series or conditions for a good transmission of knowledge, skills and attitudes. 
Third section will deal with the contents of the matter taking into account 
characteristics of the students and capabilities of the teachers. Fourth section will 
propose to different possible scenarios for actual impartation of the matter. Fifth 
section will offer a kind of conclusion of our proposal.

2. CONDITIONS FOR A GOOD TRANSMISSION

Problem of the transmission of knowledge and skills from a discipline (like 
Physics) to an applied profession (like Architecture) has been studied by several 
authors (Roset and Serra Florensa 2006)(Roset 2006). Our results show that a
good transmission should fulfill several conditions in order to be successful and 
to avoid other. Three conditions must be fulfilled: Completeness, Clearness, 
Disposal and Values. Moreover, two conditions must be avoided: Saturation of 
student’s capability of understanding and “scientific lies” (i.e. explanations that 
could suggest bad results).

In a classical approach of knowledge, skills and attitudes of our students pretend 
they know what appears in the curriculum, they are capable of solving certain 
exercises and pass exams, finally they are always ready to learn more and more.
Our experience has led us to focus not so much in what we want to convey but in
the way to do this transmission. So, we will formulate policies to accomplish and 
others to avoid.

In order to accomplish:

- Completeness: Student must be informed at any moment (at the start and 
during the process) about all we want to explain. So, each lecture has to “make 
sense” for the student.
- Clarity: Teachers will do our best for preparing models where ALL the 
parts will be clearly explained. Searching clarity never has to imply renouncing to 
rigor
- “Numerical” values: At “near all” process phases, students must have an 
option for quick evaluating our “road”

In order to avoid:

- Saturation: Students’ saturation (it is proved that more than 40 or 50 
minutes is a limit for good concentration).

244



 

 

- Physical “lies”: Unexplainable parts in the process or parts that will imply 
false implications. Do not use expressions like “it is clearly seen” or “it is easy to 
demonstrate”.

Figure 3. Conditions to accomplish and avoid for good transmission systems.

Next section will be devoted to define what we want to do. Who are the target 
students, what syllabus must be taught and how would be our teaching team.

3. IDEA OF THE MATTER: STUDENTS, SYLLABUS AND TEACHERS

Students’ needs plus contents of the matter plus teachers’ characteristics will 
define our matter.

- Target students: Architects (or other admitted people) willing to study at 
the Technology related matters in ETSAB. Some of the admitted students would 
have been asked by Studies Commission of the master for following this 
propedeutic matter. This same Commission will establish criteria for succeeding 
in the matter.

- Diversity in the origin and previous training of the students (we talk about 
10 different nationalities in a 20 students group) puts a challenge for designing a 
good syllabus that can be followed for all of them. So, our proposal will focus in 
the most basic topics (mathematics, drawing) while browsing necessary topics for 
a master in Technology (statics, environmental physics). All these topics need to 
be related by a more general matter (philosophy of the Science) in order to 
guarantee the completeness of our explanations.

- Detailed Syllabus: Mathematics. Statics, Environmental Physics, Drawing,
Philosophy of science. (Figure 4)

Figure 4. The Syllabus.

245



 

 

- For each of these parts (sub-chapters), we have defined a Detailed 
Objective that could be evaluated at the end of the matter. (Table I)

Sub-chapter
(knowledge)

Detailed Objective
(evaluable skills)

Mathematics Use of worksheets

Statics Calculation of flexural moments, shear forces, linear elasticity

Environmental Physics Basis of thermodynamics, heat transfer, acoustics and lighting

Drawing Hand drawing and using of simpletools (Sketch-up, Autocad, …)

Philosophy of science General context, skills in scientific communication
Table I. Detailed objectives of our syllabus

It should be covered in 5 ECTS, corresponding to 50 hours of lectures and 75 
hours of work by student. (Figure 5)

Figure 5. Propedeutic Matter.

- Teachers: Experienced teachers mainly working at propedeutic levels by 
our School. A balance between senior teachers and young teachers has to be 
maintained. ETSA of Barcelona has enough prepared teachers. These teachers 
should act in a very well-coordinated way because, in our opinion, the success of 
the matter strongly depends on their capability of transmitting a global idea of the 
topics treated. In fact, for us, relation teacher-student is the most crucial point for 
good results in teaching-learning.

4. DEVELOPMENT OF THE MATTER: PROPOSED TIME SCENARIOS FOR 
IMPARTATION
 

First and most desirable, in our opinion, scenario would be impartation of the 
matter in a “presential” manner during two weeks before the start of the Master 
for the generality of students. In that scenario we could appreciate, besides the 
acquisition of knowledge and skills by the students, their attitude for learning in 
the particular ambiance of our School.

For sure, this could result in an increase of costs for students (maintenance in 
Barcelona, for example), so a second scenario could be proposed. A
semipresential scenario using Skype for some lectures and taking tasks by 

246



 

 

Internet, then we could split the matter about one semester but leaving some 
days for a face to face final presentation. (Figure 6)

Figure 6. Proposed Scenarios.

We will enhance that first scenario is better in order to have our students in direct 
contact with our teachers. It would facilitate their quicker integration to the 
particular forms of working at our school.

5. A KIND OF CONCLUSION

Facing the problem of unbalanced initial level of students in Technology masters 
would be important for the success of an important amount of the master 
students by the ETS Arquitectura of Barcelona. We estimate this problem can 
affect about 40 students a year. We will remark that nations of some of these 
students are making an important economic effort for granting them. So, 
unsuccessful results of these students will mean an inefficient use of resources.

We have proposed a possible solution for the problem. Our proposal is prepare a 
propedeutic (introduction) matter for these students. We propose a 5 ECTS 
matter as a minimum requirement for a attaining our objectives.

Studying our target students and taking into account our teachers capabilities, we 
propose a syllabus including basic matters with detailed –evaluable- objectives 
for each sub-chapter.

A  similar work – with students of only one nationality- has been still done in the 
Sustainable building master by Civil Engineering, Environmental Sciences and 
Architecture School by the Rzeszow University of Technology in Poland (Rybka 
et al. 2015). There, students coming from Architecture Department enter courses 
among students trained in Civil Engineering tools. We have taken into account 
this experience in order to make our proposal. For us, incorporation of this kind of 
propedeutic course in master studies could result in an important increase of their 
success. 

We are convinced it will improve our teaching.

247



 

 

6. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

COST TU 1104 Action “Smart Energy Regions” has helped with a Short Term 
Scientific Mission by profesor Rybka in Barcelona (February 2014)

7. BIBLIOGRAPHY

ROSET, J. 2006. Física aplicada a l’ensenyament de l'arquitectura. ACE [en 
línea], vol. 1, no. 1886-4805, pp. 2. Disponible en: 
http://upcommons.upc.edu/revistes/bitstream/2099/2079/1/TEM_roset_ARTICUL
O.pdf. 

ROSET, J. and SERRA FLORENSA, R. 2006. Física Aplicada a l’ensenyament 
de l'arquitectura. S.l.: Universidadt Politecnica de Cataluña. 

RYBKA, A., KOZLOWSKA, K., SEP, M. and POMYKALA, A., 2015. Master´s 
Program, Sustainable building (M. Sc.) at Rzeszow University of Technology.
2015. Cardiff: The Welsh School of Architecture, Cardiff University. (To be 
published)

248


