
















































CESB 07 Prague Master Layout


Central Europe towards Sustainable Building CESB10 Prague 
Quality of Internal and External Environment 

IMPACTS OF FORM-DESIGN IN SHADING 
TRANSITIONAL SPACES: THE BRAZILIAN VERANDA 

Gogliardo Vieira Maragno 
Universidade Federal de Mato Grosso do Sul, Brazil, gogliardo@nin.ufms.br 

Helena Coch Roura 
Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya, Spain , helena.coch@upc.edu 

Summary 

Shading transitional spaces are a common characteristic in countries with hot climates or 
hot seasons, and forms part of a natural climate system. In Brazil, with latitudes ranging 
from 0 to 32°-S, and therefore predominantly tropical climates, verandas are the most 
common of these shading transitional spaces. The objective of this study is to analyze how 
the application of design variables related to formal dimension affects the incidence of 
solar radiation, increasing or decreasing the efficiency of the system. After contextualizing 
the importance and use of shaded transitional spaces in Brazilian architecture, we defined 
a standard model of a veranda and subjected it to changes in six aspects of its formal 
definition. Then, with the help of Heliodon 2, software, we performed simulations to 
analyze the impact of shadow and solar radiation on floors and walls that should be 
protected by verandas. We compared different latitudes of the Brazilian territory for each 
orientation. The results are presented in a comparative chart that shows the impact of each 
aspect of formal design in the shading and exclusion of solar input. We conclude that 
aspects usually neglected by architects may be critical in achieving the desired effects of 
bioclimatic and sustainable design. 

Keywords: transitional spaces, veranda, shading, solar protection, Brazilian architecture 

1 Introduction  

Certain spaces in architecture cannot be qualified as interior or exterior and exist without 
a precise or specific utility. They are often called intermediate or transitional spaces and 
are an important element in many architectural types worldwide [1].  

Several classical authors, including Olgyay, Givoni and Konya [2,3,4], agree that 
high levels of solar radiation, sky luminance and abundant rainfall in tropical climates 
makes it desirable to create covered and shaded spaces attached to buildings. Transitional 
spaces in climates with long warm periods are as important as - and sometimes even more 
important than - the interior spaces, and should therefore receive the full attention of 
designers [5]. These spaces can help to ensure environmental quality in buildings, while 
rationalizing the use of energy and materials. 

In Brazil, a country with a predominantly warm-humid (or semi-humid) climate, the 
most common transitional space in architecture is the veranda, a shaded space like a porch 
or gallery that has been present in the country's architecture from the outset. It was 
introduced by the Portuguese and has been gradually adapted to the tropical conditions. 

1 



Central Europe towards Sustainable Building CESB10 Prague 
Quality of Internal and External Environment 

With the introduction of modern architecture in the twentieth century, it became even more 
widespread. Characterized as a solution originating from the traditional architecture, the 
veranda has been definitively incorporated into the lexicon of local architecture by the 
design strategies of Brazilian architects. While they sought visual permeability through the 
transparency of pure volumes, the powerful solar radiation and the wide availability of 
natural light made it necessary to seek protective glass closures. The use of brise-soleils 
was one of the most widespread solutions, but another important alternative was to create 
deep shadows using horizontal planes. This solution protects vertical surfaces and 
simultaneously creates shaded, open and ventilated transitional spaces. Through a large 
number of different solutions, verandas are a common aspect of modern life in Brazil. 

 
Fig. 1 Traditional Brazilian veranda 

 
Fig. 2 Modern 

Brazilian veranda 

 
Fig. 3 Present-day Brazilian 

veranda 

Though the importance of verandas is recognized, they are used by architects in an almost 
intuitive and empirical way, possibly due to the lack of specific studies on the 
environmental impact of their design. This study is a part of a broader research project on 
all aspects of the aesthetic dimension and the environmental impact of veranda design in 
Brazilian architecture. The specific objective of the study is to analyze how the application 
of design variables related to the formal dimension affects the incidence of solar radiation, 
increasing or decreasing the efficiency of the system, in order to create a better method for 
adopting the bioclimatic approach to design. 

2 A typical transitional shaded space of Brazil: the veranda  

Interacting between interior and exterior, transitional spaces are also known as 
intermediate or interstitial spaces and are classified according to their spatial 
characteristics: semi-outdoor, semi-open or semi-closed. They can also be considered 
according to their degree of integration in the main part of the building: fixed or aggregate. 
For Kapstein, the transitional space is a “mediator, a link between the interior spaces, with 
light and climate controlled and the natural environment—climate, sun, wind and rain—
uncontrolled” (my translation) [6]. Moreover, the transitional space offers a set of design 
possibilities, sometimes even determining essential characteristics for the typological 
architectural definition. These spaces can be exemplified by courtyards, cloisters and 
atriums, which are fully involved in the horizontal plane, or by balconies, conservatories, 
porches and verandas connected to the exterior of the building. 

Verandas are a specific type of transitional space, acting as filters of countless 
environmental conditions between interior and exterior. They acquire multiples functions 
in housing, forming sites of family life, leisure, entertainment, social meetings and events, 

2 



Central Europe towards Sustainable Building CESB10 Prague 
Quality of Internal and External Environment 

and even work. All these activities are protected from contact with the sun, wind, rain, 
natural light and the surrounding environment of the city or nature.  

From the environmental perspective, the veranda can be concisely conceptualized as 
a habitable, covered intermediate space added to a building and open to the outside on one 
or more sides. It provides protection from rainfall and undesired radiation for both the 
envelope of the building and the space it creates. Furthermore, it offers ventilation with 
outside air and, by reducing the light intensity, also reduces the contrast of light with the 
adjoining interior spaces. 

 
Fig. 4 Typical transitional spaces, after 

CADIMA, 2000 

 
Fig. 5 A typical Brazilian veranda 

In addition to its potential to provide shade, fresh air and filtered light, the veranda helps to 
extend the perception of the exterior from the interior, whilst creating more privacy in the 
interior. It affects the comfort of both the interior and the intermediate space formed by it, 
helping to minimize or eliminate the need for artificial thermal conditioning.  

3 The veranda as a natural system of environmental control  

Coch & Serra classify the environmental control system by their function: as collectors of 
solar radiation, they use the effect of thermal inertia, improve conditions for ventilation 
and air conditioning of the indoor environment and provide protection against excessive 
solar radiation [7]. The question to be examined is the effect achieved by the veranda in 
relation to these functions and interactions. Obviously, as verandas are intended to provide 
shade, their most significant impact is on solar radiation, which is the greatest input of 
energy in a building. However, they also have an impact on other aspects, such as daylight 
and natural ventilation. 

People and material surfaces in the shade of verandas are protected against the 
effects of direct sunlight, which can considerably increase the effective temperature. Their 
action in blocking the radiation is directly related to the formal and spatial characteristics 
of their design. The total radiation incident on a building consists of a sum of radiations, of 
which direct sunlight is the most important. The veranda’s role as part of sun protection 
systems is to avoid the incidence of radiation on the building, preventing overheating of 
the interior, especially when outside temperatures exceed the comfort zone. 

Solar protection systems consist of components such as brise-soleils or transition 
spaces connected to the interior, such as the verandas. While brise-soleils mainly protect 
the building envelope, a veranda is a type of umbraculum that creates usable shaded spaces 
interposed between the solar radiation and the indoor. In addition to the environmental 
impact, these spaces usually acquire other important functions in the home. 

3 



Central Europe towards Sustainable Building CESB10 Prague 
Quality of Internal and External Environment 

 
Fig. 6 The veranda as a shaded space, an umbraculum 

Radiation affects surfaces and objects according to their orientation and reheating 
potential. This effect is always a combination of different modes of transfer of heat by 
radiation, such as: 

▪ Direct solar radiation (short-wave), in situations of clear sky; 
▪ Diffuse radiation from the sky (short-wave), in situations of overcast sky; 
▪ Radiation reflected by the ground or nearby surfaces (short-wave); 
▪ Radiation re-emitted by the ground, surrounding objects and surfaces (long-wave), 

resulting from heating under the action of solar radiation. 
While the first three are easily related to the effect of natural light, the fourth is often 
overlooked though it can result in significant amounts of heat. 

Regarding its design, the study identified eight main projection strategies used by 
Brazilian architects to create verandas: extension of the cover, specific cover, setback 
walls, subtraction forms, pilotis areas, structural interspaces, interconnection and mobile 
and adjustable devices. 

Tab. 1 Summary of the forms of incidence of radiation on verandas  

Incidence → 
Intervening ↓ 

Direct 
(short-wave) 

Diffuse 
(short-wave) 

Reflected 
(short-wave) 

Absorbed and 
reissued  

(long-waves) 
Environmental 
relations 

- solar altitude 
angle (latitude, 
season, time) 

-sky 
conditions 

- solar altitude angles (latitude, season, 
time) 
- geometric relations 

Veranda 
variables 

- orientation 
- height x depth 
ratio 
- length 
- position of the 
building 

- part of sky 
visible (height 
x depth). 
 

- characteristics of 
the surfaces 
(albedo); 
- geometric 
position of 
reflective surfaces 

- surface absorption 
and emittance 
(veranda and 
environment) 
- area (and distance) 

4 Methodology for determining formal design impacts 

We developed simulations in order to determine solar radiation impacts according to 
architectural variables. We used a veranda model with the dimensions 6.0x3.5x2.5 m 
without columns and protruding from the building facade. First, the model was compared 
with and without a veranda situation to check its impact, and then with the following 
characteristic variations: shorter, shallower depth (equivalent to the increase in height), 
inserted and with columns. Finally, it was compared with a veranda with lattices and one 
with external obstacles, like a wall. 

The model was tested at different latitudes intended to represent the situations found 
in Brazil (0o, 15oS and 30oS, corresponding to the northern, central and southern 
regions). Moreover, the model was tested at summer solstice on three different periods of 

4 



Central Europe towards Sustainable Building CESB10 Prague 
Quality of Internal and External Environment 

the day (8 h, 12 h and 16 h) and with different orientations (north, south and west). The 
variants were analyzed at 15oS, the median, as compared to the typical model, plus all the 
other situations of hours and orientations. 

 

 
without veranda 

 
veranda model 

 
inserted 

   
shorter shallower depth with columns 

Fig. 7 The model and its variations 

it is 
complementary to other programs such as those used for ray tracing and radiosity [7]. 

The model and its variants were analyzed with the program Heliodon 2, version 2009, 
which was used to construct the sunpaths at different latitudes and to analyze the impact of 
direct and diffuse solar radiation, taking into account the masking of the veranda produced 
by the model and its variants. The program proved useful for studying variations with 
different projections (shaded plan, stereograph, isochronous) and graphs. As it is easy to 
use and offers many options for analysis (the attribute highlighted by the creators), 

 
Fig. 8 Solar radiation on floor 

and wall from Dec. to Jan. 
Fig. 9 ing gra

 
 Mask ph Fig. 10 Isochronous projection of solar 

radiation flux during one year 

cuador, Brasília and Porto Alegre. 
Figures 8-10 show examples of the simulation results. 

5 Results 

69% on the ground. The graphs show that the wall and floor with south orientation, the 

The calculations were carried out on two selected surfaces: the vertical surface 
immediately below the veranda (6x2.5 m) and the horizontal surface formed by the 
horizontal projection of the veranda (6x3.5 m), one representing the windows or walls, and 
the other representing the floor protect by veranda. The simulations considered by latitude 
are approximations to the cities of Boa Vista on the E

The first result of the simulation performed at latitude 15ºS shows a very high accumulated 
yearly reduction in radiation: between 73% and 83% on the wall and between 52% and 

5 



Central Europe towards Sustainable Building CESB10 Prague 
Quality of Internal and External Environment 

side that receives the lower intensity of radiation, are those with a smaller contribution on 
solar radiación. 

Regarding the variation in latitude, the graphs of the simulation results also confirm 
that the northern orientation is the most sensitive and receives increasing radiation with 
increasing latitude. The increase in solar radiation on the graph means a loss of efficiency 
of the veranda. Thus, the decrease in the impact of a veranda between 0° and 30°S is about 
45% to the wall and 35% to the floor, resulting from more days of exposure and a lower 
altitude of the sun.  

 
Fig. 11 Effect of latitude on total incident solar radiation in a year 

The results of the other variations can be summarized as follows: 
▪ The deeper the veranda, the more efficient the shade is, especially in the east and 

west and in the north. 
▪ Very short verandas with unprotected sides are less efficient; the shorter they are, the 

lower the efficiency of their shade. 
▪ The shade on the walls is practically insensitive to the existence of normal columns. 

Columns do create shade on the floor, but it is not significant. 
▪ The more inserted the veranda is, the less likely are the floor and wall protected by it 

to receive sunlight, as the incidence of oblique rays and lateral rays most common in 
low-lying east and west sides is almost completely prevented. 

▪ The shade provided by verandas is very insensitive to external and nearby walls, 
except on the ground on the east-west orientation. 

▪ The usefulness of the lattice as a complementary filter, increasing the shade mainly 
on east and west orientation, is confirmed. 

  

Fig. 12 Overall comparison of total annual incidence of solar radiation at 15ºS. 

6 



Central Europe towards Sustainable Building CESB10 Prague 
Quality of Internal and External Environment 

7 

6 Conclusions 

Compared with the veranda considered, the variations studied on a model with 
intermediate size and characteristics, ranging from totally exposure surfaces to a totally 
inserted veranda, showed the incident solar radiation graded according to the efficiency of 
the shade provided by the veranda. 

The more external, less deep and shorter a veranda is, and the less support it has, the 
lower its impact on blocking solar radiation should be. Therefore, the greatest amount of 
shade is provided by long, deep, inserted and with more columns verandas. 

No designs decisions can be based on a sole factor, so the usefulness of this analysis 
is merely that of providing benchmarks that can aid the design process. This study shows 
the importance and utility of verandas for reducing direct sunlight in buildings, which is so 
important in hot climates such as that of Brazil. This aspect should not be neglected by 
architects as it can be critical in achieving the desired effects of bioclimatic and sustainable 
design. 

Acknowledgments  

The first author thanks CAPES/Brazil (Coordenação de Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal de Nível 
Superior), and UFMS/Brazil (Universidade Federal de Mato Grosso do Sul) for supporting the 
doctoral research.  

References 

[1] COCH, H.. La Utilitad dels Espais Inúltils – una aportación a l’avaluació del confort 
ambiental a l’arquitectura dels espais intermedis. Tesis Doctoral (Ámbitos de Investigación 
en la Energía y el Medio Ambiente en la Arquitectura). Universitat Politécnica de Catalunya, 
2003. 

[2] OLGYAY, V. Design with climate. Princeton: University Press, 1963. 

[3] GIVONI, Baruch. Man, Climate and Architecture. Amsterdam; London; New York: 
Elsevier, 1969. 

[4] KONYA, A. Diseño en Climas Calidos. Madrid: H. Blume, 1981. 

[5] YANNAS, S. “Passive Heating and Cooling Design Strategies”. IN: KRISHAN, A.; 
BAKER, N.; YANNAS, S; SZOKOLAY, S. Climate Responsive Architecture – A Design 
Handbook for Energy Efficient Buildings. New Delhi: Tata McGraw-Hill Publishing, 2001. 

[6] KAPSTEIN, G. Espacios Intermedios – respuesta arquitectónica al medio ambiente: II 
Región. Santiago de Chile: Universidad del Norte, Fundación Andes, 1988. 

[7] SERRA R.; COCH H. Arquitectura y Energía Natural. Barcelona: Edicions UPC, 1995. 

[8] BECKERS, B.; MASSET, L. Heliodon 2: Guía del usuario. Liege: Barcelona: 2009. 
Disponible en: www.heliodon.net. Consultado en octubre de 2009. 


	Summary
	Keywords: transitional spaces, veranda, shading, solar protection, Brazilian architecture

	1 Introduction 
	2 A typical transitional shaded space of Brazil: the veranda 
	3 The veranda as a natural system of environmental control 
	4 Methodology for determining formal design impacts
	5 Results
	6 Conclusions
	Acknowledgments 
	References


