








































444 445

1. Urban models and energy sources in city history

The current environment and energy conditions need reflec-
tion on the energy-intensive behaviour of the City on territory. 
The deep relationship between urban morphology and energy 
supply directly affects both the urban energy balance and the 
environmental comfort of areas where we live. This one-to-one 
connection  historically led to the growth or collapse of urban 
models: if, on the one hand, the development and decline of 
the energy source enabled the growth of the man-made en-
vironment, on the other hand, land usage for residential and 
production purpose has determined the development and per-
mutation of energy sources. 
From this perspective, the entire city history highlights how ur-
ban form has changed during different epochs with relation to 
the function of energy sources. City models moved from early 
discrete villages, constrained within a compact and self-suf-
ficient form fed on wood and animal muscular power, to the 
contemporary city, labelled by F. Butera as the energy and envi-
ronmental black hole1. 
Inside this evolution, every crisis caused by an energy source 
generated a mutation of the previous city’s shape. An exam-
ple are Coke-towns: technological innovations, especially in in-
frastructure, pushed production and consumption sites away 
from the mines. Industry begot the quick growth of urban ex-
pansion in a process wherein «industrialization and urbanization 
phenomena appear inextricably linked»2. Saturated city-centres 
became unable to satisfy social and economic requirements, 
generating a new untidy building belt around the city: suburbs. 
The nexus between production and consumption site, still 
active in this model, will be broken down later with electricity, 
which has had great importance on future urban form thanks 
to two main features: the introduction of a new supply techno-
logy, based on a broadly distributed network system, and the 
vertical development of buildings, enabled by elevators. Today 
the Vertical City symbolizes governmental economic power, 
yet skyscrapers reveal themselves as energy-hungry machines 
«which can consume easily up to 1.000 kwh/m2/year, a value 
8-12 times higher than normal construction»3. Similar to former 
circumstances, the advent of oil has once again modified the 
previous city-types toward a sprawling and ‘dilute’ urban model 
strongly linked to individual car utilization. The limit of this urban 
model, already found in excessive land use, revealed itself du-
ring international oil crisis of Seventies. The oil embargo, in fact, 
has led scholars to reintroduce in their research energy-saving 
and efficiency issues, while also studying the improved urban 
design4. In this way, all ‘physical’ parameters which had been 
entrusted to technology and which directly affect the city’s ener-
gy behaviour (density, H/W ratio, volume ratio, orientation, etc.) 
came back to the core of debate on efficient and self-sufficient 
urban form, strengthened by M.K. Hubbert’s theory on peak of 
oil and the following Green Apocalypse5. 

2. Objectives

In light of this historical relationship between urban structure 
and energy sources, the current urgent requirement to switch-
over towards new renewable sources make us wonder about 
the shape of future Renewable City. This requirement constrains 
designers to pay attention from the early stage of the process 
to the weather and environmental conditions in which the de-
sign will exist, in order to define it according to its energetic 
and environmental behaviour. The importance of working at an 
urban scale is confirmed by international and European com-
mission which assigns great importance to the city action, sug-
gesting urban design as the ideal tool to reach urban sustai-
nability’s main goals: «The way land is used in an urban area 
is fundamental to a town or city’s character, its environmental 
performance and the quality of life it provides for its citizens [...] 
Sustainable urban design will therefore be a key element of the 
thematic strategy for the urban environment»6. 

Most recent research addresses the size of the building in order 
to shorten the planning process and to facilitate the ease of 
construction, but an interesting study7 shows how, in the long 
run, results achieved in this way lose their efficiency, demanding 
a jump of scale toward that of a city. In fact, a building has a 
confined capability and is unable to solve prior urban design 
mistakes. Today, advancements in informatics systems provide 
designers useful software to estimate energy and environmental 
performance of a given urban form. Software supports desi-
gners without replacing them: it provides quantitative data and 
trend analysis, but it is unable of expressing the quality of space 
which remains architect’s task and responsibility. 
Consequently, the transition towards a more efficient urban form 
involves energy-environment parameters and quality of urban 
space, both of which are contained within the urban fabric unit: 
the block. The latter gains importance in sustainable design, due 
to its scale half-way between city and building size, and works 
at the same time on buildings and public space, improving both 
the quality of urban space and the energy performance of cities. 
The paper applies these topics on a case-study in Barcelona; 
the main objectives of this study are to:
- Demonstrate how the environmental performance of the ur-
ban texture is related to the dimensional and morphological 
characteristics of the fabric, with specific regard to the streets 
orientation and the proportions of the urban canyon. 
- Provide guidelines to improve energy performance and envi-
ronmental comfort both in new and existing urban area through 
urban design.

3. The case-study

The Eixample district (Fig.1) is a representative synthesis of the fe-
atures of the compact and complex Mediterranean urban model. 
The interest in this case-study depends not only on its particular 
morphology, but also on the approach and the design process 
developed by Ildefons Cerdá, which guided the transformation of 
Barcelona from a walled town into a modern city (1859).
One basis of the planning method was the knowledge of the city 
real estate as the main reference to understand the actual needs 
and the future perspectives of development. Cerdá reports the 
insalubrious living conditions and the inadequacy of Barcelona 
to integrate the upcoming energy sources (i.e. the steam engi-
ne) and recognizes public health and universal mobility as the 
main objectives of the urban renovation process.
The second step of the planning process is the principle of 
equality, aimed at ensuring respectable quality of life (in terms 
of residential standards and hygienic conditions) as well as uni-
form accessibility to urban services and infrastructure (public 
and green spaces, transportation, supplies).
The formal structure of the Eixample is defined and sized throu-
gh a mathematical formula which constitutes the scientific ap-
plication of the previous principles8. The result is a quadrangular 
chamfered block (illa) with sides 113.3 m long and a 60x60 m 
inner garden (patio). At first, the buildings should have been 16 
m high and occupy only two sides of the illa, but the pressure of 
private owners and the postwar speculation led to much more 
intensive edification. 
The disposition of the blocks according to a regular array defi-
nes a grid of streets 20 m wide, formed by a central driveway 
and two lateral sidewalks with plane tree rows. The street can-
yon geometry and the 45° network orientation established by 
Cerdà are devised to ensure adequate exposure of the main 
sides of the block to solar radiation and to healthy winds .

4. General approach and methodology

The methodology refers to the conceptual frame defined by 
Cerdá which might be considered a operating tool to establish 
appropriate strategies for the forthcoming transformation of 
contemporary cities10, but takes advantage of the digital tools 
available today. 
The research is developed through the design of a generic virtual 
model based on the typological structure of the pattern, in order 
to avoid the specificities of a real urban context which might 
make the understanding of its environmental behaviour difficult. 
The average measures to build an abstract but reliable mock-up 
are determined referring to the SpaceCalculator11 (Fig.2).
Within the homogeneous fabric, a sample of 9 blocks laid out in 

a 3x3 array on a site area of 400x400 m is appropriate to provi-
de correct information that can be extended to the whole sector. 
The analysis is implemented in two steps with the support of 
specific simulation software: 
1) Assessment of the environmental performance in outdoor 
spaces by means of Envimet program12, considering the clima-
tic parameters which affect the conditions of well-being:13 
− Temperature (K°)
− Relative humidity (%)
− Wind speed (m/s)
− Solar flux (W/m2)
2) Examination of the solar collection above the building enve-
lope, by means of the Heliodon program14. In this phase, more 
specific indicators are calculated:
− Solar potential (Wh/m2),
− Energy gains (kWh)
− Sunlight hours (h) 
The digital simulation is implemented at winter (case A) and at 
summer (case B) solstices, in order to provide a complete pic-
ture of the site’s climatic performance. The required weather in-
puts are obtained from the EnergyPlus database15 (Fig.3).

5. Results and discussion

5.1 Environmental performance of outdoor spaces
The overall results refer to the pedestrian level (Fig.4 and 5).
Temperature (T) and relative humidity (Hr) are two interrelated 
air properties which affect thermal comfort and can be analysed 
together . In this case-study, the form of the urban fabric does 
not seem to directly affect the spatial and temporal variation of 
these parameters whose performance is probably influenced by 
the boundary’s effects on the sample area. In both [A] and [B], 
temperature is fairly uniform in streets, crossings and courtyards 
and sporadic differences are found between shadowed and 
sunny areas. A similar tendency is detected with regard to re-
lative humidity: only during the early afternoon of the 21st June, 
the Hr in courtyards is higher than in streets, due to the different 
degrees of closure of these spaces.
Contrary to the previous parameters, the wind performance is 
closely related to the morphological features of the built envi-
ronment. The dominant North wind is symmetrically diverted in 
the direction of the streets, due to the 45° orientation of the grid. 
The street canyon geometry produces a channelling effect with 
air paths parallel to the long sides of the blocks. The vectors al-
low identification of a skimming flow regime in the street section, 
while, within the courtyards, the draughts are definitively weaker 
(V=0-1 m/s in A and B). The wider distance between opposite 
internal sides of the block results in an isolated roughness flow 
regime, with disturbed and contrasting wakes17.
The only windward façade is the North chamfer, while the other 
sides are sheltered thanks to their own orientation. Almost sta-
gnant zones are locally generated next to the corners, due to 
their position with respect to the main air flows; in the crossings, 
wind temporally recuperates its original direction, but with a 
speed reduction. 
Solar simulation is run for a cloud-free sky conditions18 which 
allow the best insight into the daily evolution of solar access. 
Only the direct solar flux is analysed. 
In case A, all the streets have some hours of direct radiation, 
thanks to the diagonal orientation: the SE-NW axis are well-lit 
and warm between 9:30 and 11:00 h, while the SW-NE ones 
receive the sunlight from 15:00 to 16:00 h. Shadows cast by 
plantings along sidewalks are negligible because planes are de-
ciduous trees. Courtyards are sunny in the North sector around 
midday, while the South portion does not get any direct radia-
tion throughout the all day. 
In case B, streets are fully exposed to solar radiation between 
12:00 and 15:00 h, while sidewalks are partially sheltered by the 
trees, whose cast shadows reduce the incoming solar flux by 
about 60%. During the rest of the day, at least one side of the 
street is shadowed by the surrounding buildings. Crossings and 
courtyards are almost constantly exposed to solar radiation, due 
to the greater spatial openness and the absence of plantation.

5.2 Solar accessibility on the block envelope
Within the homogeneous portion of the Eixample, the study is 
limited to the central block while the surrounding buildings act 
as obstructions. Solar analysis is implemented with regard to 
vertical (chamfers, inner and outer façades) and horizontal (roofs 

2
and patios) components of the envelope (Fig.6, 7 and 8).
On the 21st of June (sun’s altitude is 72° at 12:00 h), roofs have 
the highest solar potential and provide the maximum ener-
gy gains (58% of the total amount), due to a large and unob-
structed surface area19. During the winter solstice, the general 
trend is the same, but the distribution of solar gains is more 
uniform.
With specific regard to solar access on vertical surfaces, in case 
B the average sunlight hours and the solar potential display a 
similar behaviour in outer and inner façades. The width of the 
courtyard would forecast a greater collection potential with re-
spect to the external sides, but, in the first case, the shadowing 
of the transversal orthogonal façades have to be considered20. 
The different influence of h/w and h1/c ratios appears clear in 
[A], when sun rays are lower (23° at 12:00 h) and solar potential 
decreases of 28% from the internal to the external façades.
The 45° rotation of the street network allows all the sides of 
the block to receive some amount of solar radiation during the 
winter solstice and protects them from the direct East and West 
incoming solar flux during summer.

6. Conclusions and further development
The Eixample case-study demonstrates how to deal with ener-
gy and design issues at an urban scale and shows the gre-
at opportunities provided by the urban project. The conscious 
analysis of environmental parameters led to discovery of general 
relationships which can aid architects in renovations and new 
interventions.
The spatial and temporal control of climatic variables is funda-
mental to making the best planning decisions: each formal so-
lution has to fit within a specific environmental context and to 
other specific morphological parameters. Concerning this, the 
simulation software might provide a fundamental technical sup-
port, but the  designer still keeps a principal role in interpreting 
and elaborating the results. 
In a Mediterranean climate, the diagonal orientation of the grid 
is a rational arrangement which provides equal solar exposure in 
winter and good protection in summer both on the façades and 
on the streets. Actually, its  effectiveness is related with the ur-
ban canyon geometry: in this situation, the H/W ratio is constant 
in all directions, but the variation of this proportion according to 
the orientation might be an interesting topic to improve solar 
performance.
Similar considerations can be done with regard to air flow. The 
45° rotation shields the buildings from the North wind, without 
substantially affecting its original velocity: the requirements of 
comfort in the streets21 are therefore fully satisfied in summer 
(V=2-3 m/s), but not in winter (V=4-5 m/s). A narrower section 
would attenuate the air movements and flows, but would beco-
me uncomfortable in the warm season.
The solution can be researched in the typology of the urban 
block: the patio is a “buffer zone” between the exterior and the 
interior which offers the possibility to control the microclimate. 
In winter, it might become a “shelter” to enjoy free sunlight and 
moderate ventilation, while adequate protection from solar ra-
diation could be provided by the vegetation in summer. Further-
more, the partial opening of the block would ensure the public 
accessibility, provide air renewal and reduce the relative humidi-
ty inside (over 80% in B)22. 
With regard to the “individual” comfort, the central courtyard 
allows dwellings to have a double opposite aspect and to take 
advantage of passive daylight and ventilation; concerning the 
technical use of the sun, the homogeneous height of the blocks 
would make it possible to exploit the roofs for solar active ap-
plications.
On the whole, the results show how, by paying attention to the 
local conditions, urban design can reduce energy costs which 
usually fall on buildings behaviour (lighting, heating and cooling 
system, etc.), improving dweller’s environmental comfort. The 
interconnection between the urban and the architectural scales 
is confirmed, therefore, as a fundamental tool to achieve positi-

How environmental and energy issues 
shape the cities: a case-study 
in Barcelona, Spain.

Ilaria Giovagnorio - Alessandra Curreli - 
Giovanni Marco Chiri - Helena Coch Roura
Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya Barcelona, Spain
Università degli Studi di Cagliari, Italy 



446 447

2

7. Acknowledgements

Part of this research is founded by Sardinia Region with funds 
from PO Sardinia FSE 2007-2013 (L.R.7/2007) “Promotion of 
scientific research and technological innovation in Sardinia”.
This work is also supported by the Spanish MICINN under 
project ENE2009-11540. 

Notes
 
1 Droege, 2006
2 P.H.Derycke, 1972 (De Pascali, 2008). 
3 De Pascali, 2008
4 Among the most remarkable publications: S. Owens (1986); 
R.L. Knowles, (1974); L. Martin and L. March (1975); R. G. Stein 
(1977)
5 The events that raised the Ecological Issue: the ozone hole 
discovery (1985) and the global warming (1986-88). Ingersoll, 
2009
6 Towards a thematic strategy on the urban environment. Eu, 
2004.
7 De Pascali, 2008
8 The side of the block is the ratio among building height, street 
section and courtyard width. Serratosa, 2008
9 Martín Ramos, 2010
10 The urban dynamics have changed, but the way to work with 
them is the same.  Busquets 2009
11 A set of basic indicators of density and urban form. Berghau-
ser Pont, Haupt, 2010
12 http://www.envi-met.com/
13 Serra Florensa, 1995
14 By B. Beckers and L. Masset. http://www.heliodon.net 
15 http://apps1.eere.energy.gov/buildings/energyplus/cfm/wea-
ther_data.cfm 
16 Serra Florensa, 1999
17 The flow regimes are functions of h/w and h/l ratios. Santa-
mouris, 2001
18 Both Envimet and Heliodon provide potential values of solar flux
19 Roofs are located at the same height and not affected by 
obstructions
20 Courtyards are not actually urban canyons described by a 
single cross-section. Erell, 2011
21 Air speed values until 3.5 m/s are acceptable in outdoor spa-
ces. Serra Florensa, 1995
22 Values of Hr higher than 75% are out of the comfort zone. 
Olgyay, 1998

8. Bibliography

Berghauser Pont M., Haupt P., Spacematrix. Space, density 
and urban form, Nai Publishers, Rotterdam, 2010.

Busquets J. and Centre de Cultura Contemporània de Barce-
lona, Cerdà i La Barcelona Del Futur: Realitat Versus Projecte, 
Cccb, Barcelona, 2009. 

Compagnon, R. Solar and Daylight Availability in the Urban Fa-
bric, in «Energy and Buildings», n. 4, vol. 36,  2004

De Pascali P., Città ed energia. La valenza energetica dell’orga-
nizzazione insediativa, Franco Angeli, Milano, 2008.

Droege P., The Renewable City. A comprehensive guide to ur-
ban revolution, Wiley&Sons, Chichester (GB), 2006.

Erell, E., Pearlmutter D., Williamson, T., Urban Microclimate: 
Designing the Spaces between Buildings. Earthscan, London; 
Washington, D. C., 2011. 

Ingersoll R., Questione ecologica in architettura, in «Lotus» 
n.140, 2009.

Knowles R., Sun rhythm form, MIT Press, Cambridge Massa-
chusetts, 1981.

Martín Ramos Á. et al., El Efecto Cerdà: Ensanches Mayores 
y Menores, Escola Tècnica Superior d’Arquitectura, Barcelona, 
2010. 

Olgyay V., Arquitectura y Clima: Manual De Diseño Bioclimático 
Para Arquitectos y Urbanistas, Gustavo Gili, Barcelona, 1998. 

Ratti C., Raydan D., Steemers K., Building form and envi-
ronmental performance: archetypes, analysis and an arid clima-
te, in «Energy and Buildings», n. 35, vol. 1, 2003.

Santamouris M., Energy and Climate in the Urban Built Envi-
ronment, James & James, London, 2001.

Serra Florensa R., Arquitectura y Climas, Gustavo Gili, Barcelo-
na, México, 1999. 

Serra Florensa R., Coch Roura H., Arquitectura y Energía Natu-
ral, Edicions UPC, Barcelona, 1995.

Serratosa A., Attualità dell’Eixample di Barcellona, in La città re-
ticolare e il progetto moderno, CittàStudi Edizioni, Torino, 2008.

9. Legend

Fig.1 The Eixample: the street and the chamfered blocks.

Fig.2 Typological model and morphological features of the urban 
fabric: plan and section

Fig.3 Monthly average weather data provided by Energyplus 
(A_June; B_December)

Fig.4 Daily evolution of climatic parameters on winter’s solstice 
(Case A)

Fig.5 Daily evolution of climatic parameters on summer’s solsti-
ce (Case B)

Fig.6 Graphical representation of sunlight time distribution in 
case A (right) and B (left)

Fig.7 Graphical representation of solar flux in case A (right) and 
in case B (left)

Ilaria Giovagnorio - Alessandra Curreli - 
Giovanni Marco Chiri - Helena Coch Roura
Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya Barcelona, Spain
Università degli Studi di Cagliari, Italy 


