



















































PLEA 2017 Proceedings - Design to Thrive - Volume III


Experimental	study	of	the	roof	thermal	performance	influence	over	the	mean	
radiant	interior	temperature	of	an	industrial	building		

Jefferson	Torres1,	Helena	Coch1,	Isabel	Crespo1	and	Antonio	Isalgué2	

1	Architecture	&	Energy,	School	of	Architecture,	Polytechnic	University	of	Catalonia,	
Barcelona,	Spain,	Av.	Diagonal,	649,	7th	floor.	08028;	

2	Applied	Physics	Department,	Polytechnic	University	of	Catalonia,	Barcelona,	Spain,	Pla	del	
Palau,	18.	08003.	

Abstract:	Industrial	building	rehabilitation	is	one	the	latest	trends	within	the	field	of	sustainable	development.	
However,	 these	 interventions	 often	 disregard	 the	 issue	 of	 user	 comfort,	 despite	 being	 the	most	 important	
factor	of	energy	efficiency.	This	work	deals	with	the	assessment	of	the	indoor	thermal	conditions	of	a	restored	
industrial	 building,	 considering	 not	 only	 air	 temperature	 but	 also	 mean	 radiant	 interior	 temperature.	 The	
research	focuses	in	the	influence	of	the	radiative	performance	of	the	saw	tooth	roof	of	this	building	regarding	
these	 conditions.	 Results	 show	 that	 the	 analysed	 thermal	 parameters	 depend	 directly	 on	 the	 roof	 thermal	
behaviour.	In	fact,	the	glazed	area	of	this	type	of	roof	is	responsible	for	the	60%	of	the	increase	of	the	mean	
radiant	 temperature	 over	 air	 temperature.	 This	 result	 is	 a	 consequence	 of	 the	 high	 interior	 temperature	
reached	by	the	glass	panels,	47°C	max,	despite	their	northern	orientation.	These	temperatures	are	a	result	of	
the	diffuse	radiation	action	and,	particularly,	the	heat	flux	emitted	by	the	opaque	part	of	the	saw	tooth-roof,	
which	significantly	reduces	the	radiative	cooling	capacity	of	the	glazed	surface.	

Keywords:	Industrial	building,	mNACTEC,	Mean	radiant	temperature,	Saw-tooth	roof.	

Introduction	

The	 industrial	 revolution,	 being	 one	 of	 the	 most	 significant	 changes	 in	 the	 history	 of	
humankind	 (Andrei,	 2012),	brought	as	a	 consequence	 the	development	of	 a	new	building	
typology.	 Large	 manufacturing	 spaces	 with	 proper	 lighting-spatial	 conditions	 for	 the	
implementation	of	productive	activities	were	needed.		

Some	 of	 these	 buildings	 have	 left	 their	mark	 on	 contemporary	 cities	 through	 some	
examples	 of	 technological	 and	 aesthetic	 value	 (Fernández	 et	 al,	 2016).	 Furthermore	
industrial	heritage	has	impacted	not	only	tangible	aspects,	but	intangible	factors	too	like	the	
collective	memory	and	identity	of	a	place	(Sutestad	et	al,	2016).	These	buildings	accumulate	
materials,	energy,	and	the	human	effort	 that	made	them	possible.	Their	conservation	and	
recycling	for	new	uses	is	nowadays	a	challenge	(Romeo	et	al,	2015).		

Vapor	Aymerich,	Amat	i	Jover,	designed	by	architect	L.	Muncunill,	was	built	in	1908	in	
Terrassa	(Spain)	to	operate	as	a	textile	industry,	being	a	case	of	industrial	architecture.	This	
building	has	been	restored	in	1992	and	converted	to	the	Catalonia	Science	and	Technology	
Museum	 (mNACTEC).	 It	 had	 a	 production	 area	 around	 11,000	m2	which	 has	 become	 the	
principal	exhibition	hall	of	the	Museum	after	its	rehabilitation.	Due	to	its	initial	purpose,	the	
elaboration	of	 fine	textiles,	 this	space	was	provided	with	a	roof	 in	saw-tooth.	This	 type	of	
roof,	with	its	glass	panels	facing	north,	provides	a	large	amount	of	natural	light,	and	avoids	

3810



the	 access	 of	 direct	 solar	 radiation	 to	 the	 interior.	 However,	 after	 the	 rehabilitation	 and	
used	 as	 Museum,	 the	 thermal	 indoor	 conditions	 are	 considered	 too	 hot	 in	 summer	 by	
visitors	and	workers,	in	spite	of	the	scarce	of	sunlight	entering.		

The	preservation	of	industrial	buildings	is	considered	a	sustainable	approach.	However,	
the	 mNACTEC	 rehabilitation	 disregards	 its	 new	 museum’s	 use	 and	 this	 could	 became	 a	
contradiction	 in	 terms	 of	 energy	 efficiency.	 Industrial	 buildings	 should	 be	 rehabilitated	 in	
order	to	be	adapted	to	their	new	uses	with	the	purpose	to	improve	their	conditions	adapted	
to	the	current	standards	and	requirements	(Blagojević	et	al,	2016).		

Even	 energy	 saving	 is	 one	 of	 the	 main	 aim	 in	 building	 sector,	 the	 user	 indoor	
conditions	 should	 be	 considered	 in	 any	 construction	 (Kalmár	 et	 al,	 2011).	 The	 most	
important	variables	in	regards	of	thermal	comfort	conditions	are:	air	temperature,	relative	
humidity,	wind	velocity	and	the	mean	radiant	temperature	(Givoni,	1994)	(Walikewitz	et	al,	
2015).	Several	researches	have	studied	the	influence	of	hot	air	temperatures	in	the	interior	
comfort	conditions	on	residential	buildings	(Beizaee	et	al,	2013)(Mirzaei	et	al,	2012).	Other	
studies	approach		this	issue	focusing	in	the	mean	radiant	temperature,	assessing	issues	like	
its	influence	on	the	indoor	thermal	environment	(d’Ambrosio	et	al,	2013),	the	interrelation	
with	 the	 room	 geometry	 (Kalmár	 et	 al,	 2012)	 or	 the	 comfort	 limits	 for	 heated	 ceilings	
(Fanger	et	al,	1980).	Likewise,	Atmaca	argues	that	the	mean	radiant	temperature	is	a	very	
significant	 factor	 especially	 in	 buildings	 whose	 envelopes	 are	 exposed	 to	 a	 strong	 solar	
radiation	(Atmaca	et	al,	2007),	like	is	the	case	of	the	mNACTEC	roof.		

In	this	sense,	due	to	the	proportion	that	the	roof	represents	with	respect	to	the	indoor	
space	 and	 the	 singularity	 of	 its	 own	 geometry,	 a	 detailed	 analysis	 of	 the	 radiative	
performance	of	this	element	will	be	recommended.	

This	 work	 addresses	 the	 issue	 of	 the	 interior	 thermal	 conditions,	 considering	 the	
possible	influence	of	the	mean	radiant	temperature.	The	specific	aim	of	this	research	is	to	
assess	the	influence	of	the	radiative	performance	of	the	building	saw-tooth	roof,	evaluating	
the	thermal	repercussions	of	the	opaque	and	glass	envelope	surfaces.	

Methodology	

The	methodology	 is	based	on	an	experimental	work	carried	out	 in	 the	mNACTEC	during	a	
period	 in	 the	hottest	period	of	summer	2015.	The	building	 is	 located	 in	Terrassa-Spain,	at	
2°00´E,	41°33´N	and	286	masl,	which	lies	in	the	Mediterranean	climatic	zone.		

The	building	has	a	main	exhibition	hall,	11000	m2,	with	161	Catalonians	vaults	arranged	
in	 a	 grid	 of	 7	modules	 in	 the	 East-West	 direction	 and	 by	 23	modules	 in	 the	North-South	
direction	covered	by	a	saw-tooth	roof.	Every	module	of	the	roof	is	composed	by	two	parts:	
an	opaque	and	a	glass	surface.	The	opaque	surface	is	a	semi-vault	defined	by	a	double	bent	
built	in	brick.	It	has	a	0.33m	thickness	composed	by	various	layers	of	bricks	with	an	air	gap	in	
the	middle	as	shown	in	Figure	1c.	The	glass	surface,	oriented	almost	to	the	North	(19°	to	the	
West),	is	formed	by	two	simple	glass	panels	separate	by	an	air	gap.	

The	 experimental	 work	 of	 analysis	 of	 the	 roof	 radiative	 performance	 influence	 on	 the	
mean	radiant	 indoor	temperature	has	been	divided	 in	two	parts.	The	first	part	 focuses	on	
the	roof	thermal	behaviour	and	the	second	part	on	the	thermal	interior	conditions.	The	roof	
measurements	had	the	purpose	to	assess	its	thermal	response	to	the	climatic	conditions	to	
which	 it	 is	 exposed.	Due	 to	 the	 singularity	 of	 its	 geometry	 the	 two	 surfaces,	 opaque	 and	
glazed,	 had	 been	 analysed	 separately.	 Solar	 radiation	 (SR),	 long-wave	 radiation	 (LW)	 and	
surface	temperatures	Ts	of	the	opaque	and	glass	parts	(Ts.op,	Ts.g)	were	measured,	outside	
and	 inside,	 on	 this	 two	 elements	 that	 comprise	 the	 roof.	 The	 second	 part	 addresses	 the	

3811



ambient	interior	conditions	in	order	to	match	these	results	with	the	roof	thermal	behaviour.	
The	parameters	considered	in	this	part	were	the	mean	radiant	interior	temperature	(Tmrt)	
and	 indoor	 air	 temperature	 (Tai).	 It	 has	 been	 analysed	 the	 independent	 influence	 of	 the	
glass	and	opaque	surface	over	the	mean	radiant	temperature	through	calculations.		

	
Figure	1.	Construction	specifications	a)	Front	elevation	b)	longitudinal	section	and	c)	detail	section.	
	
The	module	selected	from	the	grid	to	be	measured	was	the	tenth	from	North,	and	the	

third	from	West.	The	data	of	the	glass	surface,	SR	and	LW	was	collected	from	June	23th	to	
June	30th,	and	the	outdoor	surface	temperature	from	July	1st	to	July	8th.	The	three	same	
parameters	were	measured	on	the	opaque	surface	 from	July	1st	 to	 July	8th.	The	data	are	
always	 referred	 to	 solar	 time	 (UTC).	 The	equipment	used	was:	 for	 SR	a	pyranometer	MS-
020VM	with	a	 spectral	 range	 from	350nm	 to	1100nm,	 for	 LW	a	pyrgeometer	 IR02	with	a	
spectral	 range	 from	4.5	μm	 to	40	μm	and	a	 field	 view	angle	of	150°	 connected	 to	a	data	
logger	CR800,	and	for	 the	surface	temperatures	an	external	 thermocouple	K-type	connect	
to	a	multifunctional	meter	TESTO	435.	The	first	two	instruments	were	set	to	collect	data	in	5	
min	 and	 the	 last	 in	 20	 min	 intervals.	 Due	 to	 the	 difficulty	 of	 measuring	 the	 indoor	
temperature	of	the	glass	and	opaque	surfaces,	an	infrared	thermometer	was	used,	spectral	
range	8-14	μm,	and	emissivity	calibrated	at	0.90.	In	order	to	make	a	proper	diagnostic	of	the	
radiative	 roof	 behaviour,	 due	 to	 the	 complexity	 of	 its	 geometry,	 measurements	 in	 9	
different	 points	 over	 glass	 an	 opaque	 surface	were	 done.	 The	measurements	were	 done	
outside	and	inside	on	both	surfaces,	on	July	9th	from	09:00h	to	18:00h	every	30	min.	This	
procedure	was	supported	through	thermal	images	with	the	use	of	a	thermo-graphic-camera	
FLIR	I7.	These	measurements	of	radiant	temperatures	were	validated	comparing	the	outside	
surface	 temperatures	 measured	 with	 the	 infrared	thermometer	 and	 the	 K-type	
thermocouples,	and	the	average	differences	were	less	than	0.7°C.	

In	 regards	 to	 the	 ambient	 indoor	 measurements,	 all	 parameters	 considered	 in	 this	
part	 were	 collected	 from	 July	 9th	 to	 July	 13th.	 In	 order	 to	 assess	 Tmrt	 under	 indoor	
conditions,	a	frequent	method	validated	in	several	studies	was	used	(Thorsson	et	al,	2007)	
(d’Ambrosio	 et	 al,	 2013)	 which	 involved	 the	 globe	 temperature,	 air	 temperature	 and	 air	
velocity.	 The	 globe	 and	 air	 temperature	 were	measured	 using	 a	 globe	 thermometer	WB	
20SD;	for	the	air	velocity	an	anemometer	HIBOK	AM8901	range	from	0.4-35	m/sec.	All	the	
equipment	was	placed	at	2.10	m	height,	out	of	visitors’	reach.	The	data	was	collected	at	10	
min	and	60	min	intervals	respectively.	

Finally,	outdoor	air	temperature	data	was	gathered	from	the	database	of	the	nearest	
Weather	 Station	 from	 the	Museum	 ID:	 ITERRASS3,	 located	 at	 300m	 from	 the	 building	 at	
2°00´48´´E,	41°33´59´´N	and	307	masl.	The	information	was	collected	in	20	min	intervals.		

The	data	were	collected	in	3	different	periods	but	with	the	aim	to	make	a	comparable	
analysis,	1	day	from	each	period	with	similar	climatic	conditions	has	been	chosen,	June	29th,	
July	1st	and	July	9th.	All	these	days	had	clear	sky	conditions,	with	mean	temperatures	and	
SR	of	28.8ºC,	360	W/m2;	28.6ºC,	330	W/m2;	and	27.5ºC	and	332	W/m2.		

3812



Results	and	discussion:	Roof.	

Figure	 2	 shows	 the	 results	 of	 the	 radiation	 heat	 flux	 data	 on	 the	 opaque	 surface	 (a)	 and	
glazed	surface	(b).	Regarding	to	the	results	for	opaque	surface,	it	shows	a	SR	curve	with	no	
interruptions,	 which	 reflected	 0%	 obstructions,	 and	 completely	 clear	 sky	 conditions	
throughout	 the	 whole	 day.	 This	 radiation	 appears	 at	 04:30h,	 it	 rises	 until	 its	 peak	 1000	
W/m2	at	12:00h,	and	then	it	starts	to	fall	down	until	disappearing	at	19:30h.	 In	regards	to	
the	LW	at	night	periods	from	00:00	h	to	04:30	h	and	19:30	h	to	24:00	h	the	roof	is	emitting	a	
flux	quite	 constant,	 -87	W/m2.	While	 the	SR	appears	 the	heat	 losses	 start	 to	 rise	up	until	
reaching	 its	peak	 -192	W/m2,	around	 the	 same	 time	with	 the	SR	peak.	After	 this,	 its	heat	
losses	diminishes	until	the	SR	disappears	and	comes	back	to	its	constant	behaviour	at	night.		

	
Figure	2.	Solar	and	long	wave	radiation	measured	a)	on	the	opaque	surface	and	b)	on	the	glass	surface.	

	
There	 is	a	relationship	among	the	values	of	the	SR	and	LW.	However,	this	behaviour	

gets	complicated	on	the	glazed	surface	due	to	the	roof	geometry.	The	results	on	the	glass	
surface,	Figure	2b,	show	a	SR	curve	with	two	different	ascending	slope.	In	the	morning,	the	
curve	keeps	a	 low	ascending	slope	until	midday,	from	0	to	130	W/m2.	These	values	reveal	
the	presence	of	the	diffuse-reflect	radiation,	due	to	the	fact	that	the	glass	panels	oriented	
to	the	North	avoid	the	penetration	of	the	whole	direct	radiation	in	this	period.	After	this,	SR	
curve	starts	to	rise	with	a	higher	slope	until	 its	peak	430	W/m2,	reflecting	the	incidence	of	
the	direct	radiation.	This	behaviour	can	be	observed	in	Figure	3b,	which	shows	the	incidence	
of	the	direct	radiation	only	in	the	afternoon	due	to	the	building	orientation,	19°	to	West.		

With	respect	to	the	LW	results,	the	heat	flux	is	quite	constant	in	the	night	time	periods	
but	 with	 a	 lower	 value,	 -55	W/m2,	 than	 the	 opaque	 surface.	 However	 in	 the	 daytime	 it	
displays	a	totally	different	behaviour.	When	solar	radiation	appears,	specifically	the	diffuse-
reflect	 component,	 heat	 losses	 decrease	 until	 -10	W/m2,	 around	midday.	 Then,	 this	 flux	
increases	until	its	peak,	-87	W/m2.	This	responds	to	direct	radiation	incidence.	

As	mentioned,	the	relationship	seen	on	the	opaque	part	between	the	SR	and	LW	is	not	
the	same	in	glazed	surface	results.	This	behaviour	support	that	the	heat	losses	do	not	only	
depend	on	the	amount	of	the	solar	radiation	received,	but	also	on	the	heat	exchange	with	
its	environment.	In	reference	to	this,	the	portion	of	sky	seen	by	the	glass	is	lower	than	the	
one	 seen	 by	 the	 opaque	 surface,	 55-75%	 respectively,	 in	 terms	 of	 Sky	 View	 Factor	 (SVF).	
Furthermore,	the	portion	of	opaque	surface	seen	by	the	glass	has	great	influence	on	its	heat	
losses	performance	due	to	the	high	amount	of	heat	flux	emitted	by	the	opaque	surface,	as	
consequence	of	the	high	temperatures	it	reaches.	

3813



	
Figure	3.	Obstructions	of	the	sun	paths	in	a	stereographic	projection	from	the	same	point	of	the	pyranometer	

location	on	the	opaque	(a)	and	glass	(b)	surface.	Graphics	obtained	by	Heliodon	(Beckers	et	al,	2003).	
	

In	order	to	analyse	the	whole	heat	radiation	exchange,	the	exterior	glass	and	opaque	
surface	 temperatures	 had	 been	 measured,	 Figure	 4.	 At	 night	 time	 periods,	 these	
temperatures	 clearly	 only	 depend	 on	 heat	 losses	 by	 LW.	 This	 is	 reflected	 in	 the	
temperatures	of	both	surfaces,	which	keep	under	the	outdoor	air	 temperature	due	to	the	
high	 levels	 of	 LW	emitted	 to	 the	 sky.	Moreover,	 these	 results	 shows	 the	 influence	of	 the	
lesser	 portion	 of	 sky	 seen	 by	 the	 glass	 compared	 to	 opaque	 part	 over	 its	 surface	
temperature,	which	impacts	in	an	average	of	2°C	higher.		

In	 daytime	 period,	 the	 temperature	 performance	 of	 these	 two	 surfaces	 are	
conditioned	 by	 both	 radiations:	 SR	 and	 LW.	 In	 regards	 to	 the	 opaque	 part	 results,	 these	
values	show	a	behaviour	quite	corresponding	to	their	radiation	exchange,	Figure	2a.	In	the	
same	 way,	 the	 results	 of	 glass	 surface	 temperature	 show	 the	 same	 pattern	 seen	 in	 the	
measurements	of	SR,	a	curve	with	two	ascending	slopes.	Nevertheless,	these	two	slopes	do	
not	 have	 the	 large	 difference	 seen	 on	 radiation	 results,	 Figure	 2b.	 With	 the	 purpose	 to	
analyse	this	behaviour,	 it	has	divided	daytime	in	two	periods,	morning	and	afternoon.	The	
average	of	SR	received	in	the	afternoon	period	is	3	times	(255	W/m2)	higher	than	the	one	
received	in	the	morning	(85	W/m2).	Meanwhile	the	average	difference	between	surface	and	
air	 temperature,	 comparing	 the	 same	 periods	 is	 2.5	 times,	 (5°C	 to	 2°C).	 This	 behaviour	
responds	 to	 the	 scarcity	of	net	 LW	 flux	emitted	 in	 the	morning	period,	which	 impact	 in	a	
higher	temperature,	and	transparency	of	glass	to	SW.	

Regarding	the	interior	surface	temperatures	results,	Figure	4b,	the	maximum	value	on	
both	 surfaces	 is	 around	 17:00h.	 In	 the	 case	 of	 the	 opaque	 surface,	 it	 shows	 a	 delay	 of	 5	
hours	and	a	reduction	of	20°C,	between	the	exterior	and	interior	maximum.	Meanwhile,	in	
the	glass	part,	the	transmission	occurs	almost	immediately,	and	it	displays	an	increase	of	its	
temperature	 of	 7°C.	Moreover,	 the	 peak	 on	 the	 glass	 surface	 temperature	 is	 10°C	 higher	
than	the	one	of	the	opaque	part.	

	
Figure	4.	Glass	and	Opaque	Surface	temperatures	a)	exterior	and	b)	interior	

3814



Results	and	discussion:	Indoor.	

Due	to	the	air	velocity	measurements	obtained	(<0.4	m/s),	 the	mean	radiant	temperature	
values	are	considered	the	same	than	the	globe	temperature	values	(Thorsson	et	al,	2007).	
Also,	according	to	these	air	velocity	values	the	operative	temperature	is	equal	to	the	globe	
temperature	(ASHRAE,	2001).		
Figure	 5a,	 shows	 the	 indoor	 results	 of	 the	 air	 temperature	 (Tai)	 and	 the	 mean	 radiant	
temperature	 (Tmrt).	Neither	of	 these	two	parameters	go	under	30°C	and	their	maximums	
are	around	40°C.		The	indoor	temperatures	are	higher	than	the	outdoor	air	near	the	whole	
day.	The	average	difference	between	inside	and	outside	is	5°C.	Moreover,	Tmrt	and	Tai	have	
the	same	behaviour	and	almost	the	same	values	in	the	entire	period	measured;	the	highest	
difference	is	in	their	peak	time.	Figure	5b	displays	the	difference	between	the	Tmrt	and	Tai	
(∆Tmrt-Tai).	 It	 is	observed	the	range	of	difference	goes	 from	-0.4°C,	very	constant	 in	night	
periods,	 to	 1.53°C,	 in	 the	 peak	 time.	 Their	maximums	 are	 around	 17:00h,	which	 coincide	
with	 the	 interior	 temperatures	 peak	 of	 the	 glass	 and	 opaque	 surfaces,	 Figure	 4b.	 	 This	
reflect	the	large	influence	of	these	surfaces	over	Tmrt	and	the	influence	of	this	over	Tai.	

	
Figure	5.	Indoor	air	temperature	and	mean	radiant	indoor	temperature	(a),	and	Difference	between	mean	

radiant	temperature	and	air	temperature	(b)	
	

In	order	 to	determine	the	 independent	 impact	of	 the	roof	surfaces	over	 the	 interior	
ambient,	 it	 has	 been	 calculated	 the	 influence	 of	 surrounding	 surfaces	 over	 Tmrt.	 This	
parameter	was	calculated	based	on	measured	values	of	the	envelope	surface	temperatures,	
and	 their	 positions	 respect	 to	 the	 chosen	point,	 shape	 factor	 (SF)	 (Kabre,	 2010)	 obtained	
from	the	software	Heliodon	(Beckers	et	al,	2003).	Equation	(1)	was	used	for	this	purpose:		

																																																							(1)																																																																	
Where,	 mean	radiant	temperature,	in	K,	 temperature	of	surface	N,	in	K,	 	

angle	factor	between	a	point	and	a	surface	N.	If	we	refer	to	the	specific	case	analysed,	then	
the	equation	can	be	written	as:	

	 																								(2)								
It	has	simplified	the	impact	of	the	all	surrounding	surfaces	to	one	interior	point,	 in	4	

surfaces,	op	=	opaque	surface,	 	=	glass	 surface,	 	=	walls,	 	=	 floor.	Regarding	 the	 radiant	
temperatures,	according	 to	 the	 thermal	 images,	Figure	6,	 the	 floor	and	walls	have	almost	
the	 same	 values	 than	 Tai	measured,	while	 roof	 surfaces	 have	higher	 temperatures.	 Thus,	
only	roof	surfaces	are	considered	in	the	analysis	of	the	influence	over	Tmrt.	To	obtain	Ts.g.	

3815



and	 Ts.op.	 it	 has	 been	 averaged	 the	 9	 different	 points	 measured	 over	 each	 part.	 With	
respect	to	shape	factor	parameter,	it	has	been	simulated	the	angle	factor	between	these	4	
surfaces	and	one	interior	point	with	the	same	location	of	the	globe	thermometer.	

	
Figure	6	.	Interior	thermal	image	10h00	UTC	(a),	and	14h00	UTC	(b).	

	
Figure	7	shows	the	difference	between	the	global	mean	radiant	temperature	and	the	

mean	 air	 temperature	 (∆Tmrt-Tai),	 depending	 on	 the	 different	 values	 of	 surrounding	
temperatures	and	their	shape	factors.	In	the	axis	X,	the	range	of	the	surfaces	shape	factor	
values,	from	0	to	0.5,	since	0.5	SF	will	be	the	maximum	angle	factor	between	the	roof	and	
the	point	analysed.	In	the	axis	Y,	the	values	of	the	difference	between	surface	temperature	
and	air	temperature	(∆Ts	-	Tai).	

It	 has	 been	 analysed	 the	 influence	 of	 the	 Ts.g.	 and	 Ts.op.	 on	 Tmrt	 at	 two	 different	
heights:	P1:	2.4	m	which	simulate	the	same	location	of	globe	thermometer,	and	P2:	4.8	m,	a	
point	located	in	a	second	floor.	The	analysis	corresponds	to	temperature	peak	time,	17:00	h.	

According	 to	 these	 results,	 the	glass	part	has	a	higher	 influence	over	∆Tmrt-Tai	 than	
the	opaque	part	on	both	points	analysed.	On	P1,	the	influence	of	the	glazed	part	is	0.84°C	
and	the	opaque	part	is	0.56°C,	60–40%	respectively.	Meanwhile	on	P2,	the	influence,	in	the	
same	order,	are	1.09°C	and	0.57°C,	66-34%	respectively.	It	can	be	observed	that	when	the	
analysed	 point	 gets	 closer	 to	 the	 roof,	 the	 influence	 of	 both	 surfaces	 over	 ∆Tmrt-Tai	
becomes	 higher.	 However	 the	 glass	 part	 increases	 its	 influence	 0.25°C,	while	 the	 opaque	
part	0.01°C.	

	
Figure	7.	Shape	Factor	and	∆Ts-Ta	influence	of	the	surrounding	surfaces	over	Tmrt	

Conclusions.	

This	research	approach	the	analysis	of	the	rehabilitated	industrial	building	interior	ambient	
conditions,	focusing	in	the	envelope	radiative	performance	and	its	impact	on	the	users.	

3816



The	parameters	analysed	in	this	study,	Tai	and	Tmrt,	have	a	strong	dependency	on	the	
roof	thermal	behaviour.	Considering	the	whole	building	volume	the	highest	heat	exchange	
is	with	the	roof	surfaces,	while	the	heat	flux	with	the	walls	and	the	floor	is	negligible.	In	this	
sense,	 this	analysis	 supports	 that	 the	glass	 surface	has	 the	highest	 repercussion,	between	
the	all	surfaces	of	the	envelope,	over	Tmrt.	The	glass	impact	represents	the	60-66%	of	the	
entire	long	wave	radiation	flux.	This	behaviour	responds	to	the	high	temperatures	reached	
by	 this	 surface,	 47°C	 (maximum)	 although	 this	 surface	 is	 oriented	 to	 the	 North.	 These	
temperatures	are	determined	by	the	constant	action	of	the	diffuse	component	throughout	
the	whole	 day,	 and	 particularly	 to	 the	 heat	 radiation	 emitted	 by	 the	 opaque	 part,	which	
diminishes	the	heat	losses	of	this	surface.	

Acknowledgements.	

This	 work	 has	 been	 supported	 by	 the	 Spanish	 Ministry	 of	 Economy	 under	 project	 code:	
BIA2016-77675-R.	 JTQ	 acknowledges	 to	 the	 scholarship	 of	 the	 SENESCYT	 ref.	 AR6C9307	
from	the	government	of	Ecuador.	

References.	
Andrei,	R.	 (2012).	 Industrial	building	conversion-The	Poaching	of	an	already	poached	reality.	Buletinul	

Institutului	Politehnic	Din	Iasi,	58(2),	pp.	157-164.		
ASHRAE.	(2001).	ASHRAE	Handbook-Fundamentals.	Atlanta:	ASHRAE		
Atmaca,	I.,	Kaynakli,	O.,	Ygit,	A.	(2007).	Effects	of	radiant	temperature	on	thermal	comfort.	Building	and	

Environment,	42(9),	pp.	3210–3220.		
Beckers,	B.,	Masset,	L.	(2003)	HeliodonTM_2.6-1	software.	Available	at:	www.heliodon.net.	
Beizaee,	A.,	 Lomas	K.,	Firth,	S.	 (2013).	National	 survey	of	 summertime	temperatures	and	overheating	

risk	in	English	homes.	Building	and	Environment,	65,	pp.	1–17.	
Blagojević,	M.,	Tufegdžić,	A.	(2016).	The	new	technology	era	requirements	and	sustainable	approach	to	

industrial	heritage	renewal.	Energy	and	Buildings,	115,	pp.	148–153.	
d’Ambrosio	Alfano,	F.,	Dell’Isola,	M.,	Palella,	B.,	Riccio,	G.,	Russi,	A.	(2013).	On	the	measurement	of	the	

mean	 radiant	 temperature	 and	 its	 influence	 on	 the	 indoor	 thermal	 environment	 assessment.	 Building	 and	
Environment,	63,	pp.	79–88.	

Fanger,	 P.,	 Bánhidi,	 L.,	 Olesen,	 B.,	 Langkilde,	 G.	 (1980).	 Comfort	 limits	 for	 heated	 ceilings.	 ASHRAE,	
86(2596),	pp.	141–156.		

Fernández,	L.,	Suárez,	L.	(2016).	Industrial	Heritage.	Arquitectura	Viva,	182,	pp.	3.		
Givoni,	B.	(1994).	Passive	and	low	energy	cooling	of	buildings.	New	York:	Van	Nostrand	Reinhold	Cop.	
Kabre,	 C.	 (2010).	 A	 new	 thermal	 performance	 index	 for	 dwelling	 roofs	 in	 the	 warm	 humid	 tropics.	

Building	and	Environment,	45(3),	pp.	727–738.		
Kalmár,	 F.,	 Kalmár,	 T.	 (2011).	 Analysis	 of	 floor	 and	 ceiling	 heating	 with	 intermittent	 operation.	

Environmental	Engineering	and	Management	Journal,	10(9),	pp.	1243–1248.		
Kalmár,	 F.,	 Kalmár,	 T.	 (2011).	 Interrelation	 between	mean	 radiant	 temperature	 and	 room	 geometry.	

Energy	&	Buildings,	55,	pp.	414–421.		
Mirzaei,	P.,	Haghighat,	F.,	Nakhaie,	A.,	Yagouti,	A.,	Giguère,	M.,	Keusseyan,	R.,	Coman,	A.	(2012).	Indoor	

thermal	condition	in	urban	heat	Island-Development	of	a	predictive	tool.	Building	and	Environment,	57,	p.7–17.	
Romeo,	 E.,	Morezzi,	 E.,	 Rudiero,	R.	 (2015)	 Industrial	 heritage:	Reflections	on	 the	use	 compatibility	of	

cultural	sustainability	and	energy	efficiency.	Energy	Procedia,	78,	pp.1305-1310	
Sutestad,	S.,	Mosler,	S.	 (2016).	 Industrial	Heritage	and	their	Legacies:	Memento	non	mori:	Remember	

you	shall	not	die.	Procedia-Social	and	Behavioral	Sciences,	225,	pp.	321–336.	2016.	
Thorsson,	S.,	Lindberg,	F.	(2007).	Different	methods	for	estimating	the	mean	radiant	temperature	in	an	

outdoor	urban	setting.	International	Journal	Climatology,	27,	pp.	1983–1993	
Walikewitz,	N.,	 Jänicke,	 B.,	 Langner,	M.,	Meier,	 F.,	 Endlicher,	W.	 (2015).	 The	 difference	 between	 the	

mean	radiant	temperature	and	the	air	temperature	within	indoor	environments :	A	case	study	during	summer	
conditions.	Building	and	Environment,	84,	pp.	151–161.	

	

3817


	Design to Thrive - PLEA 2017
	Introduction to the Proceedings of PLEA 2017
	Volume Contents
	Table of Contents
	Low Carbon Design
	Materials
	Overheating
	Passive & Climatic Design
	Place Making and Well-being
	Renewables / Solar & Hydrogen Buildings
	Resilience, Aging and Adapting to Change
	Sound
	Transition Communities
	Transport
	Ventilation
	Vernacular Buildings
	Water and Waste
	Windcatchers and Windows



