











































Microsoft Word - WS5_Mourao_Portugal.doc


A. Cuchí; J. Mourão; A. Pagés - A framework to take account of CO2 on urban planning  
45th ISOCARP Congress 2009 

  

 

1 

 

A framework to take account of CO2 restrictions on municipal urban 
planning 

 

1. Introduction 

 
Recently, more and more cities and regions are increasing their interest in sustainability, 
specifically on the issues related to climate change. Clear evidence is the big amount of 
European cities (576, in July 2009), which have already joined the Covenant of Mayors.  
The Covenant of Mayors is a voluntary agreement to fight against climate change at 
municipal level, with which the signatory cities are committed to reduce their CO2 emissions 
by at least 20% by 2020. 
To tackle climate change at local level it is necessary to research into local strategies which 
allow reducing global CO2 emissions. The first step of this research consists of identifying 
which emissions should be taken into account and how they should be measured.  
In the work set out below, we approach these questions from the point of view of urban 
planning, since we consider urban planning as one of the most important tools that 
municipalities have to intervene in the territory. 
The discussion of this paper is based on a report commissioned by the Catalan Environment 
and Housing Department entitled “Validació de criteris en la consideració de l'eficiència 
energètica del planejament”.  
 
2. Urban Planning and sustainability 

 
The interest on sustainability showed by the administrations of urban regions is not always 
followed by a reflexion about the urban condition in face of ecological sustainability as a long-
term goal. Such a reflexion, however, is urgent to support new frameworks for urban 
planning.  
Sustainability means satisfying needs in the short and long term (Brundtland, 1987). In this 
sense, while discussing urban planning for sustainability should be reminded that the main 
need satisfied by cities and urbanization is accessibility.  
The market generates the city as a form of reducing costs of mobility, increasing accessibility 
between producers and consumers. Accessibility represents the possibility of achieving 
goods, services and information at a low cost, consisting on the main utility of urban space 
and also on the main difference between cities and rural space.  
Mobility, sometimes pointed out as the origin of cities, is in reality only a mean to reach 
accessibility. Proximity and connectivity are the other means to provide accessibility, and 
both depend on the location of activities on space. 
Location of activities on space establishes a balance between agglomeration (until the limits 
of congestion) and dispersion (until the limits of mobility efficiency). Urban planning while 
locating activities on space, defines levels of accessibility. However, this location is also 
strongly affected by policies and by the economy.  
On the one hand, location of activities depends on the markets and on the other hand, it 
interferes with them. However, being it defined by planning; being it defined by policy or by 
the market, the location of activities provides accessibility giving priority to short term needs. 
But what about the long term?  
In the context of the externalization of mobility costs, the limits of congestion and of 
dispersion, which once benchmarked the location of activities on space, were overlapped. 



A. Cuchí; J. Mourão; A. Pagés - A framework to take account of CO2 on urban planning  
45th ISOCARP Congress 2009 

  

 

2 

 

Accessibility as the urban utility is since then threatened: urban centres become blocked by 
road traffic and urban regions dispersed by fragmented urban networks (Marvin; Graham, 
2001).  
This scenario is consequence of the industrial process based on a linear metabolism that 
allows markets, urban networks and urbanization, growing without limits. Congestion and 
sprawl are the results.  
When several authors refer to sprawl and to dissolution of the urban cohesion, they refer to 
the spreading of high levels of accessibility further on the territory, which are supported not 
by proximity but by mobility. This kind of accessibility has been provided at an apparently low 
cost, supported by stabilized oil prices and by the externalization of environmental costs, in 
particular by contamination. 
While not closing material cycles, the industrial linear metabolism generates contamination 
and incentivises patterns of location of activities that intend to maximize profit and to 
delocalize effects of industrialization, rather than solving or reducing them. CO2 emissions 
are a major form of such contamination.  
Contamination is not only produced by the industrial activity, it is in big part generated by the 
use of urban territories, and by the need of accessibility satisfied through mobility. We can 
identify urban non-industrial emissions from transport, residential and services sectors. Such 
emissions depend on urban infra-structure and buildings, and of the accessibility and 
habitability provided by cities and urbanization. 
Because of this interdependency, restrictions on CO2 can regulate the urbanization process, 
as they can regulate the economic process. This indicator, even not expressing all the 
dimensions of the ecological sustainability, when used properly has the power of reshaping 
certain urban activities that are strongly responsible for it: buildings, mobility and supply of 
urban services (energy, water, and waste treatment). Mostly it has the potential to regulate 
forms to provide accessibility, what represents a relevant opportunity for urban sustainability. 
The contradiction between the industrial globalized urban dimension and sustainability goals 
can be faced by this indicator, because it leads to the acceptance of contamination as 
mobility cost, redefining accessibility patterns and giving a new role to proximity and 
connectivity.  
Urban growth, since the industrial revolution, has been accelerated by an increasing 
accessibility based not only on the geographic location of activities or on the technology, but 
mostly on the low price of fossil fuels and contamination externalities. And beneath low 
mobility costs urban scale tends to become global.  
At this global scale, restricting contamination and CO2 emissions means not only to act on 
cities, but also on the “planetary economy”. And this is much more than urban planning is 
capable to do. What urban planning is able do is to optimize location of activities on space, at 
multiple scales, seeking to regulate the urban metabolism and to control local parts of the 
global net. And this is not few. 
While aiming to achieve sustainability goals, urban planning faces a double problem: 
globalization of urbanization and networks; and, lack of the right tools to introduce “change” 
and to internalize environmental costs in its decision making process.  
The first problem will be managed by the conditions imposed by the “peak oil”, since 
industrial urban condition tends to full globalized urbanization only while mobility costs are 
very low. Otherwise, on what concerns to the lack of tools solutions can be proposed through 
research, experiments and construction of an alternative vision of urban planning.  
 
 

 



A. Cuchí; J. Mourão; A. Pagés - A framework to take account of CO2 on urban planning  
45th ISOCARP Congress 2009 

  

 

3 

 

3. A Framework to define “municipal urban emissions” 

 
Conventional urban planning has strong limitations on acting on emissions because it is not 
thought from the point of view of sustainability. When some questions appear, answers are 
not available: Over which activities and how urban planning acts? What means sustainability 
in the city, in energy and emissions? We try to approach these interrogations. 
This paper, as the research behind it, seeks a suitable way to join the structure of urban 
planning with urban sustainability, taking into account the main phases and main sectors of 
planning where to include CO2 emissions.  
Planning main phases answer to three questions:  

• How are we (Diagnosis)?  

• Where do we want to go (Objectives)?  

• How to get there (Planning evaluation)?  
These questions fit perfectly to the low carbon challenge: How much do we emit? How much 
we want to reduce?  How to achieve and verify such reductions? 
On what concerns to the sectors, having in perspective carbon reduction we select three 
planning sectors: buildings, mobility and urban services. All of them have a significant share 
of the urban emissions and are part of the main domains of intervention of urban planning.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Table 1 – Phases and sectors of physical urban planning 

 
As table shows there are 9 areas where emissions restrictions can be introduced, but this 
restriction has to be driven by consistent criteria of urban municipal emissions measurement.  
Social use of an urban municipality implies the production and consume of utilities. A good is 
produced (P) to allow utilities to be developed (U) and to be consumed by inhabitants (C). 
Throughout the production of goods, greenhouse gas emissions are emitted. These 
emissions can be produced during the extraction process of raw materials, during the 
manufacture process, during the transport of the products, etc. and also during the use or 
consumption. 
CO2 emissions of the economic process can be considered in two different ways. The first 
one consists of attributing the emissions where they are physically emitted (P) and the 

DIAGNOSIS 

ACTUAL STATE 

STRATEGIC 

OBJECTIVES 

 

PLANNING 

EVALUATION 

BUILDINGS   

MOBILITY    

URBAN  

SERVICES        



A. Cuchí; J. Mourão; A. Pagés - A framework to take account of CO2 on urban planning  
45th ISOCARP Congress 2009 

  

 

4 

 

second one consists of attributing the emissions, which were emitted in order to obtain a 
good or service, to its utility (U-C).  
The “Kyoto Protocol” (1997) is an example of the first case, since it attributes to each country 
the emissions physically produced in the country. Otherwise, the carbon footprint concept is 
an example of the second case, since its methodology considers that the final utilities 
(consumer goods or services) are responsible for all those emissions which have been 
necessary to make possible their existence. 
From the point of view of sustainability, the second way to measure emissions is more 
appropriate than the first one since the second one considers the environment impact 
associated with final utilities, i.e. the environment impact associated with human needs. 
Measuring and limiting this impact is the right way to achieve “sustainable development” as it 
is defined in “Our Common Future” (1987). 
 
In this paper, we set out three alternatives, with 
different meanings and results, to define municipal 
emissions: According to the territorial productive 
boundary (P); according to the activities or utilities 
created (U); and, according to the community of 
consumers (P).  
It is clear that these three phases of the 
economical process do not always occupy the 
same geographical areas and rarely are within 
the same administrative boundaries. That is why 
the correspondent emissions are so different.  
 

3.1. P Scenario 

 
[P] In first place we approach the “territorial” 
dimension of the municipal emissions. 
This first scenario would take into account 
only the emissions that are physically 
produced in the municipality. The emissions 
would be associated to all the energy that is 
there produced at all the existing buildings 
and infra-structures. In this scenario places 
with electric centrals or polluting industries for 
exportation assume the emissions that other 
places “consume”. 
The emissions here counted are related to 
the local metabolism of the area in analyse, 
ignoring the import-export flows of the urban 
society.  
This means that the emissions associated to 
the final utilities are not counted, what is 
inappropriate to implement sustainability.  
Observing the figure, only the emissions related to the internal Production would count.  
 
 

P U C 

P U C 

C 

U 

P 

P 

U 

C 

Production 

Utilities 

Consumers 

Municipality 

Figures 1-4: 



A. Cuchí; J. Mourão; A. Pagés - A framework to take account of CO2 on urban planning  
45th ISOCARP Congress 2009 

  

 

5 

 

P U C 

C 

U 

P 

3.2. U Scenario 

 
 [U] The second scenario approaches the 
“functional” dimension of the municipal 
emissions. 
This scenario takes into account the emissions 
included in the utilities provided in the limited 
territory. The emissions of the utilities within 
the municipality count independently from the 
origin of the consumers of these utilities or of 
the products used.  
For example, the electrical energy consumed 
to provide habitability inside a municipality has 
associated emissions that can be produced 
outside from its limits.  
However, in this scenario these emissions are 
attributable to the municipality which provides 
the final utility, i.e. habitability. This seems 
appropriated to the responsibilities that a 
municipality has over its jurisdiction area. 
Observing the figure, only the emissions related to the internal Utilities would count. 
 
3.3. C Scenario 

  
[C] The third scenario approaches the “social” dimension of the municipal emissions. 
This last scenario takes into account the 
emissions related to the consumption by the 
inhabitants of the municipality. The emissions 
depend on the behaviours of the municipal 
community, inside and outside from the area in 
analyses.  
This approach is related to the individual and 
social choices and does not have a direct 
correspondence on the physical limits of the 
municipality, in this sense it is only applicable 
per capita basis.  
In this case, the emissions associated with a 
second house, for example, would be 
attributable to the consumer who uses the 
house and not to the town where the second 
house is located.  
Observing the figure, this means that only the 
emissions related to Consumers would count. 
 
We can organize these three scenarios according to the type of metabolism, the target of 
action and the ways and instruments of control. The table on the next page offers a full view 
of the scenarios and its relations with forms of acting for sustainability. 
 

P U C 

C 

U 

P 



A. Cuchí; J. Mourão; A. Pagés - A framework to take account of CO2 on urban planning  
45th ISOCARP Congress 2009 

  

 

6 

 

Scenarios Metabolism Target Ways of control Instruments of control  

P -PROCUCTION Territorial 

 (industry) 

emission focus  

(processes) 

Auditing Polluter-payer & Kyoto 
Protocol 

U -UTILITIES Functional  

(city) 

Space  

(infra-structure) 

Designing, Planning 
and regulating 

Covenant of Mayors  

C -CONSUMPTION Social 

(people) 

behaviors  

(consumption) 

Personal limited 
emissions 

Personal Carbon credits  

 
Table 2 – Scenarios of measuring and controlling municipal emissions 

 
In conclusion the U scenario is the best to define urban municipal emissions, since it is 
focused on the utilities provided by urbanization. These needs are satisfied inside the urban 
territory but can be produced outside, and consumed by inhabitants that don’t belong to the 
city. In reality, this is the essence of the urban phenomena: to import and export products 
and consumers, to make them accessible to each other at a low mobility cost. 
However, few inventories of CO2 emissions of urban territories assume this scenario totally. 
On what concerns to energy, in some cases emissions are already counted where there are 
the utilities that imply them (where final energy is consumed), rather than where they are 
produced (primary energy). However, on what concerns to mobility this approach is harder to 
put in practice. 
Mobility occurs to provide accessibility, so it is a “secondary utility” that serves other utilities 
such as housing, employment, education, etc. Mobility emissions should be then allocated to 
the utilities that imply them. This exercise is complex because mobility circuits generally 
serve several activities at the same time.  
Most of the inventories on mobility emissions are done on the “P” model, counting focus of 
emissions inside the urban areas, ignoring the activities on which they are implied and if they 
were related or not with the urban planning decisions. So, in reality, what we have available 
is a Scenario P+U. 
This point of view has consequences on urban planning for sustainability because implies to 
see planning not only as science of location of activities, but also as a science that estimates 
the demand of utilities associated to these activities, as also the contamination implied. 
One relevant instrument to apply this point of view is the recent “Covenant of Mayors” (2009), 
which will be discussed in the next section. This Covenant, even being innovative and 
ambitious, faces big methodological challenges on measuring and controlling municipal 
urban emissions. 
 
4. Problematic of defining municipal urban emissions at the Covenant of Mayors  

 

4.1. Political Homogeneity, real heterogeneity: a unified target 

 
Like several other European actions devoted to the 27 different State Members, the covenant 
of mayors, while committing all the cities on 20% of CO2 emissions reduction, implies 
homogeneity.  



A. Cuchí; J. Mourão; A. Pagés - A framework to take account of CO2 on urban planning  
45th ISOCARP Congress 2009 

  

 

7 

 

On the one hand such homogeneity gives strength and unity to the pact, but on the other 
hand it turns hard to establish comparisons while joining all the regions “over the same hat”. 
The fact that the target of 20% is equal for all 27 members of UE is remarkable, once it is 
known for long that Northern Europe has a much longer tradition of counting and mitigating 
CO2 emissions than Southern Europe. Furthermore, northern Countries have higher 
energetic demand, what gives them a higher potential of reduction. To remind these 
conditions is important to understand the meaning that the pact will have in different Member 
States, and in particular in Southern Countries.  
For example, in some Portuguese municipalities the pact was used as a motivation for 
changing practices and to legitimate the work already developed by environment and energy 
agencies. Technical teams at these municipalities while assuming that it will be impossible to 
achieve the target, stand that it is important and relevant to join the pact, yet. 
For Portugal, the scenario is particularly interesting: under the Kyoto Protocol, the Nation 
was allowed to increase on 27% of emissions over the values of 1990 from 2005 until 2012, 
but at the same time, the Portuguese municipalities which signed the pact committed their 
territories to reduce emissions on 20% from 2005 till 2020.  
In reality, these are not contradictory commitments, considering the time lap and the 
differences between the emissions that Kyoto accounts and the ones that the Covenant aims 
to account. Kyoto has for target all the emissions of a Nation, while the Covenant is focused 
on municipal urban emissions, related with the metabolism of cities.  
 

4.2. Territorial and Globalized Infra-structure: local targets for a global reality 

 
Due to globalized capitalism, urban networks are not any more provided by state local 
monopolies, rather than by globalized companies of energy, telecommunications, transports, 
waste, and even regional companies of water. This splintering of the urban networks is 
fundamental to understand the urban condition of nowadays and to discuss the role of urban 
planning (Marvin & Graham, 2001).  
Almost the totality of the world territories has been urbanized, but the control of 
infrastructures of urbanization belong to few enterprises, international corporations that 
supply municipalities on energy, water, roads and telecommunications and over cross the 
power of the sates.  
Water in Portugal can be supplied by a French company and energy by a Spanish one, 
through networks that are not neither national nor local, allowing the liberalized market of 
urban networks to design the globalized territory and the new urban landscape. 
With the exception to rarely self built local infra-structures, the networked infra structure is 
globalized and often even out of local jurisdiction. Some residual control can be operated by 
municipalities, but suppliers are out of their frontiers and out of their commitments.  
In this scenario, most of the emissions that a city “consumes” are not emitted inside its 
borders, neither controlled by its forms of governance. This is a clear consequence of the 
urban revolution that is arriving to its full accomplishment (Lefebvre, 1983). 
To deal with the global urban scenario a big quantity of information is needed to inform on 
direct and indirect urban emissions. This information is hard to achieve, to manage and to 
select, because it is still complex to define which emissions “belong” to an urbanized 
municipality or region.  
The idea of focalizing carbon emissions on a municipality which the Covenant embraces, 
encourages municipality autonomy, but is quite in opposition to the dominant economic trend 
of globalized infra-structure. This local commitment is an interesting base to discuss the 



A. Cuchí; J. Mourão; A. Pagés - A framework to take account of CO2 on urban planning  
45th ISOCARP Congress 2009 

  

 

8 

 

contradiction between global urbanization and local sustainability. In our opinion this 
contradiction would not exist if local sustainability would be considered on the point of view of 
the U scenario, where emissions are associated to utilities. 
 

4.3. Which kind of municipal planning can implement the targets? 

 
Adding to the complexities of globalization, the implementation of the Covenant also lacks 
basic guidelines for planning and action. Municipalities started acting by themselves through 
municipal energy agencies, urban planning, strategic development plans and laws, without 
knowing which ways would be more efficient. 
Within the Portuguese municipalities some energy agencies have being implementing the 
Covenant; however, such agencies have a very restricted power of action, since that 
effective plans on structuring the territory come still from an urban planning with few links to 
environmental or energy agencies.  
Conventional urban planning, more than a way to implement the targets of the Covenant is 
sometimes a barrier to achieve more sustainable and less carbon intensive uses of the 
territory and cities. In exceptional cases, municipal urban laws helped to make possible to 
implement the covenant not only through punctual actions, but also through the current urban 
management that regulates daily the local building activity. 
There is not a common agreement, neither enough experience about how municipal urban 
planning could adapt to the covenant of mayors to achieve at least partially its targets. This 
uncertainty results from the problems arising from unified and local targets for a diversified 
and global reality, but also from the absence of a framework to the integration of carbon 
emissions in municipal urban planning. Without this framework the strategic and urban 
planning actions, such as diagnosis, definition of objectives and evaluation of measures, lack 
trustful orientation for reducing CO2 emissions. 
The framework presented is based on the identification of the differences between the 
scenarios P,U, and C, and on the recommendation of the U scenario as the central approach 
to select municipal urban emissions on a trustful way. Once accepted this point of view it can 
be applied to strategic objectives and to urban planning evaluation. 
 

5. Conclusions 

 

Everything on current urban planning points to an increase of emissions instead of reduction: 
amplifying of road and parking infrastructures emitting more and damaging public space; soil 
sealing reducing emission absorption and damaging ecosystems. When urban planning 
faces the challenge of 20% of CO2 emission reduction, in few more that 10 years, it can only 
“turn around 180º” on its methods and practices.  
One of the main conclusions of this paper is that conventional urban planning is not prepared 
to restrict CO2 emissions of a municipality, partially due to its loss of control over the urban 
reality, and partially due to the absence of tools and visions for measuring and controlling 
urban municipal emissions on a trustful way. 
Planning evaluation tools have to be reshaped in sight of restriction of contamination, in 
particular of CO2 emissions. The framework here established identifies and organizes the 
urban utilities that can be ruled by urban planning, preparing a basis where to apply 
sustainability objectives and actions. 



A. Cuchí; J. Mourão; A. Pagés - A framework to take account of CO2 on urban planning  
45th ISOCARP Congress 2009 

  

 

9 

 

Another relevant conclusion of this paper is that sustainability – and specifically CO2 
emissions - should be measured and that the way they are measured and controlled is 
determinant on the results.  
Measuring and controlling are necessary tasks for diagnosing actual state like for estimating 
results and evaluating planning options. For all the phases feasible tools of accounting and 
reliable sources of information are needed.  
This paper has shown that the appropriated methodology to measure municipal emissions 
should tend to consider all the emissions attributable to final activities instead of the 
emissions physically produced inside the municipal borders. 
Furthermore it was also remarked that sustainability can only be achieved if specific strategic 
objectives are defined and verified, to conduce planning decisions to the reduction of CO2 
emissions on the territory or city. 
Finally, we observed that an important international commitment as the Covenant of Mayors 
had a remarkable acceptance, even based on a strategic target (20% - 2020) defined without 
enough detail and without reliable tools to achieve it, and for which the framework presented 
can be particularly useful. 
 
5. References 

 
BRUNDTLAND COMISSION (1987) - Our Common Future, Oxford: Oxford University Press 

CAMAGNI, Roberto (2005) - Economía urbana, Barcelona: Antoni Bosch  

CUCHÍ, Albert; PAGÈS, Anna (2007) - “Counting CO2 emissions in planning sustainable urban 
quarters” in Ecopolis. Conceptualizing and Defining Sustainable Design, ed. D. Babalis, Alinea 
international: Firenze, pp. 121-125. 

EUROPEAN COMISSION (2009) - The Covenant of Mayors – Sustainable Energy Action Plans - 
Guidance Elements in http://re.jrc.ec.europa.eu/energyefficiency/ 

GENERALITAT DE CATALUNYA; Departament de Medi Ambient i Habitatge (2009) – “Validació de 
criteris en la consideració de l'eficiència energètica del planejament” [not published yet] 

GRAHAM, Stephen, MARVIN, Simon (2001) - Splintering urbanism. Networked infrastructures, 
technological mobilities and the urban condition, London: Routledge 

LEFEBVRE, Henri (1983) – La Revolución Urbana, Madrid: Alianza Editorial 

MOURÃO, Joana; CUCHI, Albert (2007) – “Assessment on Urban Ecosystems?” in Sustainable 
Building 2007, IOS Press: Amstedam, vol.2: pp. 643-649 

UNITED NATIONS; FRAMEWORK CONVENTION FOR CLIMATE CHANGE (1997) – Kyoto Protocol 
in http://unfccc.int/kyoto_protocol/items/2830.php 

 
Authors: 

Albert Cuchí – School of Architecture. Technical University of Catalonia (UPC), Barcelona, Spain 
Anna Pagés – School of Architecture. Technical University of Catalonia (UPC), Barcelona, Spain 

Joana Mourão – National Laboratory of Civil Engineering, Lisbon and Faculty of Architecture of Porto 
University, Portugal 


