



















































FULL PAPER wrec 2012


1 

 

 

 
 
 
 

ENVELOPE MATERIALITY: LIGHT AND HEAVY IN WINERIES. 
THE CASE OF “SANTA ANA” WINERY, IN MENDOZA, ARGENTINA. 

 
 

Carolina Ganem 
INCIHUSA – CONICET 

P.O. BOX / C.C. 131.  
Mendoza. Argentina.5500. 

cganem@mendoza-conicet.gov.ar 
 
 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
In a winery, energy flux exchange and thermal inertia 
of the envelope are crucial due to the constant need for 
stabilized temperatures. As a consequence, energy 
consuming systems like serpentine pipes inside tanks 
control temperature during fermentation; and air 
conditioned equipment maintains the appropriate 
microclimate in oak breeding barrels rooms. “Santa 
Ana” Winery, located in Mendoza (Argentina), 
presents two types of envelope materiality: one heavy 
(mainly adobe walls λ = 0.81W/mK) for fermentation 
and breeding stages and one light (mainly galvanized 
steel sheets λ = 45 W/mK) for the storage stage. In 
both cases the roof is insulated. A complete envelope 
analysis was made, data from auxiliary energy demand 
was collected and summer in situ temperature 
measurements were performed at critical control 
points. Also, recommendations to environmentally 
refurbish these envelopes are presented as a light/heavy 
equilibrium that could serve its purpose with a 
response from low energy architecture is needed. 
 
Keywords: envelope materiality,  energy consumption, 
winery. 
 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
 
Primitive wineries were caves, that is, an emptiness 
found or made in the compact solid ground. When first 
on-the-ground wineries were built, the creation of the 
empty space in the most economical way many times 
neglected the full structure of thermal mass resistance, 
and the problem of interior temperature variations in 
wine production appeared.  
 
In a winery there is a constant need of stabilized 
temperatures. A thermal abrupt change can put the 
whole process in jeopardy.  

 
Helena Coch 

AiEM – ETSAB – UPC 
Av. Diagonal 649 7a planta. 
Barcelona. España. 08028. 

helena.coch@upc.edu 
 

 
 
 
Physical elements of the environment, such as nature 
morphology and topographic aspects of the 
geographical site (orientation, urban structure, land 
topography, vegetation, sounds, noise and vibrations, 
contamination), and the climate (microclimate, solar 
radiation, wind intensity and direction, ventilation and 
illumination), account directly for site choice [for a 
winery], orientation, optimal form and materials to 
control solar protection and insulation materials. (1) 
 
Optimal environmental conditions on different sites in 
wineries vary according to the needs of workers and 
the better settings for breeding and keeping wines. 
Temperature and humidity regimes are the principal 
environmental factors that need to be precisely 
controlled in the different sites of wineries.  
 
In some spaces, illumination levels to be adequate to 
work and the total absence of estrange odors, have to 
be taken into account.(2) 
 
Interior – exterior energy exchanges happen through 
the skin or envelope of the building that separates 
“interior” from “exterior”.  
 
The envelope is a dynamic border that interacts with 
external natural energies and internal building 
environment. It is also a fertile field to the development 
of layers and flexible control spaces that would 
facilitate the maintenance of stable temperatures within 
changing climatic characteristics. 
 
In Mendoza, Argentina, first wineries were 
documented in the year 1600, buildings were simple 
and almost without measures of protection and 
conservation of grape fruits. Small and middle size 
spaces on the ground. It is supposed that grape juices 
exposed to temperatures over 25ºC corrupted rapidly 
and therefore, Mendoza’s wines were of poor quality 
and easy alteration of initial properties. (3) 
 



2 

 

Nowadays, Mendoza produces one of the best D.O.C. 
Malbec varietal and is famous for its excellent wines. 
In order to provide the required environment to 
produce such an excellent product,  mechanical energy 
consuming systems like serpentine pipes inside tanks 
controlled temperature during the fermentation process; 
and air conditioned equipment were installed in oak 
breeding barrels rooms.  
 
Therefore, the purpose of this work is to evaluate the 
existent envelope and to make recommendations to 
achieve a light/heavy equilibrium of the envelope, that 
could serve its purpose with a response from low 
energy architecture. 
 
 
2. WINERIES CLIMATIC NEEDS ON EACH 
PRODUCTION STAGE 
 
2.1 Fermentation 
 
Usually on metallic double-skinned tanks. 
 
Temperature is more important in the containers than 
in the total dwelling. Between the double skin of the 
casks where fermentation is performed, tubes are 
placed, in which hot or cold water circulate depending 
of what is needed at the time.  
 
As these casks have a superior opening, CO2 generated 
by chemical reactions, that has a higher density than 
air, descend and accumulates in the inferior part. 
Therefore inferior ventilation is needed to renovate the 
air.  
 
As light can also affect fermentation, therefore it has to 
be controlled in order to allow workers to perform their 
tasks attending to the wine production process. 
 
2.2  Breeding 
 
Usually on wooden (American or French oak) barrels 
and casks. 
 
In this stage stability within the following reference 
ranges is very important: 
 
- Air temperature between 12-16 ºC and relative 
humidity between 70-82 %. 
 
- Air movement: To eliminate bad odors and other air 
volatile substances that can filtrate through wooden 
barrels.  
 
- Minimal light. Only when it is absolutely needed. 
 
2.3 Storage 
 
Usually on glass bottles in cellars.  

Of all stages, in this last one inside the building, 
stability is also a priority. To keep the four 
microclimatic parameters (temperature, humidity, 
illumination and ventilation) controlled is essential to 
obtain the expected result. At this moment the wine is 
bottled and it will not be moved until it is ready. 
 
Very low illumination levels are here more important 
than in previous stages because the wine is bottled on 
glass that lets the light in, especially on the ultraviolet 
range of the spectrum, which can affect the most the 
final quality of the wine. 
 
 
3. “SANTA ANA” WINERY 
 
“Santa Ana” winery is situated in the North Oasis in 
the Province of Mendoza, Argentina, near the Andes 
Mountains (geographical coordinates: 32º52’South 
Latitude, 68º51’West Longitude, altitude 750 meters).  
 
Mendoza has a continental dry-temperate climate with 
hot summers and cold winters. In summer, mean 
highest air temperature are between 35ºC and 40 ºC, 
and lowest mean temperatures vary between 18ºC and 
22ºC. In winter mean minimum air temperatures are 
bellow 0ºC and mean maximum are between 10ºC and 
15ºC.  
 
Global Horizontal Radiation vary between 24000 and 
25700 kJ/m2 in summer,  between 14000 and 22700 
kJ/m2 in autumn and spring and between 9000 and 
11000 kJ/m2 in winter. Annually average of Global 
Horizontal Radiation is approximate to 18000 kJ/m², 
been 700 W/m² as the highest power at solar noon.  
 
Losses by long wave radiation are approximate to 180 
W/m2. Mean daily temperature differences reach 10ºC 
to 18ºC. 
 
3.1 Envelope materiality analyses 
 
3.1.1 Materiality 
 
“Santa Ana” Winery presents two types of envelope 
materiality: one heavy, mainly adobe walls berried 1 
meter in the ground and tile roofs with wooden 
structure, a mixture of Spanish cane (arundo donax) 
and earth as insulation; and one light, with metallic 
structure and galvanized steel walls and roofs. Walls 
present a concrete slab base, only roofs are insulated 
with polyurethane foam.  
 
The difference in the envelope materiality responds to 
the year of construction. The heavy envelope responds 
to the type of construction of the beginning of the 20th 

century. The light envelope is being built nowadays, 
mainly for bottling and storage phases, as the winery`s 
production has increased and fermentation and 



3 

 

breeding stages occupy the initial building. The choice 
of a light envelope responds to economical reasons as it 
is faster, cleaner and cheaper than the heavy traditional 
one.  
 
This type of materiality for the new construction is 
chosen even though executive engineers know for a 
fact that the winery performs better with the heavy 
envelope.  
 
Energy costs in Argentina are still very low (USD 0.15 
per kWh) and therefore it is cheaper and easier to buy a 
new chiller for the new space than to built in the 
traditional way. That is why it is very important to 
propose solutions that attend the requirements of fast 
assembly with pre-produced materials. 
 
Figures 1 and 2 show the two envelope alternatives. On 
figure 1 adobe walls have a white plaster finish and on 
roofs it is possible to appreciate Spanish canes and the 
wooden structure.  
 
Windows are high and light is filtrated with green 
lattices. They can be open and therefore they consent 
high ventilation. (Even though the recommended 
ventilation for fermentation is that windows should be 
placed low in the space). 
 
Figure 2 show new construction with galvanized steel 
walls and roofs. Light comes in through open doors 
and lanterns with fixed glass (ventilation is done by 
doors only, that are always open).  
 
These lanterns are horizontal and do not present any 
kind of solar protection. That may present more light 
that required for storage phase. Moreover, notice the 
electrical lighting that is on at noon. To take these into 
account, bottles are usually kept in opaque boxes 
protected from light. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
Fig. 1 and 2. From left to right, heavy old envelope and 
light new envelope. 
 
Tables 1 and 2 present physical properties of the main  
materials of the envelope classified by walls and roofs, 
light and heavy. The U value, that depends of the 

particular thickness used in the building, is a very clear 
indicator of the great variety of energy flux exchanges 
that the envelope is going through in each space. 
 
TABLE 1. Wall’s materials properties 

  
HEAVY WALL 

 
LIGHT WALL 

 
 

 

 
Earth 

 
Adobe 

Galvanized 
Steel 

Concrete 
Slabs 

ρ = Density            
(Kg/m3) 

 
1800 

 
1600 

 
7850 

 
2400 

Cρ = Specific 
Heat   

(J/Kg.K) 

 
1460 

 
650 

 
460 

 
805 

λ = Thermal 
Conductivity 

(W/m.K) 

 
2.10 

 
0.81 

 
45 

 
1.63 

e = 
Thickness 

(m) 

 
1 

 
0.5 

 
0.005 

 
0.10 

R = Thermal 
Resistance 
(m2.K/W) 

 
0.47 

 
0.61 

 
0.0001 

 
0.06 

U or Heat 
Transmittance 

(W/m2.K) 

 
2.12 

 
1.63 

 
10000 

 
1.66 

 
 
TABLE 2. Roof’s materials properties 

  
HEAVY ROOF 
 

 
LIGHT ROOF 

 
 

Arundo 
donax 
/ earth 

 
Tiles 

Galvanized 
Steel 

Polyure 
thane 
Foam 

ρ = Density            
(Kg/m3) 

 
75 

 
1300 

 
7850 

 
49 

Cρ = Specific 
Heat   

(J/Kg.K) 

 
1000 

 
840 

 
460 

 
1400 

λ = Thermal 
Conductivity 

(W/m.K) 

 
0.20 

 
0.49 

 
45 

 
0.021 

e = 
Thickness 

(m) 

 
0.2 

 
0.05 

 
0.005 

 
0.03 

R = Thermal 
Resistance 
(m2.K/W) 

 
0.5 

 
0.10 

 
0.0001 

 
1.42 

U or Heat 
Transmittance 

(W/m2.K) 

 
2 

 
10 

 
10000 

 
0.7 

 
 
3.1.2 Interior – exterior heat flux exchange 
 
In the heavy building of “Santa Ana” winery, 85% of 
the envelope is exposed to the exterior and therefore is 
located over the surface, and 15 % of the envelope is 



4 

 

berried in the ground. This subterranean percentage 
responds to differences in the ground that where 
maintained and profited when the winery was built. 
 
In the case of new construction, buildings are 
constructed over the ground surface. Figure 3 shows 
schemes of both cases. Also see Figure 10 for the 
building plan to compete the graphical information of 
ground and underground dimensions. 
 
 

 
 
Fig.3. From left to right heavy and light building 
schemes  
 
Possibilities of self-regulation are evaluated from the 
comparison of the heat flux of the two cases by using 
Fouriers Law Equation (Eq. 3). 
 
Q = U * S * (Te – Ti)                  (3) 
 
Where: 
Q =   flux (W) 
U =   heat transmission coefficient (W/m2.K) 
S =   Envelope surface (m2) 
Te =  Exterior temperature (K) 
Ti =  Interior temperature (K) 
 
To calculate energy fluxes for the two types of space 
and compare their possibilities of self-climatic 
regulation, there will be established two fixed 
parameters: 
 
S =   Envelope surface = 100 m2 
∆T (Te – Ti) = 10 K 
 
The following results were obtained. They show a 
tendency of the amount of energy flux that will be 
exchanged: 
 
Heavy walls: Q = 1,630 W  
 
Heavy roofs: Q = 2,000 W 
 
Light walls: Q = 10,000,000 W 
 
Light roofs: Q = 700 W 
 
Notice that exchange values are similar in walls and 
roofs in the heavy envelope and very different in the 
light envelope. Insulation of the galvanized steel makes 
an important difference, as this value is also lower than 
the ones obtained in the heavy envelope.  
 

For energy exchange analysis it is crucial that every 
element of the envelope is insulated no matter if its 
construction is heavy or light, traditional or pre-
assambled. 
 
Nevertheless, there will be important differences in 
these two envelopes when taking into account inertial 
benefits in a temperate continental climate with high 
variations between day and night and between seasons. 
 
3.1.3 Thermal inertia 
 
Thermal inertia calculus are performed with “Eduardo 
Torroja Institut Equations” (Eq. 1 and 2) using data 
provided in Tables 1 and 2. 
 
I = R*S24                                                    (1)      
                            
S24 = 8.48*10 

-3 * √ (λ *ρ *Cρ)                (2) 
 
Where: 
I  =   thermal inertia adimensional parameter  
R =   thermal resistivity (thickness “e” / λ) (m2.K/W) 
S24 =  twenty four hour factor 
Cρ  = specific heat at a constant pressure (J/ kg.K)      
ρ  =   material density (kg/m3) 
λ  =   thermal conductivity (W/m.K) 
 
Thermal inertia of the different materials that compose 
the heavy old envelope are: 
 
- Walls:  
Earth (1m thickness) I = 94.86 
Adobe (0.50 m thickness)  I = 38.91 
 
- Roofs: 
Arundo donax /earth (0.5 m thickness) I = 10.38 
Tile (0.05 m thickness)  I = 6.32 
 
Thermal inertia of the different materials that compose 
the light new envelope are: 
 
- Walls: 
Concrete Slabs (0.10 m thickness) I = 9.23 
Galvanized Steel (0.005 thickness)  I = 0.12 
 
- Roofs: 
Polyurethane Foam (0.03 m thickness)  I = 4.59 
Galvanized Steel (0.005 thickness)  I = 0.12 
 
In this case, heavy envelope provides internal spaces 
with a crucial property: thermal stability. Light 
envelope does not have the same possibilities. 
 
Up to this point there has been performed a complete 
envelope analysis using theoretical methods to evaluate 
the performance of “Santa Ana” winery. The next step 
is to perform in situ temperature  measurements.  
 

 



 

4. DETERMINATION OF CRITICAL CONTROL 
POINTS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 4. Flux diagram of the industrial process. 
Detection of environmental and energetic critical 
control points. 

TION OF CRITICAL CONTROL 

. Flux diagram of the industrial process. 
Detection of environmental and energetic critical 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 
Fig. 5 Critical control point 1
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
Fig. 6 Critical control point 2 and 3
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 7 Critical control point 3
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 8 Critical control point 4
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 9 Critical control point 5

5 

Critical control point 1 – Milling / Press 

Critical control point 2 and 3. Fermentation 

Critical control point 3. Breeding 

Critical control point 4. Bottling. 

t 5. Storage.  



 

Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Points (HACCP) 
(4) (5) food safety methodology was adapted 
specific environmental and energetic issues concerning 
wine production.  
 
The winery has already certified the following food 
harmlessness policies: IRAM BMP (Manufacture 
practices), HACCP (Hazard Analysis and Critical 
Control Points) and BRC (highest level): British Retail 
Consortium Standard Approval. 
 
Therefore, HACCP methodology was already 
and accepted by the management of the winery a
was possible to adapt it to environmental and energetic 
purposes. Consequently, in this study critical control 
points determine the specific moments in which 
temperature is essential to the final quality of wine.
 
Environmental and energetic critical control points 
where detected through a flux diagram in the industrial 
process. (See Fig. 4). In Fig. 5 to 9 photographs of the 
architectural spaces related to critical control points are 
presented.  
 
 
5. SUMMER IN SITU TEMPERATURE 
MEASUREMENTS 
 
Temperature measurements were performed following 
the six identified critical control points. A seventh 
measure was taken in the exterior in order to evaluate 
the envelope performance. 
 
To perform in situ temperature measureme
Walkabout methodology proposed by Guerra (
used. This method is adapted to field trips in
difficult to set data loggers for a long period of time.
consists mainly in taking several measurements of each 
space in a short period of time. 
 
For air temperature measurements an ONSET HOBO 
U14-001 data logger was used. It was programmed to 
take a measurement every 15 seconds in order to 
register air temperature while walking through the 
different spaces of the winery.  
 
Measurements where performed on January
and 27th (summer in the South Hemisphere) at solar 
noon and the complete field trip took an hour.
 
Management of data loggers followed the 
recommendations of Longobardi and Hancock 
an efficient use of these instruments.  
 
Figure 10 shows a plan of the winery in which the six 
architectural spaces related to each critical control 
point are identified. Table 3 complements this 
graphical information with the indication of the 

Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Points (HACCP) 
methodology was adapted ad hoc to 

specific environmental and energetic issues concerning 

The winery has already certified the following food 
IRAM BMP (Manufacture good 

(Hazard Analysis and Critical 
(highest level): British Retail 

already known 
by the management of the winery and it 

adapt it to environmental and energetic 
Consequently, in this study critical control 

points determine the specific moments in which 
temperature is essential to the final quality of wine. 

control points 
where detected through a flux diagram in the industrial 

photographs of the 
architectural spaces related to critical control points are 

SUMMER IN SITU TEMPERATURE 

Temperature measurements were performed following 
critical control points. A seventh 

measure was taken in the exterior in order to evaluate 

temperature measurements, the 
methodology proposed by Guerra (6) was 

used. This method is adapted to field trips in which it is 
for a long period of time. It 

in taking several measurements of each 

ONSET HOBO 
001 data logger was used. It was programmed to 

take a measurement every 15 seconds in order to 
register air temperature while walking through the 

January 13th, 20th, 
(summer in the South Hemisphere) at solar 

noon and the complete field trip took an hour. 

Management of data loggers followed the 
recommendations of Longobardi and Hancock (7) for 

shows a plan of the winery in which the six 
architectural spaces related to each critical control 

. Table 3 complements this 
graphical information with the indication of the 

production process involved in each critical co
point associated to mean measurement results.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 10. “Santa Ana” winery p
 
 
TABLE 3. References to Fig.
air temperature on each critical control p
 

 

“Santa Ana” Winery          
Measured critical control points

         
        Milling / Pneumatic press 
        
        Fermentation – Metallic Tanks
         
        Breeding – Oak Barrels 
          
        Breeding – Metallic Tanks 
          
        Bottling (filling/coating) 
         
       Storage 
         
 Exterior 

 
 

6 

production process involved in each critical control 
measurement results. 

” winery plan.  

. References to Fig. 10 and measured mean 
air temperature on each critical control point. 

Ana” Winery          
oints 

Mean Air 
Temperature 

 

 
 

31.5 ºC 

Metallic Tanks 
 

25 ºC 
 

25 ºC 

 
 

26.5 ºC 
 

32 ºC 
 

30 ºC 
 

35 ºC 

Access 



7 

 

6. AUXILIARY ENERGY REQUIREMENTS 
 
Grapes arrive at a mean temperature of 26ºC,  that 
temperature has to drop to 8ºC after undergoing the 
press and the first cooling serpentine. Subsequently, in 
metallic double-skinned tanks juices’ temperature has 
to be stabilized at -5ºC. If we take into account that 
measured air temperature in the press is usually over 
33ºC and 25ºC in the location of metallic double-
skinned tanks, the ∆T is 25ºC in the first case and 30ºC 
in the second case. These temperature differences make 
the use of chillers so intensive, and therefore the use of 
auxiliary energy. 
 
 “Santa Ana” winery has tree chillers: one of 500.000 
B.T.U./hour, and two of 300.000 B.T.U/hour, for a 
total of 1.100.00 B.T.U/hour.  
 
All year long 500.000 B.T.U./hour (1 chiller) are used 
for breeding and bottling. Four months a year, during 
fermentation, the amount of B.T.U/hour increases to 
1.100.000 (3 chillers) to stabilize the fermentation 
process of 1.500.000 of liters. 
 

 
7. RESULT DISCUSSION 
 
Heavy old envelope keeps temperatures 8.5ºC to 10ºC 
bellow outside measurements; while spaces with light 
new envelopes are only 3ºC to 5ºC below outside 
temperatures. 
 
These results are coherent with the inertia of the 
envelope materials. The heavy old walls’ inertia 
coefficient was calculated between 38 and 95, while 
light new walls have an inertia coefficient of 0.22 to 
10. 
 
Nevertheless, neither resolve completely wine 
production needs of climatic regulation as air 
temperature needs to be between 12ºC to 16ºC.  Steel 
10ºC bellow the best measured temperature! This is the 
cause of the excessive energetic consumption of 
8.400.000 B.T.U/hour per year.  
 
If the winery was underground the inertia coefficient 
would be around 100 for all walls and roofs. That is the 
main reason why it is always preferable to have the 
critical moments of the process, especially those that 
take a long time such as barrel breeding, in an 
underground level to save cooling energy and assure all 
year long stable temperatures 
. 

 
8. ENVIRONMENTAL REFURBISHMENT 
RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
As it is almost impossible to change the level of a built 
winery, environmental and energetic recommendations 

must be orientated to better the existent envelope of 
this building,  that will continue functioning for many 
years ahead. The concern of considering existing 
buildings as research objects follows Kohler and 
Hassler theories (8).  
 
On heavy old envelope construction, the 
recommendation is to diminish undesired infiltration 
by windows and doors, as they are made from old 
wood and leave important renovations per hour. 
Renovation may be efficient and flexible enough so 
management can adapt them to specific production 
needs, for example to ventilate CO2 during 
fermentation. 
 
In what respects new construction, it must be fast and 
cheap to attend management needs and resources but it 
is very important that an equilibrium between light and 
heavy envelope is accomplished, particularly in 
temperate, very variable climates such as Mendoza’s. 
For this, it is strongly recommended to continue 
building the concrete base, and if it is possible to make 
it wider and longer. The light galvanized iron walls 
must be insulated as the roof. The heavy base will 
provide the needed inertia and the insulated walls will 
reduce energy flux exchanges. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
(1) Yravedra Soriano, María José. Arquitectura y 
cultura del vino. Madrid: Munilla-Lería. 2003. 
(2) Moreno, J. La bodega: modelo de arquitectura 
sostenible. Master Thesis. Barcelona: Universidad 
Politécnica de Cataluña. 2008. 
(3) Rivera Medina, A. M.  Entre la Cordillera y la 
Pampa: la Vitivinicultura en Cuyo, Argentina. San 
Juan: EFU. Tesis Doctoral Universidad de Sevilla 
(1987). 
(4) Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Points 
(HACCP) 
(5) IRAM 14104 Implementación y gestión de un 
sistema de análisis de peligros y puntos críticos de 
control (HACCP). Buenos Aires. 2001. 
(6) Guerra, J. Habitar el desierto. PhD Thesis. 
Barcelona: Universidad Politécnica de Cataluña. 2003. 
(7) Longobardi and Hancok. Field trip strategies. 
Florence: Proceedings of TIA 2000.  
(8) Kohler N. y Hassler U. The building stock as a 
research object. Building Research & Information Vol. 
30, Nº4. Taylor & Francis. 2000. 
 
 
Acknowledgements 
 
Authors would like to thank Eng. Luciano Mazziotti 
for helping with specific information and access to 
“Santa Ana” winery; FONCYT (Argentina) and CA1-
ETSAB-UPC (Spain) for funding this research.  


