












































Microsoft Word - IBE-15-0308-Matic Final  Correction 25.06.2016.


   

RES Integrated Refurbishment Approach for Low-Rise 
Residential Prefabricated Building in Belgrade, Serbia 

Dubravka Matic1, Jaume Roset Calzada1 and Marija S. Todorovic2 
 

1 ETSAB, Universidad Politécnica de Catalunya, Barcelona, Spain 
2 Academy of Engineering Science of Serbia and Southeast University, China 
 
Corresponding author: 
 
Dubravka Matic, Dept. de Construcciones I, ETSAB, Universitat Politecnica de Catalunya, 
Avda. Diagonal, 649, 08028 Barcelona, Spain. 
Email: duda.matic@gmail.com 

Abstract 

The refurbishment of the existing housing stock has a twofold aim: to decrease 
consumption of fossil fuels and to reduce the CO2 emissions. The main focus of the 
presented paper is the evaluation of the integrated design approach applied in scenarios 
for refurbishment of the prefabricated residential multi-apartment building. The criteria 
used in searching for the best approach to the RES integrated refurbishment were 
minimized energy loads, minimized CO2 emissions and improved indoor environment 
quality, health and comfort. After in-depth environmental analysis, a series of EEI (energy 
efficiency improvement) measures were implemented, as a comprehensive optimization 
of the building’s envelope structure, natural and mixed ventilation and source energy 
delivery. The building’s dynamic behaviour and energy efficiency have been analyzed 
and optimized by the Building Performance Simulation and PV panels’ integration for the 
Typical Meteorological Year of Belgrade, Serbia. Energy refurbishment should be 
approached in an organized, pragmatic and interdisciplinary way. Hence, the focus 
should be not only on the latest leading-edge technology, but on the synergy of different 
practices and principles in order to ensure the path to sustainable development and 
achieving desired objectives. 

 

 



 2

Keywords  

Energy refurbishment, prefabricated buildings, building's envelope structure, final 
energy, BPS – building-performance-simulations, renewable energy sources (RES)  

 

Introduction – energy refurbishment of residential buildings 

Increasingly, we are witnessing "weather extremes" with catastrophic 
consequences, described by many as meteorological - geological manifestations of 
global warming. Depletion of fossil energy resources, climate change and 
environmental pollution threaten the life support systems on Earth. To stop further 
progression of these irreversible processes, it is necessary to spread the RES (renewable 
energy sources) technologies utilization. However, their efficient and cost-effective 
implementation must be preceded by the improvement and optimization of energy 
efficiency. All kinds of energy loads are to be reduced to the lowest possible level, by 
the application of all known available measures, knowledge, technology and energy-
efficient systems and equipment. Energy efficiency in buildings is particularly 
important due to the buildings’ highest share in overall energy use, and the fact that 
extremely large potential savings can be obtained particularly in buildings. [1] 

 Buildings account for 40% of the total primary energy consumption and 36% of 
CO2 emissions in the EU. [2]  

In 2002 the EU adopted its first directive on the energy performance of buildings 
(EPBD), which points out the minimum requirements for new buildings and renovation 
of existing ones. The most current EU plan set new measures and new targets to be 
achieved - to 2020, when every new building in the EU must be "nearly-zero" energy, 
and by 2018, when every public building, whether newly-constructed or renovated, 
must be "nearly-zero" energy with minimized loads covered exclusively by renewable 
energy sources. 

The refurbishment of the existing buildings has a fundamental role in meeting these 
challenges, and without any doubt their great numerical superiority in relation to the 
new buildings in Europe represents a major sector for achieving overall goals for energy 
savings and reduction of Serbia’s CO2 emissions levels, as well as globally. [3] Without 
exploiting the huge saving potential of the building stock, the EU will miss its reduction 
targets.  

New Belgrade residential buildings 

The municipality of New Belgrade, one of the 17 districts in Belgrade, occupies 
4.096 ha and consists of 72 blocks. New Belgrade has a strong issue emerging related to 
the necessity of rehabilitation of the post-second World War collective housing, built 
between 1950 and 1980. Architecture and urban planning principles were used to design 



  3

and build New Belgrade, with modest reduced sizes of apartments, with spacious green 
areas between blocks of buildings and natural ventilation, coinciding at many points 
with the current sustainable urban development approach that promotes quality of 
interior and exterior living space with minimal impacts on the environment. [3] 

The interesting fact is that more or less the same building design, technology, 
material and spatial organization were applied and implemented, which provides wide 
potential for future refurbishment interventions. 
 

 
Unfortunately, the last 25 years, many new buildings were built outside the context 

of the architectural and urban heritage of New Belgrade. Poor maintenance over the 
years resulted in changed panorama of New Belgrade, as the aesthetically unmatched 
mix of new "hi-tech" commercial - office buildings and dilapidated residential housing 
with visibly damaged façades, side by side.  

During the life cycle of these prefabricated buildings, tenants´ lack of interest for 
building maintenance and improvement, their social and economic status had led to 
obvious physical deterioration and decrepitude of these buildings, that cause a sense of 
desertedness and rejection as well as a lack of hope that changes are possible, since 
there are no adequate institutions that would offer citizens the models for solving their 
inadequate housing conditions. Many of them have visibly damaged façades, moisture 
penetration into the walls and lack of indoor comfort, primarily inadequate air 
temperature with high infiltration of outdoor air, regardless of extremely high energy 
consumption for heating from the Belgrade district heating system and high 
consumption of energy for air-conditioning units. 

Buildings’ façades, as reflection of the modernist approach of the époque, are 
characterized with stiffness and architectural repetition in terms of aesthetics, and 
nowadays are visibly damaged due to series of inadecuate actions performed by 
apartment owners – closing terraces by glazing, without any consideration of visual 
identity of the building, illegal new opening on the façades, expanding private gardens 
at the expence of public/community green areas, etc. 

These building are the ones that represent the identity of New Belgrade, and it is 
necessary to find a solution for the future architectural revitalization, not only in order 

Figure 1. Residential building blocks in New Belgrade 



 4

to preserve the buildings, but also to improve residents’ thermal and health comfort, as 
well as provision of cleaner and healthier indoor environment, along with reduction of 
energy consumption and aesthetic qualities. 

Aim of the study and methodology 

The study aim encompass: architectural re-design using "passive" and "active" 
measures to rectify energy efficiency issues of residential buildings, bringing them to 
the level which could lead to their deep (RES integrated) energy refurbishment; 
generating a dynamic and contemporary image of the housing and the surrounding area, 
while respecting bioclimatic principles; improvement of the overall internal 
environment quality while dealing with the daily life of its inhabitants; providing a 
unique response to the façade design to break its rigidity while  respecting the historical 
legacy of modernist architecture. 

Deep Energy Renovation of a building implies energy renovation which 
minimizes the energy needs of the building to the level of zero or net zero energy and 
presumes simultaneous integration of technologies using renewable energy sources in, 
on or near the building itself to provide satisfaction to all residual energy needs. [4] 
  

Methodology  

Conducted study encompassed an analysis of building’s structure, definitions of 
several scenarios and models of the building’s architectural renovation, investigation of 
the potential energy refurbishment models and EEI measures.  

The framework for methodology included: 
1. Recollection of the technical data from new Belgrade´s historical archive 

for case study building. In-depth analysis for the existing state of the case 
study building. 

2. Creation of a building model for simulation of the existing status of the 
asset, considering initial design of the building with its original materials 
and thermos-physical properties; Every floor and apartment with 
correspondent thermal zones and subdivisions, clearly indicating heated and 
non-heated zones; Existing HVAC system (district heating + split air-
conditioning) with its respective schedules.  

3. Building physics´ optimization of all created models. 
4. Definitions of scenarios (models) for complex energy improvement used for 

BPS-Building Performance Simulation using DesignBuilder software [5] for 
the typical meteorological year (TMY) of Belgrade.  (Belgrade has 
a moderate continental climate with average annual air 
temperature of 11.7ºC. Winter is not so severe, with an average of 21 days 



  5

with temperature below zero. January is the coldest month, with average 
temperature of -0.5ºC. The hottest month July has an average temperature 
of 21.7ºC and the highest officially recorded temperature was +43.1ºC on 
24 July 2007). [6] Simulation is performed on the whole building, output 
intervals are daily and simulation period for the whole year. 

5. The best model was determined after results evaluation (indoor comfort 
parameters, heating and cooling loads, annual energy demands, internal 
loads of lighting, people and home appliances, sanitary water heating, 
primary energy demand) obtained in the previous step. 

 

Household existing status 

The building is located in the "Block 70" in New Belgrade, in the street 
Omladinskih Brigada 164-174 (hereafter OB172) was selected as a “case study 
building”. A four-storey building with a useful area of 6683 m2, it consists of three 
wings that form a “U” shape in the floorplan (Figure 2(b)), with attached one-floor 
garages at corners, and with one substation of BE-DHS for all six entrances. It was 
selected as one of five typologically different buildings in the neighborhood of block 70. 

 
The current status shows obvious façade deterioration due to negligence and a 

series of changes carried out by tenants, such as closing terraces by glazing and illegal 

Figure 2. Building section (a) and ground floor (b), 1‐4th floor plan (c) and street façade (d) 



 6

openings causing disruption of the façade. The roof covering layer is not reconstructed 
from the date of construction; only marginal repairs were made to roof water 
infiltrations that have not been repaired completely. Approximately 80% of apartments 
have split air-conditioning units installed differently on the façade. Almost every flat on 
the ground level has extended differently its garden surface at the expense of the public 
garden area between three building wings, making an image of disorder at exterior 
level. (Figure 3) 

 
 
 

 

Models and scenarios of the building’s energy renovation 

After the preliminary study of the existing building and the possible passive EEI 
and architectural measures to be applied on each case study building, the following 
models-scenarios were created. Building performance simulations were done for the 
following models of building OB172: the EB – existing building model based on the 
original design and a group of six models. Models  IB1-IB3 models of existing building 
volume but thermally improved envelope (Improved Building): (IB1- model in 
accordance with JUS-previous Serbian standard [7], IB2 - in accordance with the 
German standard [8], IB3 - in accordance with the most recent Serbian standard [9], IB4 - 
Model with enhanced "U" coefficients of the model IB3, a glazed terrace and green 
roof; IB5 - Model with coefficients IB4, with improved program in the ground floor 
facilities as garages and storage rooms ; IB6-improved model over the IB5 with 
ventilated façade on the outside facade east and west side. 

Table 1 presents the heat transfer coefficient “U” [W/m2K] of the building’s main 
structure elements.  

 
 

 

Figure 3. Current state of the façades of the case study building 



  7

Table 1.   Heat transfer coefficient U of the building’s structure elements 
Models EB IB1 IB2 IB3 IB4 IB5 IB6 

Structure 
elements 

Heat transfer coefficient U [W/m2K] 

External wall 1 1.66 0.54 0.38 0.28 0.28 0.28 0.28 

External wall 2 1.93 0.61 0.4 0.19 0.38 0.38 0.38 

Ground floor 1.2 0.66 0.26 0.26 0.26 0.26 0.26 

Roof 2.34 0.36 0.41 0.24 0.24 0.24 0.24 

Window 3.20 1.5 1.5 0.8 0.8 0.8 0.8 

 

Energy optimization results of the low-rise prefabricated building 

Simulation results for upgraded models are presented in diagrams in Figures 4, 5 
and 6. Presented simulation results of different types of final energy demand in Figure 4 
(a), show that the building’s current state has the biggest heat losses from air infiltration, 
exterior walls without insulation and windows. Figure 4 (b) clearly shows the savings 
achievement in the final simulation model IB6, in different final energy demands 
compared to the current state.  

 

 
 

Figure 5 clearly presents improvement in heat losses (44%) and in heat gains (42%) of 
savings for the last two models – IB5 and IB6.  
 
 

Thermal 
  
Electricity 

Figure 4. (a) Annual energy demand for different purposes ‐ building’s current state and  
                 (b) Annual energy demand for different purposes ‐ building’s final optimized model IB6 



 8

 
                   Figure 5. Specific heat losses and specific heat gains in W/m2 

 

The diagram in Figure 6(a) shows that reduction of specific annual cooling 
consumption by 38% is achievable by upgrading the façade envelope, but increasing the 
thickness of insulation to a certain level brings a jump up in related cooling values 
(model IB4). After applying other measures, like placing a well-ventillated facade, 34% 
of savings is achieved (IB6). Figure 6(b)also shows that specific annual energy needs 
for heating can be reduced by 57% (IB4) only treating the building envelope, while the 
application of other measures reaches 59% savings (IB6). This result is very important 
confirmation that the energy optimization must be performed as a whole year analysis 
of the energy needs of the building, both for heating and cooling in a climate of 
Belgrade and Serbia. 

 
 
 

 

 

 

A similar study conducted in 2009 for the four-floor building situated at 23–35 
Aleksinackih Rudara Street/New Belgrade [10], with the similar structure and typology 
as case study building OB172, shows that the annual energy consumption for heating 
might be reduced by four times only by improving the façade envelope, and required 
cooling or air-conditioning power indicates possible decrease of the same by about five 
times. This building was an object of the research of several potentially interesting 
models for the implementation of the measures intended to improve energy efficiency 

Figure 6. Specific annual consumption: (a) Cooling, (b) Heating 



  9

and identify a possibility of optimizing the energy efficiency of the existing residential 
building for the RES integration. 
 

Architectural measures 

Presented scenarios studied globally, a part from sustainable EEI measures, local 
construction practices, and gave models of improvement suitable for this region. The 
proposed solution for the energy renovation of the building envelope includes the 
installation of thermal insulation composite system, window and door glazing and 
carpentry replacement (from single glazing to double (IB1, IB2) and triple low-e 
glazing (IB3)), and implementation of ventilated façades / IB6 / on the east and west.  

Model IB4 proposed to change the roof into extensive green roof which have a big 
influence on the thermal inertia of the building and resolves the issues of the current 
rainwater infiltrations. Green roofs have been shown to impact positively on a 
building’s energy consumption by improving the roofs thermal performance. [11] These 
areas could be used as community areas for the tenants. 

One of the essential elements proposed was the glazed enclosure of the balconies, 
which affected on global change of appearance of the building envelope, by means of 
sliding glass elements, which creates a thermal buffer zone in the winter (IB4,IB5,IB6). 
Ventilation and daylighting are not compromised by such intervention and shading 
devices are incorporated to improve comfort in summertime. Anyway, intensive 
ventilation is requiered to prevent additional heat ovrload.  

In the complex of the building OB172 tenants mainly use garages as storage rooms, 
poorly maintained, whose promotion and change of utility - for example, to sports 
centres, recreational areas, shops or just for rent - would raise the aesthetic level of the 
building and of course the residents’ standard of living.  

The public space between the wings, to which all terraces are oriented, is initially 
designed as a park and playground for kids, but is currently pretty much abandoned. It is 
possible to install a greenhouse with lightweight construction for growing plants and 
vegetables which, besides its environmental advantages, could encourage tenants to 
participate in the maintenance of the building and its surroundings, and has added value 
to the asset, but it´s necessary to be restored. The advantage of this building typology is 
better integration of the building with the environment and surrounding, providing 
greater comfort of tenants. 

One of the major benefits of the rehabilitation of the low-rise buildings, as in the 
case with OB172, is the posibility to build one or two floor levels over existing floors, 
depending on the structure, which can solve the roof leaking problems and also can 
financially contribute to the renovation itself. Proposed models of improvements did not 
consider this intervention  because the objetive was to look for minimum building 
surface increment.  



 10

Although residents tried to archieve their needs for internal space redesigning on 
their own, all those interventions should be reconsidered in eventual future renewal 
activities. Any future refurbishment actions should be based on structural evaluation as 
well as potential of multifamily housing quality improvement, in order to achieve 
optimal service life and durability of buildings. 
 

Building integrated photovoltaic design (bipv) and performance  

 
Conversion of the solar energy and other renewable resources to electrical energy is 

of high interest due to the big electricity demand in buildings, and integration of the 
renewable energy’s technologies has an important role in providing a long-term energy 
supply. 

Serbia has average annual energy influx of global solar radiation on horizontal 
surface of 1,387 kWh/m2 and the sun shines 2096 hours per annum. The solar radiation 
average is around 40 per cent higher than the European average. The building location 
is 44°47'54"N   20°23'49"E, elevation - 80 m above sea level, with annual irradiation on 
horizontal plane per day -3630 (Wh/m2/day), on optimally inclined plane - 4130 
(Wh/m2/day) and on plane at angle 90 degrees - 2760 (Wh/m2/day) [12]. 

Concerning the construction works and existing building structure statics, low 
weight PV cells and the PV system's simplicity would make it the most appropriate of 
the solar technologies candidates to be integrated in the renewed façade.  

Surfaces for the façades’ PV arrays integration have been determined, taking into 
account existing obstructions to the incident solar radiation. In the case of this low-rise 
building, implementation of a grid-connected subsystem of Building Integrated 
Photovoltaics (BIPV) was taken into account, meaning PV modules integrated into the 
building envelope surfaces, such as the roof and façades, properly oriented towards the 
sun, which simultaneously serve as envelope material and save the cost for external 
rendering layers. The BIPV integration system was defined: Integration of the BIPV on 
the outer façade within the ventilated façade (90º) on the east and west, resulting in 
44.30 MWh (Table 2) potential annual PV produced electrical energy. Available areas 
on the roof level with PV array optimal inclination, resulting in 93.66 MWh (Table 2). 
For the glazed terraces overlooking the garden, PV installation is not proposed because 
of aesthetic reasons, keeping the built-in pots as a part of the building’s identity. In the 
case of a low-rise building of this type, more area for PV integration is available on the 
roof, which has no obstruction in insolation, while efficiency of the façade-integrated 
panels is affected by the greenery/trees which are positioned along the façade.  
 
 



  11

 
Table 2.   PV panel areas, installed PV power and produced electricity 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
Figure 7 shows the current state of the building (a), possible integration of the 

BIPV (b) and glazed terraces overlooking the public garden (c). 

 

 

 

 
 

Figure 7. (a) Existing façade, (b) BIPV panel integration (outer façade), (c) Glazed terraces 
overlooking the interior garden 

Conclusion 

The presented preliminary results more than convincingly confirm and emphasize 
the significance and magnitude of possible effects of the project implementation, not 
only on the energy of residential buildings, but on the entire complex energy 
consumption in New Belgrade. 

Minimizing energy loads by "passive" actions is the first step of the bio-climatic 
renovation of residential buildings, which has to be complemented by integration of the 
RES energy sources to be able to approach zero energy status.  

Simulation results stressed possible heating reduction by 60% only by “passive” 
actions, and further intervention by HVAC EEI measures could provide more reduction 
over IB6 model, by improving heating system with mechanical ventilation with heating 

    Pv type- Sharp ND-Q0E7H Solar Panel  

  PV 
panels 
(m2) 

Installed 
power 
[kW] 

Produced 
electricity   
(kWh/m2) 

Produced 
electricity   
(MWh) 

Roof – South (33˚) 577.71 70.56 162.06 93.66 
East (90˚) 243 29.6 91.13 22.15 
West (90˚) 243 29.6 91.13 22.15 
South (90˚) 0 0 0.00 0.00 
Total 1063.71 129.76 344.32 137.96 



 12

recovery. Cooling loads can be minimized by 38% even without changing existing 
HVAC system. Optimizing energy refurbishment measures for a different building 
types is of crucial importance, so the existing building stock can be treated in a 
systematic manner in order to achieve full energy savings potential. 

Using existing buildings rather than demolishing and building new structures 
preserves their embodied energy, decreasing primary energy use and, therefore, 
atmospheric carbon dioxide emissions.  

The implementation of the preliminary architectural and EE improvements in the 
building would have the following additional benefits: increase of the flat (housing 
space) market value and positive social effects and incentive resident’s awareness on 
energy consumption. EE measures targeted at buildings can also improve higher IA 
(indoor air) and indoor environment (IE) quality, with corresponding health benefit. In 
addition to direct cost savings, sustainable refurbishment can provide indirect economic 
benefits to both the building owner and society.  

Creating a new image of the environment, with dynamic changes in the architecture 
and promising possible energy improvements, this case study building is a good 
reference for refurbishment practices in this neighbourhood. With its great architectural 
and urban potential, New Belgrade is a municipality with huge opportunities for energy 
savings, and could be a leader in RES, particularly BIPV energy renovation of existing 
residential buildings. 

 
Acknowledgement 

This research received no specific grant from any funding agency in the public, 
commercial, or not-for-profit sectors. 
Declaration 

The Authors declare that there is no conflict of interest. 
 
 

References 

[1] Todorovic S. M.: Large Scale Residential/Municipal RES Integrated Refurbishment Construction and 
HVAC Systems Engineering R&D Needs, PUBLISHED ASHRAE Transactions, Volume118, Part 1, 
2012. 
[2] Atanasiu B. Principles for nearly zero-energy Buildings. Buildings Performance Institute Europe 
(BPIE), Belgium, 2011 
[3] Matic, D.; Todorovic, M.S.; Roset, J. RES integrated refurbishment of prefabricated building in 
Belgrade, Serbia. A: REHVA World Congress. "Clima 2013: 11th REHVA World Congress & 8th 
International Conference on IAQVEC: energy, efficient, smart & heathly buildings: proceedings". Praga: 
2013, p. A0971-1-A0971-11. 
[4] Joyce A The Fundamental Importance of Buildings in Future EU Energy Saving Policies, REHVA 
Journal 2010; 47(5):14-22.   
[5] Design Builder software, http://www.designbuilder.co.uk/ (Accessed  15 August 2013) 



  13

[6] http://www.beograd.rs/en/discover-belgrade/201193-climate/ (accessed 10 October 2013) 
[7] JUS U.J5.600:1998, Heat in civil engineering - Requirements for design and manufacturing of 
buildings National registry: 7/98  (19.01.1998.), Belgrade ,Serbia (Previous Serbian standard). 
[8] EnEV2002 (Energieeinsparverordnung 2002), Federal Gazzete, Bonn, Germany  (01.02.2002.) 
[9] SRPS EN ISO 13790:2010 Energy performance of buildings - Calculation of energy use for space 
heating and cooling (ISO 13790:2008). Institute for standardization of Serbia, National registry: 06/10  
(29.01.2010.), Belgrade, Serbia  
[10] Todorovic SM, Ilincic N, Martinovic I.and Ecim O. Photovoltaic Integrated Energetic, Architectural 
And Constructional Optimization Of Existing Residential New Belgrade’s Buildings, SMEITS. HVAC 
Journal 2009; 3: 41-49.  
[11] Castleton HF, Stovin V, Beck SBM, Davison JB, Green roofs; building energy savings and the 
potential for retrofit, Energy and Buildings,42 (2010) 1582-1591 
[12] (PVGIS). Photovoltaic Geographical Information System. 
http://re.jrc.ec.europa.eu/pvgis/imaps/index.htm (Accessed 10 March 2013). 

 

 

 

 


