












































KEYNOTES


THE PERCEPTION OF LIGHT AFFECTED BY COLOUR SURFACES 
IN INDOOR SPACES 

J. López; H. Coch; A. Isalgué; C. Alonso; A. Aguilar 

Architecture & Energy. Barcelona School of Architecture. UPC. 

Av. Diagonal, 649, 7th floor 08028 Barcelona 

ABSTRACT 

Visual comfort in indoor spaces depends on the amount and quality of light available and also 
on space characteristics. One of the most influential aspects is the colour of surfaces defining 
a space. Each colour has a reflectance coefficient resulting from how much light is reflected 
back from the coloured surface. However, from the observer’s point of view, there are other 
factors that may affect visual perception of a space painted with colours. Some of them are 
psychological and depend on the background of the observer while other factors are 
physiological and are strongly connected to the sense of sight. According to this theory, 
architectural spaces could take advantage of the benefits of colour to improve visual responses 
for users. 

In this paper, we present a case study in which three coloured spaces with different lighting 
conditions were assessed by a sample of observers. At the same time, luminance and 
illuminance measurements were taken so as to compare these values with light perceived in 
the spaces. The results of this field work show the influence that colour has on the perception 
of light in three-dimensional spaces and contribute to the study of colour in architecture. 

Keywords: architecture, colour, visual comfort, light 

INTRODUCTION  

Dealing with visual comfort implies keeping in mind features of light and space 
configuration. Although attention is usually focused on light, space characteristics are vital to
the visual response. One of the most important characteristics is the colour used on surfaces 
shaping a space. As a physical phenomenon, colour is a consequence of interaction between 
the reflecting properties of materials and the nature of incidental light. However, we can also 
explain colour from a perception standpoint, connected to psychological factors such as 
culture, age or education, and to physiological factors as well. These are influenced by the 
human visual system which shows a different degree of sensitivity based on light wavelength 
and objects. According to the photopic V (λ) and scotopic V’ (λ) human response curve [1], 
maximum sensitivity corresponds to 555 and 505 nm, respectively. In photopic vision, this 
value is perceived as a greenish yellow. 

In consequence, under the same lighting conditions, spaces can be perceived in a different 
way depending on the colours they are painted. On the one hand, the physical value which 
represents the amount of light returned by surfaces is luminance. It depends on incidental light 
and the reflection index of the colour. On the other hand, it has been noted that surfaces with 
the same luminance value but different colours are actually seen as having different 
brightness. In fact, brightness is the subjective perception of luminance [2]. Several studies 
have been done in the field of brightness and colour, but most of them compare small samples 
of colour among them as well as in contrast to a lighter or darker background [3]. 

CISBAT 2013 - September 4-6, 2013 - Lausanne, Switzerland 469



Nevertheless, from the point of view of architectural spaces, which corresponds to a three-
dimensional experience, little research has been conducted.

The aim of this study is to compare the physical phenomenon of colour and light with the 
human perception of it in order to determine if they coincide. As colour and brightness are the 
main parts of the theory of light and space in architecture [4], the results of the study can be 
applied to architecture, especially in the field of interior design where using colour can 
enhance perception of light in spaces. 

METHOD

With this purpose in mind, three spaces were built in a controlled set. The set was appropriate 
because there was room enough to move in front of the spaces as well as because lighting 
conditions could be adjusted. The spaces, A, B and C, were of the same dimensions; 2m wide, 
1.5m deep and 3m high, with no ceiling, as we see in Figure 1 and Figure 2. 

Figure 1: Plan of the set and Spaces A, B, C.

Figure 2: Front view of the set and spaces A, B, C 

470 CISBAT 2013 - September 4-6, 2013 - Lausanne, Switzerland



Each space was painted in a different colour: yellow (NCS S 1070-Y10R) for space A, blue 
(NCS S 1030-B) for space B, and grey (NCS S 1500-N) for space C. The choice started with a 
bright yellow because it is associated with a sensation of lightness. Besides, its wavelength is 
close to the point of highest sensitivity in the eye, according to the human response curve. The 
purpose was to compare an intense yellow with a grey with the same reflection index and with 
a slightly darker blue. The reflection index of each colour was calculated from the 
measurements of luminance and illuminance taken later on in the experiment. The equation 
(1) was used based on the assumption that all the surfaces were Lambertian. As a result, the 
experimental reflection indexes for each colour are: 0.64 for A (yellow), 0.50 for B (blue) and 
0.66 for C (grey). 

     E · r = π · L      (1) 

In order to compare the colours, two lighting arrangements were staged, combining two 
intensities of light; a starting intensity (I1) and a modified intensity (I2) which was half of the 
previous by means of a neutral filter. To these ends, the lighting fixtures were positioned in 
order to provide an illuminance level of approximately 900 lux at ground level for I1. Using a 
filter, the intensity was reduced to I2, becoming about 450 lux. A combination of both 
intensities led to the design of two lighting arrangements: in Arrangement 1, all the spaces 
had the same intensity (I1), while in Arrangement 2 the intensity in Space A was reduced (I2)
and spaces B and C remained with I1. The same lighting fixtures were used in each space: a
Quars halogen lamp (2000W) in zenithal position filtered with a 50% Diffuser Frame so as to 
provide a diffuse and even light. A white board was placed in the upper part of the front side 
of each space to diffuse light and hide the lamps. The colour temperature and the lamps 
remained the same during the experiment. 

Figure 3: Observer assessment 

The spaces were assessed by a sample of observers (Figure 3). A total of 25 participants took 
part in the test, 9 males and 16 females, from 18 to 39 years old, with an average age of 25. 
All of them had normal vision with the exception of one, who had Daltonism. The 
participants were all students with basic knowledge of lighting. They were organised in 
groups of 3-5 that entered the set twice, each with a different lighting arrangement, and 
answered some questions about the perception of light. All the groups had a 15 minute gap 
between Arrangement 1 and 2. On entering the set, they were asked two questions: which 
space seemed to be lighter and which seemed to be darker. Furthermore, they had to estimate 
the difference of light in the spaces as “almost equal”, “slightly different” or “very different”.

CISBAT 2013 - September 4-6, 2013 - Lausanne, Switzerland 471



Apart from the observer assessment, physical measurements were taken in each arrangement.
While the measurements give quantitative data, the assessment offers a qualitative evaluation 
[5]. The measured parameters were illuminance and luminance. Illuminance was measured at 
ground level and in the middle of each vertical surface, 1.5m from the ground, half width. 
Luminance was measured in the middle of each vertical surface as well. The instruments used 
were a Konica Minolta LS-110 luminance meter and a Lutron lux meter. 

RESULTS 

The results of the measurements are divided into illuminance and luminance values. The first 
results were used to establish intensities in the lighting arrangements by placing the lighting 
fixtures and filters, as well as to calculate the reflection index of the colours. The luminance 
measurements were used as physical and objective data to assess the amount of light coming 
from vertical surfaces, although other studies take different parameters into consideration [3, 
6]. Given that the observers could move freely throughout the set, an average value of 
luminance was considered to be most suitable. The value for each space resulted from the 
mean of luminance in the vertical surfaces. The results are shown in the tables and graphs 
below: 

Luminance (cd/m2) Space A Space B Space C
Arrangement 1 124.0 109.0 149.7
Arrangement 2 65.5 109.0 149.7
Table 1: Average wall luminance values at 1.5m from ground level (cd/m2) in each space, 
Arrangement 1 and Arrangement 2 

0

50

100

150

200

Space A Space B Space C

cd
/m

2

Arrangement 1

0

50

100

150

200

Space A Space B Space C

cd
/m

2

Arrangement 2

Figure 4: Average wall luminance values at 1.5m from ground level (cd/m2) in each space, 
Arrangement 1 and Arrangement 2 

Although the lighting conditions in Arrangement 1 were the same for all spaces, the 
measurements show that luminances are not equal, due to different reflection indexes in the 
colours. In the second arrangement, when darkening Space A, the measurements show that 
Space C is clearly the lightest and Space A is obviously the darkest. 

The observer assessment comes in two parts. The first part contains the answers to questions 
about the quantity of light perceived in each space (Figure 5); the second part presents the 
degree of difference perceived in terms of light (Table 2). In the first part, there is a graph for 
each lighting arrangement showing the answer percentage. The answers are divided into three 
blocks, one for each space, containing two columns. The first column corresponds to answers 

472 CISBAT 2013 - September 4-6, 2013 - Lausanne, Switzerland



about the brighter space and the second column shows answers to question about the darker 
space. 

0%

20%

40%

60%

80%

100%

Space A Space B Space C

Arrangement 1

0%

20%

40%

60%

80%

100%

Space A Space B Space C

Arrangement 2

Figure 5: Graphs showing the percentage of responses in Arrangement 1 and Arrangement 2
to the questions: -Which space seems lighter? (light grey columns) -Which space seems 
darker? (dark grey columns)

In the second part of the results the observers estimated the degree of difference in perception 
of light in the spaces. It was important to highlight to what extent observers perceived 
differences in terms of light, because evaluating if this was easily perceived or not was 
significant. The answers are divided into three categories for each arrangement. 

Answers
Almost equal Slightly different Very different

Arrangement 1 44 % 56 % 0 %
Arrangement 2 48 % 48 % 4 %
Table 2: Percentage of answers to the question about the degree of difference in the 
perception of light in the spaces, Arrangement 1 and Arrangement 2. 

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS 

Once the measurements and the observer assessment were completed, the results obtained in
both procedures could be compared. First of all, we see that the overall result of observer 
opinions in Arrangement 1 does not coincide with the measurements, while in Arrangement 2
it does. The assessment in Arrangement 1 concerns yellow and grey, which have a similar 
reflection index but do not give the same sensation to observers. 

As mentioned above, the lighting conditions in Arrangement 1 were equal in all spaces. In 
Table 1 we see that the highest value of luminance was measured in Space C (149.7cd/m2)
while the lowest was in Space B (109cd/m2). Space A is in the middle, with 124cd/m2.
Comparing these values with the observer assessment, we find that the majority of observers 
perceived Space A as the brightest instead of C. In regards to the darker space, opinions 
coincided with the measurements. The luminance is similar, but if we compare the values, 
Space C is 1.37 times lighter than B and 1.2 times lighter than A, which is not a big 
difference. According to the observer opinions (Table 2), none of them found the spaces “very 
different”; the opinions were divided between “almost equal” and “slightly different”. This 
corresponds to reality, because the measurements didn’t show prominent differences.  

CISBAT 2013 - September 4-6, 2013 - Lausanne, Switzerland 473



The results in Arrangement 2 are different. Here, the highest luminance value corresponds to 
Space C (149.7cd/m2), while the lowest corresponds to Space A (65.5cd/m2). The observer 
assessment coincided with the results, but not with the degree of difference perceived. If we 
compare the luminance values, we see that Space C is 2.28 times lighter than A, which means 
that the difference is noticeable. If we look at the observer assessment in Table 2, only 4% of 
observers perceived light in the spaces as “very different”, while 48% thought they were 
“almost equal”. The remaining 48% perceived them as “slightly different”. In this case, 
although Space C is much lighter than A, observers minimise the difference. It makes it clear 
that, from the observers’ point of view, yellow and grey do not offer the same sensation in 
terms of light. 

We came to the conclusion that even though yellow and grey had the same reflection index, 
the surfaces painted with these colours offered a different sensation of light. While under the 
same lighting conditions the grey space looked dull and dark, the yellow space seemed
brighter. What’s more, when the yellow space was darkened it was perceived as darker but to 
a lesser extent than what the measurements showed.

These results can be taken into account when designing a building, because the perception of 
light in buildings is vital to visual comfort. The design of interiors could take advantage of the 
fact that some colours offer more sensation of light than others under the same lighting 
conditions. This doesn’t mean that some colours should be banned or considered obligatory; it
means that an intelligent use of colour may help to highlight some parts of a space and 
improve visual comfort for users. The use of colour goes beyond a choice based on reflection 
index, tastes or fashions. 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

The authors would like to thank the Escola Superior de Cinema i Audiovisuals de Catalunya 
(ESCAC) for providing the spaces where the field work was performed. We also want to 
thank ESCAC staff, the ESCAC Art Direction students and the Architecture, Energy and 
Environment Master students for their help during preparation of the study and for carrying 
out the assessments. 

REFERENCES  

1. Wyszecki, G. Stiles W.S.: Color Science: Concepts and Methods, Quantitative Data and 
Formulae. John Wiley & Sons Inc, New York, 1982 

2. Lam, W.: Perception and lighting as formgivers for architecture. McGraw-Hill Book, New 
York, 1977 

3. Cuttle, C.: Brightness, lightness, and providing ‘a preconceived appearance to the 
interior’. Lighting Res. Technol. 36,3, pp. 201-216, 2004 

4. Michel, Lou: Light: the shape of space: designing with space and light. John Wiley & 
Sons Inc, New York, 1995 

5. Hopkinson, R.G. Kay J.D.: The lighting of buildings. Faber and Faber, London, 1972 
6. Cuttle, C: Towards the third stage of the lighting profession. Lighting Res. Technol. 42, 

pp. 73-93, 2010 

474 CISBAT 2013 - September 4-6, 2013 - Lausanne, Switzerland


