












































JIDA15_Actas nuevas.pdf


JIDA’15. III Jornadas de Innovación Docente en Arquitectura
Barcelona, ETSAB-UPC, 25-29 mayo, 2015

 

This work is licensed under a Creative Commons License CC BY-NC-ND 4.0                                            INICIATIVA DIGITAL POLITÈCNICA UPC

 
 
 

THERMAL EVALUATION OF BUILDINGS.
A CONVENIENT TOOL

Luis M. Barajas (1); Jaume Roset Calzada (2); Giuseppe La Ferla (3)
1 Dept. de Construccions Arquitectòniques I, ETSAB, Universidad Politécnica de 

Catalunya, Spain
2 Dept. Física Aplicada, ETSAB, Universidad Politécnica de Catalunya, Spain
3 Dep. de Construcción y Tecnología Arquitectónicas, ETSAM, Universidad 

Politécnica de Madrid, Spain
luismb_42@hotmail.com 

ABSTRACT

The convenience of the use of environmental building evaluation tools, to know 
design conditions and thermal behavior, by using bioclimatic strategies for 
determining a good early design processes of the building, as well as an 
evaluation of energy consumption of buildings and for the behavior of building the 
use of BPS - building performance simulation tool to control the power state of 
the building, the emission of carbon dioxide CO2, natural lighting and thermal 
comfort and a CFD - Computational Fluids Dynamics analysis.
We take a deeper look about the behavior of the buildings by the use of the 
Design Builder software, as main practice objective, to show this we explain the 
process to work with a BPS - building performance simulation: Pre-process, 
Simulation process, Post-process.
This material was presented in a European Union Cost Action TU1104, Training 
School in Belgrade (Serbia) in 20 - 23 April of 2015.

Key words: Training Schools, Bioclimatic Strategies, Thermal Evaluation Tools,
BPS Buildings Performance simulations

49



 

 

 

 

 

1 INTRODUCTION

All this material was imparted in a Training School of the COST ACTION TU 
1104 "Smart Energy Regions" to different students from different countries
Austrian, Spanish, British / Irish, Bulgarian, Dutch, Lithuanian, Serbian, Latvian,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Portuguese, Macedonian, Slovenian and Polish with 
different backgrounds Architecture, Architectural Engineering, Science and 
Technology and Civil Engineering all of them early stage researchers came from 
PhD studies, research area or professionals area.

The main topic was a “Integrated approach to retrofitting existing dwellings”. The 
scientific focus of the Training School was the improvement of the environmental 
and energy performance of existing neighbourhoods at a regional scale. The 
main goal of the Training School was to offer an opportunity to reflect upon about 
how retrofitting of neighbourhoods can contribute to energy and environmental 
improvement of regions in a different context whilst enabling attendees to interact 
with other researchers from across Europe. (http://www.smart-
er.eu/content/training-school-"integrated-approach-retrofitting-existing-dwellings")

2 BIOCLIMATIC STRATEGIES

Bioclimatic approach to buildings are very important to study to know how to 
achieve high comfort levels with adaptation of geometry, orientation, construction 
technology to the climate and surrounding conditions.
This kind of strategies need to be study to reduce building energy consumption 
and emissions, adapting it to environment conditions.

The building has to guarantee the comfort of the occupants during the whole 
year, adapting his strategy to the seasonal conditions of the region:

Cooling strategies during the hot season
Heating strategies during the cold season
All components of the building, and specially the envelope, should be 
design to interact like a filter between interior and exterior conditions.
They should design to interact with natural parameters and conditions

For a bioclimatic approach to retrofitting existing buildings it is necessary to study 
overall parameters that determine interior building comfort: 
(Thermal comfort standards defined by, ASHRAE 55- 2010) 

Air temperature  
Mean radiant temperature (walls and objects)  
Humidity 
Air velocity (m/s) 
Human metabolic rate activity (met) 
Clothing level (clo) 

Whole exterior parameters that influence the building:
Temperature and thermal oscillation
Wind direction and intensity 
Humidity 
Solar radiation (average of daily and monthly conditions)

50



 

 

 

 

 

The most important tools used are the Building Bio Climatic Charts (BBCC) of 
Victor Olgyay and Baruch Givoni.

The Olgyay chart considers the temperature and the humidity as exterior 
parameters which condition the human body, showing the comfort zone with the 
appropriate temperature and humidity necessary to archive it.

The Givoni chart predicts indoor conditions of the building according to the 
outdoor prevailing conditions. The chart combines different range of temperature 
and pressure of vapor over typical psychometric chart, combined with specific 
passive cooling strategy (evaporative cooling, thermal mass, natural ventilation 
and passive heating).

There are bioclimatic strategies to apply in building design:

The study of solar radiation diagrams to determinate the quantity of radiation and 
the average of hours of solar direct beam radiation during the year and in the 
main seasons
The study of direction and intensity of the wind during the year. Determinate the 
prevailing and the dominant winds: 

Prevailing are winds that blow predominantly along a single general 
direction. 
Dominant are winds that blow in a direction with the highest speed.

The study of general building data, the geometry: 
Façade disposition and orientation 
Double exposition and courtyard 
Separation between dwellings and median wall 
Height of the building, basement, ground, typical and roof level 
Windows dimension, disposition and shadows systems

The study of construction technology and materials: 
a) Type of façade and courtyard 
b) Type of separation between dwellings and median wall 
c) Type of horizontal structure 
d) Type of roof 
e) Type of windows and shadows system. 

Analyzing all bioclimatic strategies and the energy performance of all 
components of the buildings,  can be done simulating the better solutions to 
improve their energy behaviors.

3 BPS - BUILDING PERFORMANCE SIMULATION

Is the attempt to model the various energy and mass flows within a building in 
order to predict one or several performance aspects of a building using computer 
simulations. Example performance aspects are energy, light, acoustics, HVAC,
structure, costs, comfort.
One major characteristic is the trend to progressively move towards early design 
phases. Due to the increasing importance of the decisions made early in the 
design process and their impact on energy performance and cost, several BPS 

51



 

 

 

 

 

tools have been developed to help architects perform early energy analysis, and 
create more energy efficient more sustainable buildings. (Hensen, 2004)
To do this its necessary to do a dynamic-thermal simulation that it is a process of 
creating a computer model of a building whether home, office or other, to 
determine the energy demand and domestic comfort of the building. 
A dynamic-thermal simulation it is important for the study of energy efficiency 
design of buildings, and it is used to compare different design variants, to 
demonstrate code compliance, to reduce uncertainty risk in design planning.
For architects, the most important criteria (31% and 34%) was the ability of the 
tool to integrate intelligent design knowledge-base to assist designer in decision 
making. (Shady Attia, 2010).

A dynamic-thermal simulation it is necessary when simple calculations are not 
sufficient to estimate the energy demand; In the design of Buildings of high 
consumption (hotels, offices, big residential areas).
A detailed energy performance and indoor comfort analysis calculation is 
required to obtain the value of some inherent characteristic of the building, 
cladding, building construction, system, etc. 

To do a BPS we use the Design Builder software, the DB is an advanced
graphical user interface that has been specially developed to run EnergyPlus 
simulations. 
For UK and Republic of Ireland users the Design Builder interface can also be 
used to produce Energy Performance Certificates (EPCs) and to show 
compliance with the Building Regulations.
Design Builder is an application software for any location, it is a tool to control the 
energy state of the building, the emission of carbon dioxide, natural and artificial 
lighting and comfort.
It is developed to simplify the process of dynamic-thermal simulation of a 
building, Design Builder allows quickly compare the function and performance of 
designs and building systems; energy efficient and sustainable. 
(http://www.designbuilder.co.uk/)

EnergyPlus is the program of building energy simulation of the US DOE 
(Department of Energy, USA) for modeling and calculation of heating, cooling, 
lighting, ventilation and other energy flows.
It’s build on the most interesting features of BLAST and DOE-2 (interface 
modeling) while incorporating many features of novel simulation as intervals of 
less simulation to an hour, integration into a simultaneous calculation of zonal 
balance and installation, flow multizone, thermal comfort and photovoltaic 
systems. 

The Main Characteristics are:
Advanced engine calculates energy flow + resource consumption 
including: 
Heating, cooling, lighting, ventilation, water 
Best of BLAST and DOE-2…Plus: 
Time steps < 1hr, 
Modular HVAC integrated with Zone, 
Multizone air flow for Natural ventilation, Thermal Comfort, Photovoltaic's 
and Water. (http://apps1.eere.energy.gov/buildings/energyplus/)

52



 

 

 

 

 

EnergyPlus is a standalone application, NOT a "friendly" GUI - Graphical User 
Interface, here it is where comes in Design Builder.
Design Builder EnergyPlus tightly integrates within your environment enabling the 
realization of simulation hassle, simply setting the building model, applying the 
results and leaving the rest to the Energy Plus simulation engine.
Design Builder has been developed specifically around EnergyPlus, incorporating 
comprehensive database of materials, cladding, glazing and shading devices.

The benefits provide by a BPS of this type are:
Cost savings in energy consumption and cost of installation.
Improved internal comfort.
Reduction of greenhouse gases.
Increased energy sustainability.
Improved energy performance of the building.

Academically:
Provides scope and approach of reality to a particular study or research.
Being an application with a wide choose of countries and locations, can 
be modified values, ranges and different characteristics of study. 
Also can create a unique or particular weather conditions data via 
EnergyPlus.

The Design Builder program is implemented as a GUI - Graphical User Interface 
with a friendly modeling environment, intuitive and visual, it integrated different 
buildings modules for energy and environmental calculation, the data bound that 
use are:

Constructive geometric description, constructive and operational system 
of buildings.
Heating Cooling and ventilation (HVAC), domestic hot water (DHW), and 
lighting, depending on the climate of the site.
The use of the building in summer and winter regime, also its isolation and 
inertia, air permeability and sun exposure.
This format with a free use and application in any climate zone with which
want to work. 

All BPS has a typical simulation process and mostly all have to follow this next 
steps:

1. Create a new building model or load a DXF floor plan (or PDF, bitmap etc) 
if available.

2. Create building geometry model by adding blocks.
3. Partition blocks into zones using zoning rules.
4. Set model options as required based on design stage, early stage, etc.
5. Set as much building default data as possible.
6. Set data for individual blocks, zones, surfaces, etc.
7. Run test simulations for winter and summer weeks looking at hourly 

results in all zones to check for correct operation.
8. Run annual simulations without hourly results (typically select monthly and 

temperature distribution results).

53



 

 

 

 

 

All this steps can be divide in tree different process:

Pre-process
The first step to start the analysis Design Builder develops as a "friendly", intuitive 
and visual environment where you introduce different data of the building in a 
particular way of introduction:

Modeling, schedule, activities and building envelope data

A building can be created with or without reference to a 2-D drawing file created 
from a CAD system or by scanning a plan of the building. In either case, the 
building geometry is defined by entering one or more blocks.

Block types: 
Building Blocks are used to create the model. 
Outline Blocks are used to help in the creation of the building and do not affect 
the model.
Component Blocks are used to create visual and shading structures, ground 
structures and neighboring buildings.

Most of the Activity data is associated with either Internal gains or Environmental 
control.  
There are 7 categories of internal gains in Design Builder:

Occupancy
Computer gains
Office equipment gains
Miscellaneous gains
Catering gains
Process gains
Lighting (data set on the Lighting tab)

Construction systems, geometric description and building construction

To define the construction systems need to set the number of layers first, and 
then select the material and thickness for each layer. Constructions can have up 
to 6 layers. The outermost layer will be positioned adjacent to outside. 
The material in any layer can be selected from the library in the same software.

HVAC - Heating and cooling, domestic hot water (DHW) and lighting, depending 
on the climate

HVAC can be defined in Design Builder using: 

Simple HVAC where the heating/cooling system is modeled using basic 
load calculation algorithms. For convective heating systems and all 
cooling systems the EnergyPlus 'Purchased air' system is used to 
calculate heating and cooling loads. 'Purchased air' supplies hot/cold air 
at predefined temperature and humidity for heating and cooling.

54



 

 

 

 

 

Compact HVAC where the heating/cooling systems are defined in Design
Builder using fairly simple parametric HVAC descriptions but modeled in 
detail in EnergyPlus.
A DHW generator work depending on the activity and building type 
selected for the zone, a standard DHW demand is assumed by default. 

Simulation process
Where the engine of calculation start to work, in this case the engine is 
EnergyPlus, the one who made the real analysis of the building, with simulation 
intervals annual, monthly, daily and even less than one hour, integration into a 
simultaneous calculation of energy balance by spaces and areas of the building, 
multi-zone flow, thermal comfort and photovoltaic systems.

Simulations using EnergyPlus have the following characteristics:

Weather data comes from Hourly weather data file.
Includes consideration of heat conduction and convection between zones 
of different temperatures.
Includes solar gain through windows and shading from other buildings and 
self shading by the building itself.
Simulation of HVAC equipment 
Includes one or more warm up days to ensure correct distribution of heat 
in building thermal mass and the start of the simulation.
Warm up continues until temperatures/heat flows in each zone have 
converged. If convergence does not occur then simulation continues for 
the maximum number of days as specified in the calculation options.

In this process also counts with the CFD (Computational Fluids Dynamics) 
analysis, where you can introduce the data you want or work with the EnergyPlus 
simulation results, to do wind, temperature and pressure analysis inside or 
outside the building.

Computational Fluid Dynamics is the term used to describe a family of numerical 
methods used to calculate the temperature, velocity and various other fluid 
properties throughout a region of space.

CFD when applied to buildings can provide the designer with information on 
probable air velocities, pressures and temperatures that will occur at any point 
throughout a predefined air volume in and around building spaces with specified 
boundary conditions which may include the effects of climate, internal heat gains 
and HVAC systems.

Design Builder CFD can be used for both external and internal analyses. External 
analyses provide the distribution of air velocity and pressure around building 
structures due to wind effect and this information can be used to assess 
pedestrian comfort, determine local pressures for positioning HVAC 
intakes/exhausts and to calculate more accurate pressure coefficients for 
EnergyPlus calculated natural ventilation simulations. Internal analyses provide 
the distribution of air velocity, pressure and temperature throughout the inside of 
building spaces and this information can be used to assess the effectiveness of 
various HVAC system designs and to evaluate interior comfort conditions.

55



 

 

 

 

 

Post-process
The last step of the analysis, where we obtain final results of the analysis:

Loads and energy balance

Design Builder specifically implement the calculation of maximum load of heating 
and cooling under ASHRAE Standard.
This functionality is interesting for the dimensioning of facilities.
Design Builder shows solar gains, gains by occupation, lighting, etc. and 
ventilation losses, transmission fences, etc. providing valuable information about 
critical elements in the heat balance of the building.

Demand for heating and cooling.

Through a simple program option is possible to calculate the demand for the 
early stages of design or aimed at improving the bioclimatic design of the building 
without going to model in detail the HVAC.

Consumption for heating, cooling and DHW

Introducing the facility, which can be modeled at different levels of detail and 
complexity, energy consumption and fuel costs (electricity, gas, biomass, etc.).

CO2 emissions

CO2 emissions associated with the consumption obtained

Indoor climate comfort

It is air-conditioned or not, we obtain results of internal building conditions, 
temperature and humidity, at any time of year. (in different time ranges from 5 
min up daily)

Indices of comfort, PMV, PPD

Through various comfort indices such as PMV - Predicted Mean Vote of Fanger-
ISO 7730, PPD - Percentage of People Dissatisfied, the operating temperature or 
the percentage of uncomforted hours at certain temperatures, are incorporated 
into the results Design Builder.

Ventilation, air infiltration and flow

Obtainable renewals per hour we have in the building and in stream from each 
opening, if calculation has been made of natural ventilation. 

56



 

 

 

 

 

The result outputs of the software shows charts, cell data, chart/table or table, 
also give the possibilities to export data. 

Example of annual, monthly and parametrical output charts.

The most important thing is the interpretation of the results and to know which 
data it’s the one you want as the analysis main result, in the way to do 
parametrical analysis of different designs of the building.

In order to do this the Design Builder has the option of export any results in .CSV 
(coma separation value) file format, that the user can work with in an external 
spreadsheet where the user can compare different data as result:

Comfort between building Indoor Temperature
Consumption of heating and cooling and CO2 emissions between systems
Behavior between enclosures or materials 
Behavior between designs or orientations 

Example of indoor temperature comfort between two different construction system.

4 DISCUSSION

Points collected in training school in Belgrade, Serbia.
1. Choose either the survey data: climatic data, most favorable and less 
favorable day and construction data.
2. Knowing that program used to find solutions and specific results
3. We don’t do analysis of the building, in the design early stage 
4. HVAC – Key for energy buildings performs; Also it is Important the need 
to know the performance of the building before proposing a system.
5. If there’s no resources for monitoring - Simulate 
6. The main objective to us as architects of using any BPS, are the results. 
The fancy graphical look are useful, but more important the interpretation of 
them, following the next scheme. 

57



 

 

 

 

 

7. Know the constructive system and composition of the building
8. Know the level we want to work in the analysis (and know if the software 
chosen work that level)

5 NOTES

Some works already done in different subjects and topics develop with a thermal 
analysis:

Jose M. Ochoa, Irene Marincic, Maria G. Alpuche, Ileana Gonzalez, 
Guillermo Barrios, Luis M. Barajas, Adolfo Gomez, Thermal Comfort and Energy 
Performance of Social Housing in Hot-Dry Climates 
http://www.plea2012.pe/pdfs/T11-20120203-0091.pdf

PhD Thesis - Josep Maria Rieradevall i Pons
Energy rehabilitation of buildings: the building skin. The housing estates of the 
70’s in Barcelona: the rehabilitation of the estate of Montbau, 
http://hdl.handle.net/10803/285002

Dubravka Matic, Jaume Roset Calzada, Milos Eric, Mihajlo Babin, 
Economically feasible energy refurbishment of prefabricated building in Belgrade, 
Serbia, Energy and Buildings, Available online 5 November 2014, ISSN 0378-
7788, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.enbuild.2014.10.041. 
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S037877881400886X) 

PhD Thesis - Fernandes, Eloisa Pizarro
¿Illumination o ventilation? Adaptability of design guidelines Sarah Red (Brazil) to 
the Mediterranean climate of Catalonia
http://hdl.handle.net/10803/284211

Camila Burgos Leiva (Chile), Thesis: Traditional external timber cladding 
in mediterranean climates. For PhD title. September 2012 (In progress)

Juan Carlos León (México), Thesis: Design parameters of solar chimney. 
for Master degree title. June 2013
http://hdl.handle.net/2099.1/20593

Teófilo Bernardo Aguilar León (Peru), Thesis: NATURAL Ventilation for 
Building in height, in the city of Lima, Peru. for Master degree title. December 
2013 (Finished)

Kelvin Rafael Mendez Lora (Dominican Republic), Thesis: Structural 
panels EPS: energy analysis in both tropical wet climate of Santo Domingo and
applied to social housing (case Emmedue system). October 2014 
http://hdl.handle.net/2099.1/23017

Cesar Ignacio Santos Morell (México), Thesis: Natural ventilation analysis
for office buildings and proposal of solar chimney in new office building on UNAM 
campus. December 2014 (In progress)

Rivera De La Rosa, Chanely (Dominican Republic), Thesis: Green roofs 
in the Caribbean region. Case Study: Dominican Republic.
http://hdl.handle.net/2099.1/25659

58



 

 

 

 

 

6 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

To COST ACTION TU 1104 "Smart Energy Regions" Prof. Aleksandra Djukic and 
Prof. Aleksandra Krstic-Furundzic of the Faculty of Architecture of the University 
of Belgrade, Serbia, that gave us the opportunity of be part of the training school 
imparted from Monday 20th to Thursday 23rd April 2015, where we can teach the 
topic.

7 REFERENCES

HENSEN, J. Towards more effective use of building performance simulation in 
design. En Proc. 7th International Conference on Design & Decision Support 
Systems in Architecture and Urban Planning. 2004. 
ATTIA, Shady. Building Performance Simulation Tools: Selection Criteria and 
User Survey. 2010.
STANDARD, ASHRAE. 55 (2010). Thermal environmental conditions for human 
occupancy, 2010.
OLGYAY, Victor. Arquitectura y clima: manual de diseño bioclimático para 
arquitectos y urbanistas. Editorial Gustavo Gili, 1998.
GIVONI, Baruch. Climate considerations in building and urban design. John 
Wiley & Sons, 1998.
Design Builder Manual © DesignBuilder Simulation + CFD Training Guide 2008-
2011.

7.1 Media References

http://www.designbuilder.co.uk/
http://apps1.eere.energy.gov/buildings/energyplus/
http://www.smart-er.eu/

59


