

























































Title: Identification and discussion of the critical architectural factors in the Spanish energy certification process


Relevant factors in Spanish buildings energy certification process. 

M. Palme, A. Isalgué, H. Coch and R. Serra 
Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

ABSTRACT 

European directive EPBD (2003) and Kyoto protocol (1997) obligated the signer countries to 
implement an energy certification process of buildings in their laws. In Spain, the government 
established (RD 47/2007) two certification options: a simplified certification (that does not permit to 
obtain the best certification results) or a simulation process based on the Lider and Calener tools 
(DOE-II based simulators adapted to Spanish norms). In this work we report the results of a large 
number of residential building simulation and certification processes, obtained during years 2007, 
2008 and 2009. Architectural factors that may improve or affect the certification result are identified 
and discussed by comparative analysis. Residential buildings investigated are grouped in tree 
typologies: familiar house, little dwellings block (minus than 10 dwellings) and medium dwellings 
block (between 10 and 30 dwellings). For each group the more relevant architectural factors are 
discussed. All the buildings locate in the Autonomic Community of Catalonia, in a Mediterranean 
climate. At the end of the work a discussion between the different groups is conducted. Finally, 
certification process is critical discussed, especially thinking in the repeatability of the results and in 
the capacity of the analysed tools to express an architectonic result, in terms of geometrical 
distribution, form, magnitude of the buildings. Alternatives to the actual Lider and Calener 
simulation process are also critically discussed.  

1. INTRODUCTION 

Certification process established in Spain as obligated by the European Directive EPBD is in use 
since 2007. These first tree years have seen an interesting discussion about the certification 
techniques and the first building’s results. Especially, in Catalonia the public promoter INCASOL 
(Catalan Institute of Ground) provide to certificate all its new residential buildings promotions. 
These certifications were obtained by dynamical performance study with the Lider and Calener VYP 
tools. Main author of the paper participate to various public reunions with the INCASOL and ICAEN 
(Catalan Institute of Energy) Institutes, trying to identified which are the more relevant parameters of 
the Lider-Calener simulation over the final result (the CO2 emissions estimation). Results of these 
discussions lead to the application of a strategy in the simulation. With this strategy were analysed 
the following buildings. Strategy consist in accord the values of the more important parameters, in 
order to obtain at least the “B” classification. However, some buildings obtain the “A” classification 
and other buildings obtain the “C” classification. Only a building obtains a “E” classification, but this 
case is a retrofit and the strategy was not applied. Each building has a form, a volume and an 
orientation, but this may be not the cause of the different results, because simulation compares the 
analysed building with a reference building with the same form and orientation. The reason is 
investigated in this work by grouping tree different typologies of dwelling.   

 1



2. CASE STUDIES AND SIMULATION METHODOLOGY 

2.1 Climate 

The climate of the studied cases is in general Mediterranean, with little differences between the 
towns. The majority of the locations is close to the Mediterranean Sea. General urban density is low. 
Radiation levels are high to very high. Precipitation is different between the locations. Temperature 
profile is also little different, especially between the sea localities and the others. Figures 1 and 2 
show the regions and the climates of Spain and Catalonia, where place the studied buildings. 
 

     
Fig. 1: Regions of Spain 
 

      
 
Fig. 2: Climates of Spain and Catalonia 
 

 
Figure 3 shows the localization of the studied buildings in the Catalan Community.  
 

 2



 
 

Figure3: case studies localization  
 

Town of Cambrils and Blanes are very close to the Sea. Figueres, Llinars and Les Franqueses 
place 50-100 km far away. Manlleu, Campolier and Mas Torrent place more than 100 km far away to 
the Sea. Familiar houses studied locate in Llinars, Mas Torrent and Campolier towns. Little dwelling 
blocks locate in Les Franqueses and Mannleu towns. Medium dwellings blocks locate in Cambrils, 
Blanes and Figueres. Climate of the groups seems to be sufficiently uniform. Especially the medium 
blocks locate all close to the Sea.  

2.2 Tool’s characteristics 

Simulation and certification are done with the Lider and Calener tools. These tools use in the 
evaluation a reference building with the same form, orientation and the same climatic emplacement. 
Energy etiquette is assigned by comparison of the object building and the reference building that has 
the normative value of the transmittance of glass and walls. Lider and Calener tools permit to insert 
different parameters in the simulation. Parameters can be classified in different ways. In this work 
are classified as climatic, user-dependent, characteristic of the building and system-dependent, using 
the classification scheme proposed by Palme (Palme 2010). Table 1 shows the Lider Calenr 
parameters typology-grouped and the correspondent units.  
 
 
 
 
 

Barcelona 

Cambrils 

Blanes 

Figueres 

Llinars 

Mas Torrent 

Manlleu 

Les Franqueses 

Campolier 

 3



Table 1: Parameters of the Lider-Calener simulation 

TYPOLOGY PARAMETER UNIT 
Climatic zone / Climatic 
Altitude m 
Air renewal coefficient 1/h 
Glass heat loss corrected by use of blinds in winter % 

 
User-dependent 

Solar factor by use of blinds in summer % 
Boiler typology / 
Boiler efficiency % 
Boiler power kW 
Combustible typology / 
Final unit typology / 
Final unit power kW 

 
 
 
System-dependent 

Solar contribution to hot water % 
Building use / 
Internal humidity production  / 
Orientation / 
Linear thermal conductivity of materials W/mK 
Specific heat of materials J/kgK 
Water diffusion resistance / 
Glass solar factor % 
Glass transmittance W/m2K 
Fixed protection transmission % 
Fixed protection absorption % 

 
 
 
 
 
Building characteristics 

Density of materials kg/m3 

  
Altitude is the only climatic variable directly editable by tool’s user. Others climatic data are 

obtained by libraries. The system dependent variables that more influence the final result are the 
power of the boiler and the combustible typology. The majority of the buildings use natural gas and 
the boiler power is 24 kW (flat of a block) or 50 kW (familiar house). Analysed buildings have all 
the same reference values of the important parameters related with the use of the building (air 
renewal coefficient, solar factor in summer due to user’s actions over the blinds, transmission night 
coefficient of the windows due to action over the blinds).  

2.3 Buildings description  

Analysed buildings are grouped in tree categories: familiar house, medium size block and little size 
block.  

2.3.1 Familiar houses 

Familiar houses analysed are very different in form, materials, and renewable energy integration. 
Campolier house is a retrofit of an old house, principal materials are stone and wood. It has no 
insulation, single glass windows and high thermal inertia in the walls. Solar thermal panels have been 
installed for hot water production. Mas Torrent house is very well insulated, has especial low-
transmittance windows, solar thermal system for hot water. Llinars house is well insulated, has 
double glass windows, but has not thermal panels for hot water production. Table 2 shows the 
characteristics of the tree houses.    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 4



Table 2: familiar’s houses characteristics 

 Campolier Mas Torrent Llinars 

Number of floors 3 2 2 
Area [m2]  240 200 

Wall transmittance [W/m2K] 2,80 0,42 0,48 

Main orientation SW/NE S/N S/N 

South windows 3 8 2 

East windows 7 1 4 

West windows 2 1 5 

Ventilated roof no no no 

Ventilated façade no no no 

Balcony 0 1 2 

Heating system radiators  radiators radiators 
Mobile solar protection (blinds) yes yes yes 
Fixed solar protection (shutters) no no no 

Window transmittance [W/m2K] 3,3 1,7 2,8 

Combustible natural gas natural gas GPL 
Boiler type condensation  condensation condensation 
Boiler efficiency 95% 95% 95% 
ACS solar panels (solar fraction) 50% 50% 0% 

 

2.3.2 Little dwelling blocks 

Little dwelling blocks are not very different each other. Alta cortada block has a transmittance value 
a little higher and Miriana block a transmittance value a little lower than the Les Franqueses block, 
that can be assumed as reference for a well-insulated building. Les Franqueses block is a block of 
small dwellings, while the others no. Alta cortada building has only two external façades. Miriana 
building has the façade ventilated to extract humidity and heat in summer. Other significant 
difference is the number of floors, respectively 4, 3 and 2. Table 3 shows the characteristics of the 
tree buildings.  

2.3.3 Medium dwelling blocks 

Medium dwelling blocks are different in orientation: E/W for the Figueres building, S/N for the 
Blanes building and SW/NE for the Cambrils building. Wall transmittance is better in the Cambrils 
case. Cambrils flats are smaller than the others building’s flats. Solar contribution for hot water is 
higher in the Cambrils case, because of the different climatic emplacement. For the same reason, this 
building has the roof ventilated. Table 4 resumes the building’s characteristics.   

3. RESULTS  

Following pages show the energy label of the analysed buildings, grouped by category. Spanish 
energy etiquette resumes the heating/cooling demand and the heating/cooling/hot water CO2 
emissions, calculated by final energy and primary energy consumption evaluation. Final energy 
evaluation consider the system efficiency,  primary energy calculation consider the cost of energy 
production and transportation. CO2 evaluation is done using transformation coefficients established 
by the government. 
 
 
 
 

 5



Table 3: little dwelling blocks characteristics 

 Alta cortada Miriana Les Franqueses 

Number of floors 4 3 2 

Flats per floor 1/2 1/3 7 
Average flat area [m2] 65 80 30 
Total number of flats 7 7 14 

Wall transmittance [W/m2K] 0,65 0,33 0,48 

Number of stairways 1 1 1 
Main orientation S/N SW/NE SW/NE 

South windows 19 23 20 

East windows 0 0 0 

West windows 0 0 0 

Ventilated roof no no no 

Ventilated façade no yes no 

Balcony 16 12 0 

Cooling system no no no 

Heating system radiators  radiators radiators 
Mobile solar protection (blinds) yes yes yes 
Fixed solar protection (shutters) no no no 

Window transmittance [W/m2K] 2,8 2,8 2,8 

Boiler type conventional conventional condensation 
Boiler efficiency 85% 85% 95% 
ACS solar panels (solar fraction) 50% 50% 50% 

 
 
Table 4: medium dwelling blocks characteristics 

 Cambrils Figueres Blanes 

Number of floors 4 4 4 

Flats per floor 11/13 6/8 8 
Average flat area [m2] 37 75 65 
Total number of flats 50 30 32 

Wall transmittance [W/m2K] 0,48 0.52 0,57 

Number of stairways 1 2 2 
Main orientation SE/NW E/W S/N 

South windows 84 6 40 

East windows 7 72 6 

West windows 8 72 6 

Ventilated roof yes no no 

Ventilated façade no no no 

Balcony 39 24 48 

Cooling system no no no 

Heating system radiators  radiators radiators 
Mobile solar protection (blinds) yes yes yes 
Fixed solar protection (shutters) no no no 

Window transmittance [W/m2K] 2,8 2,8 2,8 

Boiler type condensation  condensation condensation 
Boiler efficiency 95% 95% 95% 
ACS solar panels (solar fraction) 70% 50% 50% 

 6



3.1 Familiar houses 

Figures 4 to 6 show the familiar house’s labels.  

 

 
 
 
Figure 4: Campolier building and energy label  
 

 
 

 
 
 
Figure 5: Mas Torrent building and energy label 
 

 
 
 
Figure 6: Llinars building and energy label 

 7



3.2 Little dwelling blocks 

Figures 7 to 9 show the little dwelling blocks energy labels. 

 
 
 

 
 
 
Figure 7: Alta Cortada building and energy label  
 

 
 

 
 
Figure 8: Miriana building and energy label 
 

 
 
Figure 9: Les Franqueses building and energy label 

 8



3.3 Medium dwelling blocks 

Figures 10 to 12 show the medium dwelling blocks energy labels. 

 
 

 
 
 
Figure 10: Cambrils building and energy label 
 
 

 
 
 
Figure 11: Blanes building and energy label 
 

 
 

 
Figure 12: Figueres building and energy label 
 

 9



4. DISCUSSION 

4.1Familiar houses 

Result of the familiar houses analysis shows that Campolier house has a performance clearly lower 
than the minimum established. The reason is clear: this retrofit doesn’t use the actual standard of 
sustainable construction. Especially, wall and window transmittances are high. Heating energy 
demand result to be 129.5 kWh/m2year, while reference building has a value of 80.7 kWh/m2year. 
Good boiler efficiency cannot solve the problem, and the resultant label is “E”. Comparison between 
Mas Torrent and Llinars buildings show the importance of the combustible typology: the “C” result 
of the Llinars building can be explained considering the GPL use (while Mas Torrent uses natural 
gas) and the absence of solar panels for hot water production. Other goal of  Mas Torrent 
construction is the heating/cooling demand reduction, which is considerably lower than the reference 
building in the same climates. Table 5 resumes the building demand and emissions results. 

 

Table5: Familiar houses demand and emissions results 

 Heating 
demand 

(kWh/m2) 

Cooling 
demand 

(kWh/m2) 

Heating 
emissions 

(kgCO2/m
2) 

Cooling 
emissions 

(kgCO2/m
2) 

Hot water 
emissions 

(kgCO2/m
2) 

Campolier 129.5 1.7 49.7 0.7 3.1 
Mas Torrent 49.1 4.7 11.3 2.1 1.8 
Llinars 21.5 5.2 8.6 2.0 3.6 

 

4.2 Little dwelling blocks 

Result of the little dwelling blocks analysis shows that Les Franqueses building has a better 
performance respect to the others. Emissions result of this building is 5.3 kgCO2/m

2year, while 5.0 is 
the “A” qualification limit. Most important factor is in this case the boiler typology (condensation), 
while others building have a conventional boiler with a lower efficiency (85%). Difference between 
Alta cortada en Miriana building (in the same town of Manlleu) has to be searched by the west and 
east façades of the Miriana construction, that have windows exposed to solar radiation. Another 
relevant factor is the total external surface exposed, that increases the losses. This fact is not directly 
detected by software, that compares the building with a reference building with the same form, but is 
increasing the importance when pass from a “C” label to a “B” label is required. Table 6 resumes the 
buildings results. 

 

Table 6: Little dwelling blocks demand and emissions results 

 Heating 
demand 

(kWh/m2) 

Cooling 
demand 

(kWh/m2) 

Heating 
emissions 

(kgCO2/m
2) 

Cooling 
emissions 

(kgCO2/m
2) 

Hot water 
emissions 

(kgCO2/m
2) 

Alta cortada 47.4 0.0 10.0 0.0 2.7 
Miriana 62.9 3.7 13.3 1.4 2.6 
Les franqueses 14.0 1.4 3.4 0.5 1.4 

 

 

 

 

 10



4.3 Medium dwelling blocks 

Medium dwelling blocks analysis show that Blanes block has a better performance with a final result 
of 4.9 kgCO2/m

2year, that signifies the only “A” label obtained by the analysed buildings. Keys of 
this result are the good summer problem resolution (with the blinds use) and the insulation level 
(relatively high in this climate). Figueres building and Cambrils building obtain the same “B” 
qualification, but real consumption and CO2 production is really different: 4.2 kgCO2/m

2year in the 
Cambrils case, and 9.5 kgCO2/m

2year in the Figueres case. This fact shows the principal problem of 
the Spanish certification methodology: the comparison between the analysed building and a 
reference building with the same orientation, that is very bad in the Figueres case. Cambrils energy 
label is very close to the “A” upper limit, while Figueres label is closer to the lower “C” limit. Table 
7 resumes the analysed building performances. 
 

Table 7: Medium dwelling blocks demand and emissions 

 Heating 
demand 

(kWh/m2) 

Cooling 
demand 

(kWh/m2) 

Heating 
emissions 

(kgCO2/m
2) 

Cooling 
emissions 

(kgCO2/m
2) 

Hot water 
emissions 

(kgCO2/m
2) 

Cambrils 5.4 6.7 1.0 2.3 0.9 
Blanes 10.8 4.1 2.5 1.6 0.8 
Figueres 28.9 3.0 7.1 1.2 1.2 
 

As a final consideration, is necessary to observe that the architectonical factors are often not considered in 
the certification process. Geometry, factor of form, orientation are important parameters of the architecture, 
and can be used to improve sustainability. However, actual certification process in Spain doesn’t permit to 
evaluate really the energy goodness of a building. It is more focused on system efficiency. Moreover, as noted 
by García Casals (Garcia 2004, 2009), systems in Calener VYP tool are defined by a nominal power and by 
an efficiency, but at the moment of certification, only the power is really taken into account. This means that is 
very easy to falsify the results selecting a low power boiler or HCAV system. Certification experts reunions, 
that taken place in Barcelona in 2009 confirm the strong dependence of the actual certification method on the 
system dimension parameters. It will be interesting to consider other ways of analysis, more focused on the 
architecture, as sensitivity qualification. Sensitivity certification focused on global volumetric parameters as 
loss coefficient, thermal mass and thermal effusivity. All the parameters consider orientation and distribution 
factors, in order to permit architectural consideration and selection between different construction typologies. 
Sensitivity certification can be conducted by estimation of sensitivity vectors or global thermal effusivity. A 
discussion of how insert sensitivity analysis in the Spanish certification process can be found in the work of 
Palme (Palme 2010). Table 8 resumes the emissions and the etiquette of the studied buildings and its 
references buildings.  
 
Table 8: emissions and labels of the studied buildings and its references buildings 

 Studied building 
emissions 

2(kgCO /m ) 2

Studied building 
energy label 

Reference building 
emissions (kgCO2/m

2) 
Reference 
building 

energy label  
Campolier 53.5 E 31.2 C 
Mas Torrent 15.2 B 32.9 D 
Llinars 14.2 C 19.7 D 
Alta cortada 12.7 B 23.2 D 
Miriana 17.3 C 27.4 D 
Les franqueses 5.3 B 16.9 D 
Cambrils 4.2 B 16.7 D 
Blanes 4.9 A 14.1 D 
Figueres 9.5 B 17.0 D 

 11



 12

Table shows clearly that energy efficiency improves as the block size improves. The other 
relevant result is the comparison among the label of Blanes, Figueres and Les Franqueses. All these 
buildings have a comparable reference building (16.7-17.0 kgCO2/m

2) and the same final result “B”. 
However, the CO2 productions of Les Franqueses and Blanes buildings are the half than the Figueres 
building. Finally, it has to be remarked that a square meter evaluation can not be the best: an 
evaluation per person seems to be more realistic thinking on the occupation density problems, as 
showed for example by Pagés (Pagés et al. 2008) and Palme (Palme et al. 2006).  

REFERENCES 

Calener tool user manual (2010), www.mytic.es  
García Casals, X. (2004), Regulación y certificación energética de edificios: asignatura pendiente en España, Internal 

Report of the Institute of Technological Researches 
García Casals, X. (2009), Efecto del dimensionado de los equipos: certificación energética de los edificios, Era solar: 

energías renovables 149, pp. 40-54 
Lider tool user manual (2010), www.codigotecnico.org 
Pagés, A., Palme, M., Isalgué, A., Coch, H.(2008), Energy consumption and CO2 emissions in construction and use of 

buildings according to floor area, World Renewable Energy Congress X, Glasgow, United Kingdom 
Palme, M., Isalgué, A., Coch, H., Serra, R. (2006), Energy consumption in small flats, World Renewable Energy 

Congress IX, Florence, Italy 
Palme, M. (2010), La sensibilidad energética de los edificios, PhD Thesis, Barcelona 

AKNOWLEDGEMENT  

This study was made be possible thanks to the UPC Research Grant Programme, to the  Spanish MICINN Research 
Project J01413 “Architectonic Urban Environment and Sustainability”, and to Trama Tecnoambiental SA.   

http://www.mytic.es/
http://www.codigotecnico.org/

