












































KEYNOTES


URBAN FABRIC PERFORMANCE IN MEDITERRANEAN CITY: A 
TYPOLOGY BASED MASS-ENERGY ANALYSIS 

Michele Morganti1; Anna Pagès-Ramon2; Antonio Isalgue2, Carlo Cecere1, Helena Coch2

1: SOSlab / Sapienza University of Rome, Faculty of Engineering, DICEA Department / Via
Eudossiana 18, 00184 Rome, Italy

2: Arquitectura, Energia i Medi Ambient / UPC, School of Architecture / Diagonal, 649, 
08028 Barcelona, Spain 

ABSTRACT 

The link between urban form and building energy demand is a complex balance of 
morphological, constructive, utilization and climatic factor. Especially in European compact 
city where existing areas prevail on much more energy-efficient new settlements, it is evident 
that operative ways to transform efficiently the building stock have to be found. Moreover, it
is now widely accepted that urban scale has a first rate importance in the building design 
process and its correlated energy performance. It has been observed that scaling laws are 
useful in describing the complex structure of urban systems: modern cities have a “metabolic 
rate” that approximately follows the living organism scaling laws. Nevertheless, it has not 
been entirely verified that this connection remains the same while studying the phenomena at 
the urban and building scale and what kind of relationship between mass and power exists 
(i.e. energy) depending on typologies and urban form. This study suggests an approach for 
using mass parameter - representative of built-form - as energy performance evaluation tools 
on a homogeneous urban texture. Mass is connected to both built-form and technology and 
these determine, to a great extent, the energy use. In Mediterranean climate, it has been 
observed that mass has strong relevance on energy demand playing an important role in 
reducing heating and cooling consumptions. Our work aims at validating this relationship, 
focusing on widespread urban fabrics of the Mediterranean compact city. Tests on different 
case studies from Barcelona and Rome (analyzed independently in terms of their energy 
demands and their masses) are carried out. Mass evaluation is based on calculation of 
effective mass of built elements. Building energy demand is assessed by modelling on multi 
space dynamic thermal analysis tool. Results presented and discussed point out that heating
and cooling energy demand are related to urban fabrics mass and, starting from typological 
based analysis, it’s possible to estimate it. This work is a broader treatment of a research study 
about one possible way to comprehend “metabolic rate” scaling law concerning urban fabric. 
Such knowledge-base could giving hints to conscious and effective built environment 
transformations towards more efficient conditions.

Keywords: Urban fabric energy performance, Built-form, Building mass, Building energy 
demand. 

INTRODUCTION 

In the last few years the EU has introduced Directives and has promoted different studies on 
the topics of renewable energy, GHG emissions reduction and energy performance in 
buildings and recently admitted that it’s an inevitable need and an opportunity to obtain 
complete self-sufficiency through renewable energy by this mid-century [1, 2, 3]. In this 
extremely complex process - where, besides, we notice an urban population growth associated 
with urban areas expansion - the built environment has a central role, regarding both energy

CISBAT 2013 - September 4-6, 2013 - Lausanne, Switzerland 581



and emissions (69% global consumptions - 75% GHG emissions overall) both in terms of its 
reduction possibility [4]. As an example, EU government undertook to reduce CO2 emissions 
by 80% by 2050 compared to 1990 levels. It has been estimated that this drop overall implies 
95% reduction in the building sector [3]. This goal needs innovative design strategies and 
technological solutions for new settlements and it requires a simultaneous improvement in
energy performance of existing urban fabrics too, in order to reduce global energy demand.
Especially in European compact cities of Mediterranean climate - where existing areas prevail 
on much more energy-efficient new settlements - it becomes crucial to deal with the existing
building stock whose housing is the main part and is responsible for 65% of final energy 
consumption in buildings [5]. Moreover it is now widely accepted that urban scale has a first 
rate importance in building energy performance: urban form, due to the obvious connection 
with morphology and building systems, both at the urban and building scale, mostly affects 
these performances [6]. Our aim is the study of urban fabric energy demand, beginning with 
building aspects. Estimation of the effects of built-form on mass and energy demand is the 
main goal of this paper. In Mediterranean climate regions, it has been observed that mass has 
strong relevance on energy demand, playing an important role in reducing heating and cooling 
consumptions. This work aims at validating this relationship, focusing on typical urban 
fabrics. Apart from testing its existence depending on built-form, our aim is to establish some 
key elements of a knowledge-base for future analysis on conformity with the “metabolic rate”
scaling law at urban scale.

BACKGROUND 

Despite numerous studies carried out in the last years on the influence of complex 
environmental interactions occurring in the urban context that allowed to develop methods 
and techniques for energy simulation at this scale, more research efforts are necessary to 
comprehend the interaction between built-form typology and energy performance of different 
urban fabrics. A number of results emerged on the relationship between city textures and 
energy consumption, proving the accuracy and consistency of different geometrical 
parameters and the impact of urban geometry on energy [6]. The incidence of built-form 
features in this interaction has been ascertained at building scale suggesting a typological 
classification based on chronological, dimensional and morphological factors [7]. 
Furthermore, under the description of the complex structure of urban systems through scaling 
laws, it has been observed that modern cities have a metabolic rate (mass-power ratio) that 
approximately follows the living organism scaling laws [8, 9]. Studying the phenomena at the
scale of urban fabric in Mediterranean climate, it has been found that mass plays an important 
role in reducing energy demand (for heating and cooling) [10]. Once established that mass is a 
parameter strictly connected to built-form, it can also be the connection between housing 
types and energy performance. This aspect is even more relevant in the context of European 
compact city where we can easily find urban fabrics consisting of fundamentally uniform 
morphological and typological elements. 

METHODOLOGY  

The methodology of this study focuses on morphological aspects relating to mass and energy 
performance. Building mass evaluation is based on calculation of effective mass of built 
elements excluding associated mass due to the construction process, which is not part of the 
building. Results shown are expressed in metric Tons referring to thermal conditioned areas 
as specific weight (Tm/m2). Energy demand was evaluated by modelling on Lider 1.0 [11] 
that provides energy demand measured in kWh/m2year where the considered surface refers to 
a thermally conditioned area. Thanks to the similar climatic conditions of the cities involved 

582 CISBAT 2013 - September 4-6, 2013 - Lausanne, Switzerland



in this study, it has been possible to take the Mediterranean climate of Barcelona as climate of 
reference. More details about this procedure could be found in [10].

CASE STUDIES 

This study compares nine different conventional housing types located in the metropolitan 
areas of Barcelona (ES) and Rome (IT) - where we can reasonably assume very similar 
climate conditions [15]. They represent the basic components of typical urban fabrics built 
during various historical periods (Fig. 1, Tab. 1). Cases A÷E (Barcelona) are described in [10]
while cases F÷I (Rome) are analysed here as follows: 

Figure 1: Aerial images and typical plans for case studies (A÷E Barcelona, F÷I Rome). 

F - Row house (1920) - Two-level dwelling (plus one basement) with load-bearing walls, 
above-ground masonry continuous foundations and dry stone drain; vaulted floor at ground 
level, floors with iron beams and hollow bricks for other level; ventilated hipped roof without 
thermal insulation. 

G - Apartment block (1960) - Nine-level apartment block with basement and floor service on 
top. The construction system is based on concrete frame, shallow footing and dry stone drain; 
floors with one-way reinforced concrete slab and ceramic filler blocks; external hollow brick 
cavity walls and flat roof without thermal insulation. 

H - Apartment block (1975) - Seven level apartment block with floor service on top, based on 
concrete frame construction system and shallow footing; floors made by hollow-core concrete 

CISBAT 2013 - September 4-6, 2013 - Lausanne, Switzerland 583



slab and partially by reinforced concrete slab; external precast concrete wall panels with 
cavity and flat roof without thermal insulation. 

I - Apartment block (2010) - Five level apartment block with basement made up of concrete 
frame and slab-on-grade foundation and floors with one-way reinforced concrete slab and 
ceramic filler block; external hollow brick walls with thermal insulated cavity and flat roof 
thermal insulated. 

More detailed descriptions of case studies could be found in [12, 13 and 14].

Year Location Housing type H/Wx,y ratio GSI*(m2/m2) FSI**(m2/m2)
A 1900 Barcelona RH 0.77-1.47 0.45 0.87
B 2000 Barcelona RH 0.30-1.22 0.16 0.62
C 1900 Barcelona AB 1.21-2.83 0.49 2.92
D 1960 Barcelona AB 0.41-1.27 0.13 0.77
E 2000 Barcelona AB 0.45-0.83 0.37 2.43
F 1920 Rome RH 0.39-1.02 0.35 1.07
G 1950 Rome AB 1.08-2.56 0.21 2.35
H 1975 Rome AB 1.14-1.90 0.13 0.89
I 2010 Rome AB 0.56-1.11 0.24 1.48

Table 1: Case studies data. * Coverage: built up area/base land area, ** Building intensity:  
gross floor area/base land area - RH: row house, AB: apartment block 

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Table 2 shows the built mass referring to useful floor area and annual energy demand (heating 
and cooling). The computation of energy takes into account eight possible orientations whose 
mean, minimum and maximum values are given in Table 2. 

Housing 
type

Thermal 
insulation

Mass 
(Tm/m2)

Heating
(kWh/m2y)

Cooling 
(kWh/m2y)

Heating and cooling (kWh/m2year)

Average Min. Max.
A RH No 1.53 86.88 3.22 90.10 86.57 92.12
B RH Yes 2.58 21.85 13.32 41.04 33.17 47.01
C AB No 1.11 79.33 8.17 87.50 85.48 89.28
D AB No 1.24 77.52 5.74 83.26 78.29 89.28
E AB Yes 1.65 22.34 11.75 39.64 25.74 47.23
F RH No 2.64 67.19 2.95 70.14 66.17 73.50
G AB No 1.56 66.19 5.19 71.38 67.36 75.58
H AB No 1.69 79.30 6.68 85.98 81.25 90.31
I AB Yes 2.96 36.52 10.96 47.48 28.88 56.92
Table 2: Built mass and energy demand. RH: row house; AB: apartment block 

In general terms, recent buildings tend to be heavier (in specific weight terms) than those 
constructed before 1980. The mass of the recent cases (Tm/m2 of thermal conditioned areas) 
is greater than old ones, mainly because of mass properties in construction systems based on 
concrete and also because of more unconditioned spaces in the buildings - especially 
underground car parks. With regard to energy demand, it is possible to observe a clear 
distinction between traditional buildings (A, C, D, F, G and H) and recent buildings (B, E and 
I). The former have no thermal insulation envelopes, while the latter are built according to 

584 CISBAT 2013 - September 4-6, 2013 - Lausanne, Switzerland



thermal regulations that restrict heat transmission coefficient. Recent cases show a mean 
conditioning energy demand of between 40 and 50 kWh/m2y, while the traditional cases one 
between 70 and 90 kWh/m2y.  

Housing type Thermal 
insulation

Specific Mass    
(Tm/m2)

Inverse specific 
Mass (m2/Tm)

Heating and cooling 
(kWh/Tm year)

A RH No 1.53 0.65 58.9
B RH Yes 2.58 0.39 15.9
C AB No 1.11 0.90 78.9
D AB No 1.24 0.81 67.0
E AB Yes 1.65 0.61 24.1
F RH No 2.64 0.38 26.5
G AB No 1.56 0.64 45.8
H AB No 1.69 0.59 50.9
I AB Yes 2.96 0.34 16.0
Table 3: Specific built mass and energy demand. RH: row house; AB: apartment block 

Figure 2 (a) Demand energy versus specific mass. (b) Linear fit of demand energy as a 
function of inverse specific mass. Empty circles: experimental values of traditional buildings; 
triangles: experimental values of recent buildings; continuous line: computed fits of 
traditional buildings. 

Table 3 and Figure 2 show the existing tendency between mass properties and building energy 
demand. Referring to thermally conditioned areas, results point out that mass has strong 
relevance on energy; for traditional buildings (empty circles), may be approximated by the 
fitting as formula (1): 

y = 89.92 x-1.233      (1)
where y represents the energy demand (kWh/Tm year) and x the built mass (Tm/m2 of thermal 
conditioned area) (Fig. 2 (a)). The proximity of the exponent to -1 suggests the trial of a linear 
fit using the inverse of the specific mass, which is presented in Figure 2 (b). Hence, greater 
the mass per conditioned square meter of an urban fabric is, less its energy demand for 
heating and cooling per mass unit is, as in [10]. Recent urban fabrics have heavier building 
systems (mass per conditioned unit area) and at the same time (because of thermal regulation) 
they have a lower energy demand. Then the points corresponding to cases built form since 
1980 approximately - triangles in Figure 2 - have less energy demand and give different trend 
than the older buildings. This trend could also depend on the large amount of mass 

CISBAT 2013 - September 4-6, 2013 - Lausanne, Switzerland 585



corresponding to unconditioned spaces such as underground car parks. Moreover Figures 2a 
and 2b show that greater the mass per conditioned square meter is, more similar is the relation 
between mass and energy is, in both traditional and recent urban fabrics.  

CONCLUSIONS 

The analysis carried out in this study confirm that a relation between mass and energy demand  
(for heating and cooling) of different urban fabrics exists in Mediterranean climate, as we 
guessed at [10]. Results show a clear tendency of this relationship in buildings built before the 
introduction of thermal regulations. However, in recent buildings the relation between mass 
and energy demand, till today it has not been so investigated. Building thermal regulations 
imposes a minimum performance, which strongly influences energy demand. Moreover, the 
presence of more unconditioned spaces and basements in contemporary buildings, affects this 
relation. 

REFERENCES  

1. EU, P.: Directive 2002/91/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 
December 2002 on the energy performance of buildings. 2002. 

2. EU, P. : Directive 2010/31/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 19 May 
2010 on the energy performance of buildings. 2010. 

3. OMA and ECF: Roadmap 2050: A practical guide to a prosperous, low carbon Europe. 
[online], http://www.roadmap2050.eu/ [accessed 12th April 2012], 2010. 

4. IEA, World Energy Outlook 2008. [online], http://www.worldenergyoutlook.org 
[accessed 12th April 2012], 2008. 

5. Market Observatory for Energy: Europe's energy position: markets & supply.
Luxembourg, Publications Office of the European Union, 2010. 

6. Ratti, C., Baker, N. and Steemers, K.: Energy consumption and urban texture. Energy and 
Buildings, 37(7), 762-776, 2005. 

7. Dascalaki, E. G., et al.: Building typologies as a tool for assessing the energy performance 
of residential buildings. Energy and Buildings, 43(12), 3400-3409, 2011. 

8. West, G. B. and Brown, J. H.: Life's Universal Scaling Laws. Physics Today, 57(9), 36-
42, 2004. 

9. Isalgue, A., Coch, H. and Serra, R.: Scaling laws and the modern city. Physica A: 
Statistical Mechanics and its Applications, 382(2), 643-649, 2007. 

10. Morganti, M., et al.: Built-Form, Mass and Energy: Urban fabric performance. Proc. of 
28th PLEA Conference, Opportunities, Limits & Needs: Towards an environmentally 
responsible architecture, Lima, 2012. 

11. Ministerio de la Vivienda de España: CTE - Código Técnico de la Edificación. 2006. 
12. Cocchioni, C., et al.: La casa popolare a Roma: trent'anni di attività del I. C. P. Kappa, 

Rome, 1984. 

13. Todaro, B., et al.: Il secondo progetto: interventi sull'abitare pubblico. Prospettive 
Edizioni, Rome, 2013. 

14. Accademia Nazionale di San Luca: Fondo Ridolfi-Frankl-Malagricci. [online], 
http://www.fondoridolfi.org [accessed April 3rd 2013]. 

15. See, for instance, data from [online] www.weather.com [accessed April 3rd 2013] 

586 CISBAT 2013 - September 4-6, 2013 - Lausanne, Switzerland



MAPPING THE “TERRITORY-LESS” CITY: A CRITIQUE ON THE 
ESTABLISHED “AIRPORT CITY” STRUCTURE

A.Athanasopoulos 

MPhil in Environmental Design in Architecture Candidate, University of Cambridge, 
Department of Architecture and University of Cambridge, Churchill College. Churchill 
College, Storey’s Way, CB3 0DS, Cambridge, United Kingdom.

ABSTRACT 
“In the UK and the EU, design practise and government policy aim to mitigate the impacts of 
aviation, but not at the expense of aviation growth. Sustainability should not be taken to mean 
a realised commitment to environmental impact reduction, but a consideration of 
environmental and social impacts alongside environmental and financial performance”. 
(Urpham, P. A comparison of sustainability theory with UK and European airports policy and practice. Journal of 
Environmental Management. 63, 237-248 )

The contemporary debate on airport planning and design aligns with the increasingly 
troubling concerns regarding economic growth and its impact to the natural and built 
environment. In terms of the city and region’s future, under the pressure of both dense 
urbanisation of metropolitan areas and environmental and social sustainability, prosperity 
cannot be achieved through the exploitation of transportation growth and transportation inter-
connectivity opportunities alone.  

In this fragile environment of overlapping or dispersed authority, policy and momentum, 
“airport cities” emerge as new trade centres and, by attracting a proportion of the area’s 
population to dwell or work within this new platform, they are becoming new urban and 
regional centres as well, yet of a debatable quality and with no distinct territory or population. 

Nevertheless, regardless of the ongoing innovation in the fields of urban theories and 
construction technology, transportation policies and building regulations have so far failed to 
fully exploit such an advancement’s potential and dilute the controversy over airport design 
priorities, in respect to both economic development and environmental protection, especially 
in the scale of the city or the ‘airport city’. 

As an essential first step towards a more sensible approach, this paper will try to map this 
“territory-less” platform’s elements, and serve as a reference base for a future in-depth 
research on the establishment and development processes of such a new urban environment. 

Key words: Airport city, Kevin Lynch, urban planning, sustainable development 

INTRODUCTION 
The contemporary debate on airport planning and design aligns with the troubling concerns 
regarding urban development, economic growth, and the impact to the natural and built 
environment, especially in terms of the city and region’s future under the pressure of dense 
urbanisation of metropolitan areas and environmental and social sustainability. 

It has been proven that transportation networks are of essential importance to the city’s 
evolution. The trend particularly for airports to expand dramatically in area, intensity and 
variety of activities can significantly affect them very quickly and in very little time. 

In this fragile environment of overlapping or dispersed authority, policy and momentum, 
“airport cities” emerge as new trade centres and, by attracting a proportion of the area’s 

CISBAT 2013 - September 4-6, 2013 - Lausanne, Switzerland 587



population to dwell or work within this new platform, they are transforming into a new urban 
hybrid. Nevertheless, regardless of their obvious advantages in terms of accessibility to 
transportation networks, concerns about environmental and social instability and degradation 
still lead to scepticism around this urban structure’s quality, territory and population. 

By discussing about the city’s structure as analysed by Mumford, Lynch and a number of 
other researchers, this essay will attempt to identify essential characteristics, highlight 
typological patterns, and map this “territory-less” platform, investigating its urban structure 
through the comparison of six distinct cases. 

In order for the airport city to be recognised as a model of sustainable regional development, 
its structure must be defined and understood first. Towards that, this study will provide the 
theoretical background and support the further development of an in-depth field-research. 

THE CITY’S STRUCTURE AND ITS SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
Describing the shift in urban development from the city centre to the periphery, Howard, 
Kropotkin, Gedes, Soria y Mata, Stein, Wright, Fuller, Soleri, Gruen, Le Corbusier and others 
proposed various forms of urban development [1,2]. From an organic to a mechanical system,
the city was always perceived as a complex spatial, political and social entity which supports 
human identity and continuity, avoiding an “aimless and formless” expansion. Regardless of 
any morphological variations however, they all agreed on the importance of transportation 
networks and travel patterns in ensuring sufficient links within the region. 

Similarly, Kevin Lynch [3] interprets the city as “a multi-purpose organisation, [...], the form 
of which must be plastic to the purposes and perceptions of its citizens”. Focusing on the 
city’s structure he identifies its essential elements: the path, the edge, the landmark, the 
nodes, and the regions, and highlights the importance of people being able to easily 
understand the space and its characteristics through them. 

Analysing further these arguments, several researchers [4,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,12] locate delicate 
relations between city and region, following the urbanisation’s natural life cycle stages “from 
urbanisation to counter-urbanisation, to re-urbanisation”, highlighting the transport-oriented 
qualities of a polycentric development model. They particularly stress the impact of a
community’s history to the region’s structure, and emphasize the need for establishing the 
city’s development framework within such a scale, presenting several advantages and 
weaknesses and the importance of local characteristics in promoting sustainable development. 

THE ROLE OF AIRPORTS IN THE CITY’S SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
As nodes of major transportation networks, similarly to train stations, airports are 
“influencing the growth and shape of the city, through the shift of economic activities from its 
centre to its periphery” [13]. In a regional scale, highly accessible through a variety of modes, 
the airport’s rail or bus station serves as an interchange station, but usually fails to provide 
adequate accessibility within its platform. On the other hand, in a decentralised system, 
Fasone et al. [14] describe the promotion of more flexible mobility patterns. As they and other 
researchers [13,14,15,16] note however, this development usually happened without a clear 
planning framework, or as the result of a controversial planning process, causing the 
rearrangement of local transportation networks, with significant consequences to the form and 
evolution of the surrounding region. 

Due to this “complexity of organisation” accompanying the airport’s operation, its area is 
developing into “a form comparable to that of a city”, a new urban hybrid that emerges 
among other regional centres; something that  Güller and Güller [13] explain as: “In terms of 

588 CISBAT 2013 - September 4-6, 2013 - Lausanne, Switzerland



territorial definition, the airport city is, in principle, the more or less dense cluster of 
operational, airport-related, activities and other commercial or business concerns, on and 
around the airport platform. However, this cluster is an airport city only if it shows the 
qualitative features of a city (density, access quality, environment, services)”. In the US, this
term is used by Kasarda and Lindsay [17] to signify even a broader municipality. Both these 
research groups clearly describe the importance of a structured land use policy and 
distribution within or near the airport’s area, and understand that the growth of an airport city 
“is not always inevitable, necessary, or desirable”.

These two definitions, however, have two weaknesses, especially when progressing from the 
business park to the city level identification. The European approach considers essential the 
qualitative features of a city, not mentioning that of a permanent and vivid population, while 
the American one refers to an actual community, yet to that of the suburban residential 
enclave; with the reason for that lying probably behind the (un)suitability of the airport’s 
platform as a receptor of residential development, as previously discussed. 

Therefore, under the framework of principles established so far to describe the city’s structure 
and evolution, it is difficult to identify the ‘airport city’s hybrid’ as an emerging prototype of 
contemporary urbanism, substituting already established centres. Even if not a ‘city’ per se
however, handling the airport’s area as a distinct form of the built environment brings about 
some of the clearest practical challenges to achieving the right balance between economic, 
social and environmental sustainability. 

SIX EXAMPLES 
Following the previous discussion, six ‘airport cities’ (Spruce Creek, Berlin-Tempelhof, 
Denver, Frankfurt, Athens and Helsinki) will be compared, attempting to identify typological 
patterns, planning characteristics and urban qualities. These examples, even though constitute 
a small sample, present a variety in characteristics, and their further analysis could provide a 
valuable insight over elements of urbanity within the airport’s platform, often neglected or 
disregarded, progressing the relevant discussion initiated in the existing literature. 

For this comparison, an investigation based on Kevin Lynch’s proposed elements of the city 
(the path, the edge, the landmark, the nodes, and the regions) will be attempted. This is an 
essential first step in the research on this urban hybrid’s integration into the city’s sustainable 
evolution. Due to the spatial dispersal of these examples however, the present analysis will be 
based on satellite images, maps, and the information from relevant authorities. Even though 
results, as detailed and accurate as possible are presented in the following tables, a future 
field- research, could supplement the theoretical conclusions, and evaluate and re-adjust them. 

Resulting from this comparative examination, it can be argued that all cases show extremely 
similar path and node patterns and forms, mainly associated with road infrastructure. They 
also tend to be defined by very sharp external and penetrable internal edges, which also affect 
the area’s segmentation into distinct regions. As for the landmarks, they interestingly seem to 
be associated with either the road network, or very distinct public buildings and open spaces, 
the latter only in cases where significant residential levels can be observed as well. 

As it appears, a single-use development is often preferred to a mixed-use one, and in almost 
all cases the airport city is significantly less accessible by public transport than the main 
airport site. Cultural/Community activities emerge, obviously, only within larger residential 
areas, while heavy industry is not a preferred use at all, probably due to the high land value. 
Green areas, in various forms, are unexpectedly common. A relation between the area’s size, 
location and land uses could exist but needs further investigation. 

CISBAT 2013 - September 4-6, 2013 - Lausanne, Switzerland 589



Spruce Creek Denver Tempelhof Frankfurt Athens Helsinki

Airport 
City

A small 
community 
organised 
around a 

central airport 
runway

Suburban 
residential 

development  
far from the 

airport / 
planned 

business park

The airport 
is built 

within the 
city

Commercial 
park at the 
edge of the 

airport’s 
platform

Retail and 
conference 
park, built 
within the 
airport’s
platform

Business and 
retail park at 

the fringe 
area between 
the city and 
the airport

Path
Main Airport runway Main street Main street Highway Highway Highway

Secondary Suburb's streets
Secondary 

streets
Secondary 

streets
Secondary 

streets
Secondary 

streets
Secondary 

streets

Edge

Internal
Between the 

residences and 
the runway

No hard 
edges apart 

from between 
the main 
street and 

back streets

Between the 
main street 
and back 
streets / 

dense urban 
block

No distinct 
edges apart 
from a light 
urban block

Between 
building and 
parking lot

Secondary 
streets 

dividing the 
area

External Green belt Outer fence

Between the 
airport 

building 
and the city 
buildings / 

urban fabric

Highway 
network

Highway 
and airport’s 

fence

Highway, 
forest and 
airport’s 

fence

Landmark

Runway, 
commercial 
area, golf 

course

School, 
church, park, 
golf course, 
community 

centre, 
convenient 

store

Square, 
subway 
station, 

esplanade

Central 
roundabout

Central 
roundabout, 
individual 
buildings, 

chapel, bus 
stop

Highway 
exit, forest, 
individual 
buildings, 
museum

Nodes

Main Airport runway
Main street –
side streets 
crossroads

Main street 
crossroads 
and square

Highway 
exit

Highway 
exit

Highway 
interchange 

and exit

Secondary
Suburb's 
streets 

crossroads

Side streets 
crossroads

Side streets 
crossroads

Side streets 
crossroads

Side streets 
crossroads

Secondary 
streets 

crossroads

Regions

Clear 
distinction 

between the 
residential and 
commercial /
administrative 

areas

Large 
uniform 

residential 
area with 
dispersed 
landmarks

Mixed-use 
urban fabric 
with higher 
densities at 
local central 

points

Small 
uniform area 

with a 
slightly 
different 

central point

Two distinct 
sub-areas in 
the opposite 
sides of the 

airport’s 
platform

Uniform 
business and 
residential 
areas with 

retail 
development 

in their 
periphery

Table 1: Urban characteristics of the airport city 

Spruce 
Creek Denver Tempelhof Frankfurt Athens Helsinki

Airport's land 
ownership

Private Public Public Mixed Public Public

Airport city's land 
ownership

Private Private Mixed Mixed Public Public

Airport's area (mil. m2) 5.2 137.3 6 11.3 16.8 7.3

590 CISBAT 2013 - September 4-6, 2013 - Lausanne, Switzerland



Airport city's area (mil. 
m2)

5.2 10.5 -* 0.5 0.3 2.8

Airport's distance from
traditional centre (km)

8 37 4 12 20 17

Airport city's distance 
from traditional centre

(km)
8 20 4 10 18-22 16

Airport's

accessibility
Car

Car, Local 
and regional 

bus (+internal 
underground 

light rail)

Car, Subway, 
Local bus

Car, Local 
and regional 

bus, 
Suburban, 

regional and 
national train, 
High-speed 

rail (+internal 
light rail)

Car, Local 
and regional 
bus, Subway 
and suburban 

train 
(+internal 

bus service)

Car, Local 
and regional 

buses, 
+High-speed 

rail (from 
2014)

Airport city's 
accessibility

Car Car, Local bus
Car, Subway, 

Local bus
Car, Local 

bus
Car, Local 

bus
Car, Local 

bus

Residential 
development

Y Y Y N N Y

Commercial 
development

N N** Y Y Y Y

Industrial development N N** Y*** N N Y****

Green / public areas Y Y Y Y N Y

Cultural/Community 
facilities

Y Y Y N N Y

Table 2: Area accessibility and land uses 
*Tempelhof airport is incorporated in Berlin’s urban fabric. The airport city’s area is not therefore distinct from the city. 
**Commercial and Industrial uses are developed in nearby locations within other single-use suburban enclaves. ***In parts 
of the airport’s building, heavy machinery factories were operating until some years prior to the airport’s closure. ****Light 
industrial uses are permitted. 

DISCUSSION - CONCLUSIONS 
The aim of this essay was to map the “territory-less city”, the contemporary urban hybrid 
widely known as “airport city”. Its purpose was to investigate the existence of any urban 
qualities within it, which would explain the arguments regarding its viability as a model for 
sustainable urban development. Its focus point was on the city’s qualities, as an organic 
structure of complexity and order, as described by Kevin Lynch, Lewis Mumford, and others. 

In this process, it has been proven that the city’s evolution relies on a structural mechanism of 
correlations, uniquely shaped by each environment’s special characteristics. As an integral 
part of this, transportation networks, and airports in particular, provide the opportunity for 
significant economic growth, but impose intense stress to the city’s environment at the same 
time, as their recent evolution from simple buildings to urban hybrids implies. 

It has been claimed that the sustainable city would be an environmentally attractive, safe city, 
of high quality, in which people will want to live [18], yet the present structure of the airport 
city is still quite distant from this ideal form. The main weakness of the existing models is the 

CISBAT 2013 - September 4-6, 2013 - Lausanne, Switzerland 591



fact that this new city is a place where no one wants to live, and when it is not, then it retains 
a form similar to the suburban enclave, alienating it from the urban core and the airport itself. 

In order to enlighten the case around this controversial territory, an analysis of six examples
was attempted. Even though limited in breadth, it approaches those new urban forms with 
relevant detail, and proves that, even though of a diverse morphology, most of them do share 
certain common features, and that in many cases an airport can coexist sustainably with a 
community, as an integrated part of its urban fabric and structure. 

Among all of them, strong similarities can be observed in terms of their paths’ characteristics, 
nodes and hierarchy, as well as of the sharpness of their external edges compared to the 
penetrability of their internal ones. The latter is probably due to the large uniformity of uses
and the less common pattern of segmentation. A relation between the area’s size, location,
land uses and accessibility by public transport, could exist but needs further investigation. The 
nature, form and dispersal of landmarks within the area seem to depend on all these factors, in 
addition to other cultural and economic parameters. 

It is therefore understood that, even though in some cases certain principles and 
characteristics of urbanity can be identified, the diversity in this urban hybrid’s form and 
structure is imposing the clearest practical challenges to identifying it as a city per se, and 
achieving the right balance between economic, social and environmental sustainability. 

REFERENCES  
1. Mumford, L.: The city in history: Its origins, its transformations, and its prospects. Penguin Books [1991], 

first published in the UK by Martin Secker & Warburg Ltd, pp.: 549 – 656, London, 1961 
2. Haughton, G., and Hunter, C.: Sustainable Cities. Sustainable Policy and Development Series 7. Regional 

Studies Association. Jessica Kingsley Publishers Ltd, pp.: 199 – 311, London, 1994 
3. Lynch, K.: The image of the city. MIT Press. Camridge, MA & London, UK, 1960 
4. Breheny, M.J.: The contradictions of the compact city: Areview. in: Breheny, M.J. (ed.) Sustainable develop-

ment and urban form. European Research in Regional Science 2. Pion Ltd, pp.: 138 – 159, London, 1992 
5. Orrskog, L., and Snickars, F.: On the sustainability of urban and regional structures. in: Breheny, M.J. (ed.) 

Sustainable development and urban form. European Research in Regional Science 2. Pion Ltd, pp.: 106 –
121, London, 1992 

6. Hall, P.: Urban Development and Research Needs in Europe. CERUM Report 8. Umeå University, 2001 
7. Kloosterman, R.C., and Lambregts, B.: Clustering of economic activities in polycentric urban regions: The 

case of Randstad. Urban Studies. vol.38, no.4, pp.: 717 – 732, 2001 
8. Dempsey, N., and Jenks, M.: Future forms of city living. in: Jenks, M., and Dempsey, N. (eds.) Future 

forms and design for sustainable cities. Architectural Press, pp.: 415 – 417, Oxford & Burlignton, 2005 
9. Okabe, A.: Towards the spatial sustainability of city-regions: A comparative study of Tokyo and Randstad. 

in: Jenks, M., and Dempsey, N. (eds.) Future forms and designfor sustainable cities. Architectural Press, pp.: 
55 – 70, Oxford & Burlignton, 2005 

10. Buxton, M.: Energy, Transport and Urban Form in Australia. in: Williams, K., et al. (eds.) Achieving 
sustainable urban form. E&FN Spon Press, pp.: 54 – 63, London & New York, 2000 

11. Newton P.: Urban form and environmental performance. in: Williams, K., et al. (eds.) Achieving sustainable 
urban form. E&FN Spon Press, pp.: 46 – 53, London & New York, 2000 

12. Simmonds, D., and Coombe, D.: The transport implications of alternative urban forms. in: Williams, K., et 
al. (eds.) Achieving sustainable urban form. E&FN Spon Press, pp.: 121 – 130, London & New York, 2000 

13. Güller, M., and Güller, M.: From Airport to Airport City. Editorial Gustavo Gili, Barcelona, 2003 
14. Fasone, V., et al.: Multi-Airport System as a Way of Sustainability for Airport Development: Evidence from 

an Italian Case Study. Procedia – Social and Behavioral Sciences. Elsevier. vol.53, pp.: 96 – 105, 2012 
15. Pestana Barros, C., and Weber, W. L.: Productivity growth and biased technological change in UK airports. 

Transport Research Part E. Elsevier. vol.45, pp.: 642 – 653, 2009 
16. Schlaack, J.: Defining the Airea: Evaluating urban output and forms of interaction between airport and 

region. in: Knippenberger, U., and Wall, A. (eds.) Airports in Cities and Regions – Research and practice.
KIT Scientific Publishing, pp.: 113 – 121, Karlsruhe, 2010 

17. Kasarda, J. D., and Lindsay, G.: Aerotropolis: The way we‘ll live next. Allen Lane. London, 2011 
18. Banister, D.: Unsustainable Transport. City transport in the new century. Routledge, Abingdon, 2005  

592 CISBAT 2013 - September 4-6, 2013 - Lausanne, Switzerland



 

THE BEHAVIOUR OF ENERGY BALANCE IN A STREET 
CANYON, CASE STUDY CITY OF BISKRA. 

BOUKHABLA Moufida1, Pr ALKAMA Djamel2, Pr. MOUMMI Noureddine3,  

1: Laboratory LACOMOFA, Department of Architecture, University Mohamed Khidder 
Biskra. Algeria. 

2: Laboratory LACOMOFA, Department of Architecture, University Mohamed Khidder 
Biskra. Algeria. 

3: Laboratory LGM, Department of Mechanical engineering, University Mohamed 
Khidder Biskra. Algeria. 

 

ABSTRACT  

This research studies the heat flow exchanged between paving of two different types 
(concrete and asphalt) and the urban environment in a street canyon. A method which 
takes into account all fluxes is established. A numerical approach is made in order to 
assess the modification of energy balance and its impact on air warming according to 
the geometry of canyon streets. The proposed approach provides assistance in the 
identification of important parameters resulting in the phenomenon of air warming, 
which can explain the thermal phase between the ground surface and the urban 
environment in summer. The extensive sunshine duration and the large mineral surface 
exposed to direct sunlight combine to generate a large storage of heat during the day 
and its return at night, which contributes significantly to overheated air during a 
summer night. This systematic research constitutes a significant step during 
interventions in the urban fabric or even in new urban developments. The heat flow 
density is determined by the heat transfer between the urban canopy and the 
atmosphere. A set of field measurements is performed using "multmeter" equipment to 
measure the temperature of the under soil: the air temperature and the wind speed using 
a measuring instrument called "thermo-anemometer with propeller LV 110", the 
temperature of the ground surface by an instrument called "Infrared Thermometer”, the 
relative humidity through an instrument called "Thermo-hygrometer HD100". The time 
interval between measurements is two hours. A total of two measuring stations, 
representing street canyons with two different ground coatings (asphalt and concrete), 
are chosen in the city of Biskra. Such research is needed to find reliable ways to 
determine accurately the energy balance in an urban environment in the future. Finally, 
all of this can contribute to refresh the air and sustainable cities of tomorrow. 

Key words: Heat flow, energy balance, numerical approach, air warming. 

INTRODUCTION 

A primary objective of environmental design in an urban context is the creation of 
comfortable spaces. The built environment has a significant impact on air warming. We 
will try to demonstrate clearly in the canyon streets in the city of Biskra the impact of 
the change in energy balance on air warming. 

 

CISBAT 2013 - September 4-6, 2013 - Lausanne, Switzerland 593



PROBLEM 

In recent years urban climatology focused primarily on air warming. [1]. Heat flux 
exchanged between the soil and urban environment play an important role through their 
contributions to this air warming. Various authors have conducted studies on these 
exchanges. The synthesis of bibliographic work shows that the authors discuss the 
phenomenon of exchange considering that the daily net radiation is divided between 
latent heat and sensible heat [2] [3 ] [4]. To limit air warming in an urban environment, 
mastery of the energy balance should be a priority. Cities must anticipate this new 
climate data. 

OBJECTIVES 

Determine the change in the energy balance where the ground is covered by concrete 
and asphalt in an urban environment defined by the geometry of the street (canyon 
shape) and its impact on air warming. This study uses a numerical approach including a 
monitoring methodology. 

The parameters of the energetic balance as follows: 
           ENERGY BALANCE                                                                              W/m2 

             Sensible heat flow                                                           W/m2 
         Latent heat flow                                                              W/m2 

             Heat flow into the soil                                                     W/m2 
             Heat flow absorbed by vegetation                                   W/m2 

E              Mass flow of water vapor                                                 W/m2 
          Coefficient of thermal convection 
          Air temperature                                                                  K 

Soil surface temperature                                                     K  
     Wind speed                                                                         m/s 

         Coefficient of convective mass transfer 
           Density of air                                                                     1.18kg.m-3 

         Specific heat of air                                                             =1004J/kg.K 
         Latent heat of vaporization of water                                 = 2.4*106 j/kg 
       Molar mass of water vapor                                                =18,01g*mol-1  

          Gas constant                                                                       R=8.32j.K-1.mol-1 
       The saturation vapor pressure                                             kPa 

         The vapor pressure                                                              kPa 
         Relative humidity                                                                % 
         Thermal conductivity of the soil                                          W/m/K 
         Coldest and Hottest temperature                                           K 

e            Level of                                                                                                              m                          

Site Description  

This study applies to the city of Biskra, located in an arid region with a warm and dry 
climate in Algeria. Its arid climate is characterized by significant annual and daily 
fluctuations between maximum and minimum temperatures. Between the coldest month 
and the hottest month, the temperature range exceeds 20°C. The daily range for the hot 
season is around 22°C. Solar radiation is intense about 10h/day. The average relative 
humidity is 47%, not exceeding 60% in winter. Rainfall is irregular and low (120 mm) 

594 CISBAT 2013 - September 4-6, 2013 - Lausanne, Switzerland



[5]. The measurements of the different climatic parameters were made at two measuring 
stations (Figure 1). Thermal and physical characteristics of the ground are: rough 
ground in asphalt,whose thermal conductivity is k=1.90W-1.m-¹.k, the emissivity about 
0.90 to 0.98, and the color black; and a rough ground in concrete, whose thermal 
conductivity is k=1.80W-1.m-¹.k, the emissivity varies between 0.71 and 0.90; and the 
color is greenish gray. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Geometric details of each station are shown below (Figure 2).    

 

 

 

 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

MONITORING CAMPAIGN AND CLIMATIC CONDITIONS 

Studying the effect of energy balance on air warming begins by drilling through the 
asphalt and concrete and measuring the underground temperature using a measuring 
instrument called "multmeter", with two accurate sensors to measure the temperatures  
T1 and T2 and a small handheld portable digital multmeter with LCD display, M890C. 
The instrument is product conform with the IEC 1010 and the CE certificate. The 
temperature measurement range is -20°C to 1370°C with an accuracy of ±0.5%, in 
measuring stations belonging to a similar climatic environment. A campaign pilot was 

Station N°1 : Canyon Street H >2W 
 

View of the station: Geometry and  
orientation of the station: 
  
H=7m 
W=3.40m 

H 

     W                  East-West 

 

Type of soil: asphalt 

 

 

Station N°2: Canyon Street H >2W 
 

View of the station:  

 

Geometry and  
orientation of the   
station: 
 
H=7.50m 
W=3.5m  

 

H 
    W  North West-South East 

Type of soil : concrete 

 

Figure2: The geometric details of the stations. Source: Author  

Figure1: The streets where the stations were placed. Source: Author. 

S2 

S1

CISBAT 2013 - September 4-6, 2013 - Lausanne, Switzerland 595



addressed to determine at what level the fluctuation of temperatures starts according to 
the ground level in asphalt with a thickness of 7cm, and in concrete with a thickness of 
5 cm. A level of 5 cm measures T1 as the coldest temperature, and 10 cm measures T2 
as a hottest temperature for asphalt. Then a level of 4 cm measures T1 as a coldest 
temperature and 8 cm measures T2 as the hottest temperature for concretel. The air 
temperature and the wind speed are measured using a measuring instrument called 
"thermo-anemometer with propeller LV 110",  the temperature of the ground surface by 
an instrument called "Infrared Thermometer” and the relative humidity by an instrument 
called "Thermo-hygrometer HD100" with a capacitive humidity sensor and a 
temperature sensor integrated.  

THE ENERGY BALANCE EVALUATED 

A portion of the net energy arriving on the ground is heating it by conduction, another 
by evaporation of water and another changes the atmosphere by convection. Because 
our investigation site lacks vegetation, the photochemical processes of chlorophyll 
assimilation of plants are neglected in our case; therefore the energy balance is defined 
by the following equation:   
                                                       Rn = H + LvE + G + J                                                                       (1) 

The measurements were performed for three hot days under typical conditions of 
summer on 8, 9 and 10 July 2012 (days included in the overheating zone in the city of 
Biskra). Assuming that there is a permanent regime; the sensors will be fixed with no 
changes during the measurement period. 

A) SENSIBLE HEAT FLOW H: 

This heat flow is calculated by the following equation: 
                                  H = hc (Ta – Tsurf sol)                                                                  (2) 

                                   hc = 0.5 + 1.2                                                                   (3)            

hc is the convective transfer coefficient. 

B) LATENT HEAT FLOW LVE:  

It is calculated by the relationship of Stefan based on the theory of mass transfer, also 
called film theory given by: 

  

                                  PVS (T) = exp 
(25,5058-(5204,9/T))                                                   (5) 

                                  PV (Ta) = Hr PVS (Ta)                                                                 (6) 

The assumption of Louis asks that is: 

                            

 
C) CONDUCTIVE HEAT FLOW G:   

The heat flow in the soil is defined by Oke by the following equation: 

                                                                                                 (8)                              

By replacing each quantity in the energy balance equation (1), we can finally write the 
energy balance as follows: 

596 CISBAT 2013 - September 4-6, 2013 - Lausanne, Switzerland



 

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION     

Figures 3 and 4 show that at the two measuring stations, a high correlation exists 
between the energy balance and latent heat flow determined by evaporation.   
A first field measurement result gives value fluctuations between the air temperature, 
ground temperature and the relative humidity at the measurement stations, as well as the 
values of the wind speed for day and night periods. It can be seen that for Station N°1 
the measured values of air temperature are higher than those recorded in Station N°2 
from 08h00 to 20h00 and from 02h00 to 10h00. In Station N°1, it is clearly noticeable 
that the measured ground temperatures are higher than the air temperatures. The mean 
value for the ground temperature is 47.6°C, and then comes the air mean temperature 
with 43.5°C. This can be explained by the fact that the ground surface pavement is of a 
dark colour with high absorptivity. The soil surface temperatures are remarkably higher 
for Station N°1 than those for Station N°2, because of its large emissivity due to the 
presence of asphalt which heats up quickly during day time. For Station N°2, the 
decrease of wind speed appears from 08h00 to 16h00 and from 20h00 to 08h00. For 
Station N°1 the observed decrease of wind speed is from 08h00 to 20h0 and from 00h00 
to 08h00. The wind speed recorded at Station N°2 became higher than that of Station 
N°1 after midnight, due to the street orientation (North west-South-east), which is 
attributed to the hot prevailing winds in summer blowing from SE. Decrease in relative 
humidity before 16h00 and at night from 00h00 to 04h00 fluctuated between 11% and 
23.2% in Station N°1, while the recorded values in Station N°2 for these periods 
fluctuated between 11.6% and 22.9%. This can be explained by the presence of traffic, 
air-conditioning systems and ground absorptivity characteristics. 

STATION NO.1: 

 

 
 
The extent of the (LvE) is large, which represents more than 80% of the (Rn). Changes 
in flow between (Rn) and (LvE) indicate that the energy balance (Rn) s significantly 
with a maximum difference between the two flows equal to 180W/m2 (at 14h00 during 
the day time) (Figure 3) . The maximum value of Rn is 564W/m2. At night time the 
difference between the two flows equals 220W/m2 at 22h00. The sensible heat flow (H) 
is contributed in the presence of the urban heat island. It is powered by both the release 
of anthropogenic heat and the heat stored in the ground (G). This last allows (H) to stay 
positive during the night from 20h00 to 08h00.  

Figure 3: cycle of latent, sensible and conductive heat flow, and 
energy balance in a canyon street, asphalt ground. Source: The 

CISBAT 2013 - September 4-6, 2013 - Lausanne, Switzerland 597



The energy balance (Rn) and latent heat flow (LvE) can progress: at 14h00 in a canyon 
street oriented East-West with an asphalt ground cover, LvE reaches a maximum value 
equal to 480W/m2 and Rn equal to 564W/m2 (Figure 3). 

STATION N .2:  

 

 

The influence of the prevailing wind from the North West - South East appears on the 
energy balance (Rn) and latent heat flow (LvE), from 08h00 to 06h00. (LvE) and (Rn) 
drop gradually. This wind favoring the rejection of heat in the atmosphere during the 
night and therefore sensible heat flow (H) becomes positive. In the canyon street with 
concrete ground, the energy balance reached its maximum value at 16h00 (720W/m2) 
during the day. The energy balance is generally increased, the latent heat flow also 
increased and the extent of the conductive heat flow (G) often delayed especially in the 
transition to negative values in the early evening from 20h00 until 04h00. 

CONCLUSION 
This research has a role to perform in the analysis of the extent and the behavior of the 
energy balance in a canyon street and its impact on thermal fluctuations. This document 
focuses on field measurements of the temperature of the air, temperature of the ground 
surface, of relative humidity, the wind speed and the temperature under ground at two 
levels within two stations situated in canyon streets, which were conducted from 8 to 10 
July 2012, at a bi-hourly intervals. At 14h00 in the canyon street oriented East-West and 
ground covered with asphalt, the latent heat flow (LvE) constitutes 80% of the day 
flows exchanged within a highly urbanized site. In the canyon street with concrete 
ground, the energy balance is increased, it reaches its negative values in the morning, 
from 09h00 until 13h00. 

REFERENCES 
1. Mestayer P.G., Anquetin S., 1994, Climatology of cities. In Diffusion and Transport 

of pollutants in Atmospheric Mesoscale Flow Fields. A. Gyr F.S. Rys editors, 
ERCOFTAC Series, Kluwer Academics Press p. 165-189.    

2. Saighi M., 2002, Nouveau modèle de transfert hydrique dans le système sol-plante- 
atmosphère, Thèse de Doctorat, Université des sciences et technologies Houari 
Boumediene-USTHB. 

3. Fennessey N.M, Vogel R.M., 1996, Regional model of potential evaporation       
And reference evapotranspiration for the northeast USA, Journal of Hydrology,        

4. Eichinger W.E, Nichols J., Prueger J.H., Hipps L.E., 2003, Like Evaporation 
estimation in arid environment, Hydroscience- Engineerin g, Repport N430, 
University of Iowa. 

5. Cote Marc, 2005, La ville et le désert, Karthala, Paris. 

Figure 4: cycle of latent, sensible and conductive heat flow, and energy 
balance in a canyon street, concrete ground. Source: The author 

598 CISBAT 2013 - September 4-6, 2013 - Lausanne, Switzerland



GIS BASED TOOLS TO ASSESS LOCAL SELF-SUFFICIENCY  

Matteo Clementi; Gianni Scudo 

Politecnico di Milano, Department of Architecture and Urban Studies, via Bonardi 9, Milan. 

ABSTRACT  

An analysis and design method to elaborate self-sufficiency urban scenarios is presented, 
where energy and material flows related to residential sector, food consumption, and private 
transport have been considered. 

The method uses open-source Geographic Information Systems (GIS) and is articulated in the 
following processing phases:  

1) Identify the territorial boundaries defined as local  

2) Assessing the  Renewable Local Energy Potential - Analysis of contextual conditions and 
local renewable energy potential. 

3) Assessing  Local Energy-Matter Demand and Supply for residential, agricultural/food 
consumption and (marginally) private transport activities. Quantification of aggregated 
impacts through the environmental impact indicators adopted  (GWP100 - CO2eq 
emissions, NRE / RE MJ non-renewable and renewable primary energy). 

4) Assessing local self-sufficiency scenarios  based on  best practices transfer, filtered on the 
basis of local factors mapped on the GIS (climate, use, existing buildings shape and  
technology).  

The effectiveness evaluation of good practices is carried out using specific tools, called “user 
histograms”. These are used to verify the choices adopted by calculating  the local demand for 
energy and materials through three specific indicators and related reference thresholds : 

 Accounting productive land demand compared with the locally available land.  

 Accounting CO2 emissions per capita, compared with reference value of sustainability (in a 
range between 1000 and the 2000 kg CO2 eq/ person*year).  

 Accounting primary renewable and non-renewable energy consumption, compared with 
threshold values, characteristic of the 2000Watt-Society program  (1500W coming from 
renewable sources and 500W from not renewable ones). 

The results describe the application of this methodology in the context of a settlement of 
about 5000 inhabitants in the province of Milan, Albairate. They show how local self-
sufficiency can be achieved in the categories of food and energy supply related to residential 
buildings.  The  main actions taken into consideration, concern an  adequate use of renewable 
energy in the built environment,  interventions on existing buildings to reduce energy 
consumption in the residential sector and a readjustment of the inhabitants diet towards local 
low energy  productions ( i.e. vegetal versus animal proteins). 

Keywords: CO2 accounting, local self-sufficiency, GIS. 

METHODOLOGY 

The text presents the current state of development of the applicative tools of  ELaR,  which 
stands for Ecodynamic Land Register, a methodology  to assess  different design choices on 

CISBAT 2013 - September 4-6, 2013 - Lausanne, Switzerland 599



the basis of their contribution to achieving self-sufficiency with regard to energy and material 
flows, in a context defined as local. 

ELAR aims to highlight and rethink energy and materials flows which feed people activities 
through analysis carried out by Geographic Information Systems [1, 2]. It highlights the 
dynamic relations between energy and matter demand and local renewable potential which 
should necessarily be maintained in equilibrium in a self-sufficient system.  Local demand for 
energy and materials and the local renewable potential supply are assessed from the 
information gathered and processed. The local demand for energy and materials analyzes the 
consumption categories of housing, food and marginally of private transport; data are 
expressed in terms of general amount referred to the local context or in terms of per capita 
data. 

The collected and processed information is organized in order to enable the transferability of 
good practices oriented to local sustainable self-sufficiency, and to measure their 
effectiveness in terms of dweller environmental impacts reduction. 

TOOLS 

The ELAR methodological approach allows to aggregate the data processed in graphic format 
easily understandable to local actors (general users, local administration, designers, 
producers)  

The elaboration and communication of the results are provided by two basic tools: 
" Resources / impacts geographies." 
" User histograms" 

RESOURCES/IMPACTS GEOGRAPHIES  

Resources and impacts geographies are obtained by collecting on the same territorial 
information support data on Local Demand of Energy and Matter (LDEM), and on the 
Renewable Energy Technical Potential (RETP). 

Information on Local Demand of Energy and Matter (LDEM) is collected in the form of 
impact geographies, while information on Renewable Energy Technical Potential (RETP) is
collected as resources geographies concerning local supply.  

Impacts geographies represent the supply chains of production and consumption through geo-
referenced vectors which locate supply chain different nodes. Two different indicators 
quantify the environmental impacts associated to the different nodes of the supply chain: 

 the use of primary non-renewable/renewable energy sources, expressed in MJ 
equivalent; 

 accounting of CO2 equivalent emissions, expressed in kg of CO2eq.  
Figure 6 shows an example of impact geography related to primary energy accounting, where 
energy consumption values are graphically represented as colored circles of different sizes.  

Resources geographies are obtained by collecting in specific thematic maps quantitative data 
related to the locally available renewable resources. Once the boundaries of the local context 
have been defined, this phase of the methodology processes and stores in the same 
Geographic Information System data concerning local physical and biological/agricultural 
environment. This data-base provides descriptive information on the climatic conditions (solar 
potential mapping at different scales [3], pluviometric conditions, windiness, humidity and air 
temperature throughout the year), on actual land uses, on geo morphological aspects etc.. 

600 CISBAT 2013 - September 4-6, 2013 - Lausanne, Switzerland



(Figure 1). The main goal of such a data archive is to provide useful information to identify 
the current local renewable potential supply and develop possible local sustainable scenarios 
for good practices transferability. 

Figure 1: Some maps that make up the resources geographies of Albairate (Lombardy 
region), to the left a land use map, to the right a solar radiation map. 

Good practices transferability depends on the assessment of similarity between territories 
under analysis and good practices territories. This information, as part of one single 
Geographic Information System (GIS) can be associated to different portions of land, as 
example a cadastral land or urban parcel. 

The association of such information to geometric particles using GIS, enables identifying the 
vocational characteristics of each portion of the local territory. 
USER HISTOGRAMS   

The user histograms build the connecting structure between the information collected in the 
geographies, in order to check different design choices. They report in terms of per-capita 
flows energy and matter local demand and relate them with the extension of productive land 
per-capita. The user histogram general structure can be easily understood looking at the 
following diagram (Figure 2). 

Figure 2: General synthetic structure of a user histogram  

As shown by the arrows, the histogram describes  energy and matter flows direction from the 
right to the left. Consequently, the right side of the histogram contains information on the 
resources supply (RETP Renewable Technical Potential, locally available), where information 
on local renewable supplies are given.  The left side shows information about Local Demand 
of Energy and Matter (LDEM). The central part houses strategies as possible  design choices 
in between local renewable energy/matter  supply and demand (LSS Local Self-sufficiency 
Scenario). They perform the main function to connect local demand and supply. The image 
below shows an example of user histogram describing the main components. The extreme left 
of the graph shows data of energy and matter demand expressed in terms of the indicators 

CISBAT 2013 - September 4-6, 2013 - Lausanne, Switzerland 601



adopted, in this case the CO2 equivalent emissions. The quantities of energy and materials are 
aggregated into the consumption categories of housing, food and, marginally, of private 
transport, to compose the total amount of energy and impact (NRE, GWP 100) per person (on 
the extreme left) (Figure 4). Such option gives the possibility to compare the data with 
reference threshold values per person (15800MJ of primary non-renewable energy per year as 
sustainability goal suggested by the 2000W Society program, and between 1000 and 2000 kg 
of CO2 equivalent emissions per year)  [4]. 

Figure 3: Example of user histogram describing the main components 

The right part of the graph represents the local renewable supply, it shows the extension of the 
productive surfaces in the local context, expressed in square meters per person (Figure 5). The 
productive surfaces are intended to be the productive portions of land for agriculture and 
forestry, as well as the built-up portions that show relevant features such as high solar 
vocation surfaces. 

The far right part of the histogram brings together the extensions of productive land per capita 
identifying the amount of productive land available. The different colors of blue and green 
refer to the extension of productive land available per person (in blue) and the extension of 
the available productive land interested by the application of good practices assumed in the 
scenario (in green) (Figure 5).

The structure of information allows in the design phase to operate a useful and immediate 
comparison between productive land necessary to local self-sufficiency and land actually 
available. Such condition of immediate comparison drives the design choices among the good 
practices, in order to find out the ones more suitable to the real conditions of the territory.   

The central part of the histogram is representative of best practices application, and identifies 
two specific application steps. The first, in the column to the left, refers to strategies to 
improve efficiency (es), both in terms of energy use and matter consumption. The main 
function of this phase is to reduce the amount of energy and matter shown in the part related 
to the current demand (Figure 5, on the left). For example, the main strategies adopted in the 
case study of Albairate (Figure 4, 5, 6) concern the energetic upgrading of the building 
envelope, the adoption of low animal proteins diet and the spread of carpooling practices. The 
second application step, in the column to the right, refers to the application of good practices 
on renewable energy use (rs), with the purpose to mediate between the energy and matter 

602 CISBAT 2013 - September 4-6, 2013 - Lausanne, Switzerland



reduced demand and the potential renewable supply (Figure 5, central column). The data 
shown in the histograms translate the amount of energy expressed by the demand, in the 
amount of productive land required in order to compare the result with  the quantity of locally 
available productive surface per person (Figure 5, right column). 

Figure 4: Part of the user histogram concerning Local Demand of Energy and Matter 
(LDEM), Albairate (Lombardy region) 

Figure 5: Part of the user histogram concerning the strategies adopted in the proposed Local 
Self-sufficiency Scenario (LSS), Albairate 

CISBAT 2013 - September 4-6, 2013 - Lausanne, Switzerland 603



Figure 6: Extract from the impact geographies concerning the adoption of good practice on 
local supply chain of bread (sr19) inside di LSS, Albairate 

CONCLUSION 
The GIS based tool was tested in the context of the Albairate region to assess local self 
sufficiency. The data presented in the resulting histogram (Figures 4, 5) claim that the local 
territory can sustain local demand using 2600m2 of productive land. Among the main 
practices to be adopted the following emerged: electric mobility powered by grid connected 
photovoltaics, changing the diet of the inhabitants (see previous “es” strategies description) 
and energy requirements reduction of dwellings by approximately 80%. Future developments 
concern the online publication of a good practices database so as to allow a better fruition and 
an easy implementation of data by the users.  

We wish to thank  Paola Caputo (Politecnico di Milano) for the support given in the data 
collection concerning  the  good practices database. 

REFERENCES 
1. Clementi, M. : ELaR, Ecodynamic Land Register. A proposal to assess the “strong 

sustainability” of design alternatives according to the local context conditions, in World 
Renewable Energy Congress X and Exhibition - Conference, Proceedings, pag. 861/866, 
Glasgow, 2008.

2. Clementi,  M., Scudo G. : Ecodynamic Land Register - Current development level of the tool 
in Renewables in a changing climate. From nano to urban scale.  CISBAT  2009- Conference 
Proceedings, Editor EPFL, pag.415/420,   Lausanne, 2009. 

3. Clementi, M., Scudo, G. : Solar radiation mapping at the micro-urban scale using GIS, in 
PALENC2010, Passive and Low Energy Cooling for the Built Environment - Conference 
Proceedings, Athens, 2010. 

4. Semadeni, M. et al., : Steps Towards a 2000 Watt-Society, 2002. 
http://efficientpowersupplies.epri.com/pages/Steps_towards_a_2000_WattSociety.pdf

604 CISBAT 2013 - September 4-6, 2013 - Lausanne, Switzerland



DYNAMIC CONSUMPTION EVOLUTION OF BUILDING 
MATERIALS IN THE HOUSING SECTOR IN THE NETHERLANDS: 

TOWARDS A MATERIAL METABOLISM? 

Icibaci, L. M. 1; Timmeren, A. van 2; Brezet, H. 1

1: Technical University of Delft Faculty of Industrial Design Department of Design for 
Sustainability Landbergstraat 15 2628 CE Delft, The Netherlands 1

2: Technical University of Delft Faculty of Architecture Department of Urbanism Julianalaan 
134 2628 BL Delft, The Netherlands 2 

ABSTRACT  

The Netherlands has moved a long way from a landfill to a waste processing society. In 2008 
the European Waste Framework Directive signalized the wish to step up on the material 
hierarchy. This paper is based upon investigating how this process could take place and 
includes a renewed look on the ‘urban metabolism’ and the role of environmental technology, 
urban ecology and environment behavior focus for the field, focusing on material flows. 
Relevant aspects continue transformation, economic-technological innovation before, during 
and after design and construction.  

Industrial ecology principles have shown to be powerful tools to track economic and 
environmental characteristics connected to specific flows. To step up on the material 
hierarchy towards waste prevention it will be necessary a more qualitative evaluation of the 
building industry related waste flows, which both the government and the companies involved 
in the industry should be prepared. Moreover even for a “recycling” based society as the 
Netherlands aims to become, there are challenges in specifying consumption trends and 
connecting national material accounting to product consumption. How to plan future capacity 
in an integrated system is a challenge for the waste management chain that has to be in tune 
with fluctuations of consumption trends in early stages. This paper has investigated dynamic 
consumption evolution of building materials in the housing sector through Domestic Material 
Consumption, waste accounting and dynamic stocks. The results show that traditional waste 
accounting does not bring enough relevance to evaluate waste prevention based on 
quantitative analyzes. Finally, an unprecedented qualification of material flows shows to be 
necessary to classify materials not only for waste prevention measures but for a drastic 
improvement in the material recycling chains, waste treatment and at last design of new 
products.  

Keywords: material metabolism, waste hierarchy, accounting flows, dynamic housing stock 

INTRODUCTION

According to de Bree (2005)1 the Dutch overall waste industry is young and has rapidly 
become a large-scale operation. The most important changes of the Dutch waste industry in 
recent years include scale increase, consolidation / vertical integration, the formation of multi-
utilities and the entrance of other European waste companies. In addition, the liberalization of 
the European energy industry has had an important influence on the Dutch waste industry. 
Waste prevention has to be included one way or another in such structure, formed mainly by 
large-scale players. Within this context, the government position has been to create policy 
structure that defines what needs to be avoided in accordance with European rules. In this 

CISBAT 2013 - September 4-6, 2013 - Lausanne, Switzerland 605



group the focus will be mainly on landfill, incineration and export of waste. Within this 
framework private companies will have to formulate the management of waste themselves 
including technology, logistics and costs. With this background, the government has also 
abstained from other “controlling” forms, which includes further improvements of waste
accounting flows. Nonetheless without a clear and consistent evaluation of the development 
of waste flows the long term effects of such policy structure is questionable in regard to 
building capacity for future waste treatment, assessment of environment impacts and setting 
goals to improve waste management.  

With the attempt to step up in the waste hierarchy treatment, different ways to process waste 
are needed rather than incineration, and a better measurement of waste flows is necessary.  In 
this regard, a quantitative and qualitative evaluation of the waste flows, building stock and 
consumption trends are crucial for future waste treatment building capacity, design guidelines 
of new products and building systems and consequently a more clear environment assessment 
of waste production. This qualitative accounting has to include, besides volume, a better 
characterization of waste that ideally connects large-scale waste flows to the accounting of 
products including physical evaluation.

For a small country as the Netherlands, building waste, has critical effects in the carrying 
capacity to provide adequate treatment; more so with the increase of import waste bans raised 
by neighbor countries, such as Germany imposed in 2005. In a report published in 19992, the 
Netherlands was the only EU member state that expressed concerns that the supply of 
Construction & Demolition (C&D)-derived aggregates may one day match the construction 
industry’s capacity to substitute them for primary aggregates. The same report includes the 
observation that the rush towards full recycling treatment should not disregard that full 
substitution of primary aggregates by secondary material may never match equivalent quality.  
Hence, the importance of improving accounting systems also illuminates related consumption 
of material flows by increasing and opens possibilities to substitute primary resources.   

METHOD

One of the measures to implement in the waste hierarchy according to the European Waste 
Framework is to avoid recycling through the reusability of components and materials that are 
included as waste prevention resolution. Within this context this study evaluates the 
proportion of materials that are potentially reusable within construction waste in the housing 
segment and the prognostics through time. According to these materials, the study 
investigated 3 different levels of data: 

i. The consumption trend to evaluate if materials combined with component design and 
building systems would be more prone to be reused in the future according to technology 
and management structures. 

ii. The evolution of the building stock as a reservoir of present and future reusable materials. 

iii. The development of waste production to assess the volume and speed which these flows 
occur, including the ways the extraction of these materials happen at this phase of the 
building life.  

Within these three datasets the material types were described according both to the current 
national accounting systems and to information acquired from the private sector.  

606 CISBAT 2013 - September 4-6, 2013 - Lausanne, Switzerland



RESULTS 

I. Consumption 
For the purpose of this paper, consumption trends will be described instead of absolute 
numbers. Information on consumption of building materials described in this study was 
derived from private industry but with the exception of cement based products, the data is 
very inconsistent and when available it was not easily shared by sources.  There is also 
disaggregated information available at the national accounting system, but not entirely 
available for the public. The information is organized by goods (e.g. triplex, clay brick) and 
by the industry types that consumes and supply goods. Most of the existent data is classified 
by monetary value rather than volume and in both cases dated within an average of 10 years. 
The classification does not prioritize between residential and non-residential consumption 
rates, instead within industry (e.g. construction materials, site preparation, construction 
installation). Steel consumption is available since 2000 and has been mostly stable until 2009 
followed by drop in 2010 as most of the construction sector developments decreased. Rate of 
wood consumption was the most challenging to estimate, mostly due to lack of cooperation 
within the wood chain and in general it has seen a slight growth within the same time frame of 
the other products mentioned. Currently the government is compiling new datasets with the 
goal to assess national economic performance, although not national reserves through the 
environmental perspective, neither future waste production. 

According to current building deconstruction technology available and the context of the 
market demand for reusable materials, the list of materials was selected as being the best 
candidates for reuse. The evolution of recent building material consumption trends indicates 
that the new housing stock is more concrete intense than constructions before the 1950’s; 
more precisely at the structural level, floor structure and roof tiles. These components will be 
better candidates for downcycling or recycling if new technologies prove to be feasible. For 
roof structure, wood remains to be the primary material used in the housing sector. For 
framing of windows and doors wood based production still dominates compared to plastic 
components such as PVC. Consumption of ceramic components has steadily decreased with 
exception of external façade, which still has the largest share of ceramic-based products. 
Plastic products are in volume represented by pipes and frames with the largest share being 
PVC products. There is an important growth among insulation materials. The consumption of 
materials is also divided into products for new construction and products for renovation 
works. The latter group has been re-shaping the building material manufacturing and in the 
future regarded as the largest consumption activity. 

II. Building stock 
The forecast for building waste is generally problematic as demolition rates are based on 
assumed life span of buildings. Reasons for demolishing buildings are also not entirely 
understood, but construction year, building typology, tenure and building methods have been 
pointed to be partially define demolition trends (Hoogers et al, 2004; INTRON and RIGO, 
2006).  The concept of life span of buildings needs further research. Kohler and Hassler 
(2010) mention that such estimations in Germany have assumed average life span of 50 years 
resulting in 2% demolition rate when in practice the demolition rate was in average 0,5% 
while in the Netherlands the average life span is considered to be 90 to 120 years (Itard et al 
2008; Van Nunen, 2010). Very little is known about demolition dynamics and even less about 
renovation cycles, where in the Netherlands demolition represents only partially the total 
building stock while renovation projects have a large participation in the waste production of
the housing sector as well. Renovation until recently was not regarded as significant but has 

CISBAT 2013 - September 4-6, 2013 - Lausanne, Switzerland 607



increasing importance in the housing stock dynamics in most of mature urban centers and 
northern Europe. 

According to TNO3 (Koops, 2005) within the period 1990-2001, nearly 120,000 homes were 
removed and over 1 million new homes were added to the stock. He concludes by saying that 
“demolition is a small phenomenon that occurs spatially very uneven”, and suggests that
demolition often occurs in areas with large-scale concentration of inexpensive buildings.  

Deriving data from INTRON and RIGO5 it is estimated that within a period of 8 years 1995-
2003 in the Netherlands there were 7 new houses built for every 1 demolished. Between 2004 
and 2011, however, the ratio was 3,7 new houses for 1 demolished. The reduction of 
demolition and construction of new buildings is a current trend indicating that C&D waste 
flows in the housing segment are not only defined by demolition, but also largely affected by 
renovation cycles; which is still a poorly measured phenomenon. Despite the decreasing ratio 
between demolition and new construction, there has been an absolute increase of demolition 
rates from 0,17% in 2000 to 0,25% in 2008. 

For this study the housing stock was divided according to construction year and typology. By
comparing previous housing stock reports, it was possible to identify which housing groups
were more prone to be demolished.  Highest demolition rates were from gallery flats before 
1964, terraced houses before 1964, and semi- detached from the same period all mostly from 
the social housing segment. The type of classification defines the quantities and quality of the 
material composition in the stock. A more detailed description of materials has been made 
according each group and then compared to the recovered material rates derived from 
demolition companies. The results show that different materials and different amounts of 
materials will be recovered from different building groups. The general average recovery rate 
among products will range from 30% to 70% (interviews with different demolition 
companies). The proportion of these materials present today in the housing stock was in this 
paper exemplified by one group of buildings (free standing, terraced, semi-detached and 
duplex before 1964), representing 29.2% of the total existing housing stock. Recoverable 
materials: 4,232,161 tons of wood (roof structure, floor & frames); 17,052,149 tons of 
ceramic (roof tile and brick façade1); 979 ext. doors; 9600 int. doors; 1199 wash basin; 1460 
wcs. Interviewed demolition companies also extract different products from housing stock as 
lamps, balcony fences, staircase handrails, kitchen systems as cabinets, mirrors, handles, 
sockets, etc. that have not been included in this calculation. 

III. Waste production 
Today, development of C&D waste production is periodically published by two major sources 
of information: by the Agentschap NL (NL Agency, Ministry of Economic Affairs) and the 
National Registration Centre for Waste (LMA). Reporting of waste is dependent on the 
company that disposes the waste, which in most cases is a transportation company, either 
private or public. There is not a clear relation between the waste generator and ownership of 
waste in waste registration (Koppert et al, 2010)4. Even though currently the code description 
for waste registration at the LMA is based on the Euralcode system, previous code(s) systems 
are at times still used to classify waste. Regular accounting using this new coding system is 
more consistent since 2002 with improvements made in 2008 describing construction and 
demolition waste by material type and origin which LMA aggregated into three categories: 
building, infrastructure and utility; while the Agentschap database uses 14 different                                                         1 Recoverable façade bricks today are mainly extracted from constructions dated until 1930s that more often employed lime based mortar rather than cement based mortar, which increase deconstruction of these bricks.  
608 CISBAT 2013 - September 4-6, 2013 - Lausanne, Switzerland



categories. Hence, one barrier is that not all companies register their waste properly according 
to the Euralcode. At times companies may mismatch material categories, which will influence 
at final waste accounting. Another issue confronted is double accounting. The waste will be 
accounted by the transportation companies and at times also by the waste processing 
companies. 

The accuracy of the data provided as a total is therefore still questionable since not all 
disposals need to be reported (e.g. small businesses do not have to register waste and 
processed waste that is classified under a different Euralcode). The lack of “control” that 
reinforces the registration practice allows companies to by-pass registration of “ unknown”
waste derived from demolition and construction (Afvalbeheer, 2011).  

Currently the National Demolition Association in the Netherlands (VERAS) works with a set 
of forms which demolition companies are asked to complete. These forms are actual 
inventories done in two phases before and after demolition as an evaluation of the material 
flows content in the project to be demolished. This documentation is essential as part of 
tenders offered by these companies in large-scale demolition projects. Nonetheless, there is no 
official requirement that this documentation is submitted. These documents are however 
precious source of information about waste production (from source) and possible assessment 
for the entire building stock when comparing waste production with building typologies and 
construction year.  

The overall evolution of waste streams shows that cement-based products have progressively 
substituted consumption of ceramic products. Internal walls, roof tiles and floor systems are 
the best cases that evolved from this substitution. Nonetheless, waste fractions are still 
evolving according to older fraction of the stock. A consistent database for ceramic-based 
products in C&D waste stream started in 2002 and its volume has slightly decreased in 
absolute numbers. Wood streams have drastically increased in the same period, while all 
metals can be considered as relatively stable since 2002; plastics presents a surprising 
continuous decline, which is a very small percentage from the current consumption rate. Total 
C&D waste production has increased from 1995 to 2009, stony fraction waste production has 
a very similar evolution. Housing demolition rates in the same period have increased in the 
same period, which coincides with the evolution of total C&D waste production and stony 
fraction waste production. 

DISCUSSION  

There are several benefits when integrating an accounting system in these three levels as 
described in this paper: the input of materials, the analyses of stock and output as waste 
production over time. It has been shown that it is possible to connect these scales (primary 
resource consumption to product) and evaluate which products are, or will be, critical to waste 
production and consequently treatment. This type of information can give feedback to product 
development, building design and waste treatment solutions that could better process certain 
waste flows. Such initiative of tracking materials from waste back to material consumption, 
product manufacture and back to waste production is part of a new trend seen in both 
recycling industry in the Netherlands and partially in small scale micro business 
deconstruction and recover of materials for retail previous recycling. Without such qualitative 
analyses fractions of waste that today are being incinerated or generally downcycled could be 
upgraded in the waste hierarchy as upcycle and reuse. In the Netherlands here is already an 
existent structure in the accounting national systems that could be improved in order to make 
this integration happen. Savings in data assessment as prevention measures may lead to future 
higher expenditures in repairing long term consequences both at the primary extraction 

CISBAT 2013 - September 4-6, 2013 - Lausanne, Switzerland 609



material level and at the waste production and treatment level. The case of quick and large 
scale implementation of incinerating plants around the country in the past showed that with 
lack of more detail information waste treatment solutions are leveled from the minimum 
standards while technology and consumer behavior evolves resulting in technological lock-in 
effects, or have to be long term support of outdated solutions instead of shifting to better ones. 

The liberalization of the waste market should not hinder the legitimacy of a centralized 
national accounting system based on compulsory waste registration flows and reinforcement 
of measures that are today voluntary or “ungoverned”.  
 
CONCLUSION 

The findings from this research concluded that there is already an existing structure in the 
Netherlands able to organize the information of construction and demolition waste production 
that can support integrated material metabolism bringing large advances in waste management 
and qualitative improvement of material consumption. Nonetheless, this structure is not yet 
effectively applied, the organization of the data is not easily comprehensive and the data 
sharing is not public available. Despite the progress made of waste flows accounting since 
1995, towards standardization of accounting methods in the Netherlands and in Europe 
tracking material flows through codes and origin, there are still challenges in evaluating the 
development of waste production as constant changes occur in the classification of material 
flows, origin, and waste registration. In three different levels (input, stocks and output), an 
existent effective structure able to improve the evaluation of waste production was found that 
could directly support waste treatment improvements, environmental assessments extending 
to evaluation of product development and construction systems and the a review of the entire 
construction mechanism that is currently intertwined to the final material choices. 

REFERENCES 

1.  de Bree, M. A.: Waste and Innovation. How waste companies and government can 
interact to stimulate innovation in the Dutch waste industry. Delft, 2005. 

2.  Symons Group Ltd.: Priority Waste Streams Programme. Project Group to the European 
Commission on the C&DW, 1999. 

3.  Koops, M.: Sloop en nieuwbouw in Nederlandse stadswijken; ontwikkelingen en 
effecten. Delft, 2005. 

4.  Koppert, H.: Environmental protection expenditures in the building industry 
Final report Statistics Netherlands 

5.  Hofstra, U.:Scenariostudie Bsa-Granulaten aanbod en afzet van 2005 tot 2025. Delft, 
2006.

610 CISBAT 2013 - September 4-6, 2013 - Lausanne, Switzerland



HOW TO GIVE AN ADDED VALUE TO URBAN ENERGY DATA: 
TWO COMPLEMENTARY APPROACHES 

F. Roduit1; G. Blanc2; G. Cherix3. 

1: Project Manager, CREM, 1920 Martigny Switzerland 

2: Project Manager, CREM, 1920 Martigny Switzerland 

3: Director, CREM, 1920 Martigny Switzerland 

ABSTRACT 

Cities will play a major role to achieve the energy-climate objectives adopted by the European 
Union, and its member states. Many have adopted ambitious objectives and elaborate 
associated operational strategies: increasing energy efficiency, reducing CO2 emissions and 
increasing renewable energy production. The achievement of such objectives implies that 
cities dispose of reliable energy-climate data, ensuring that local authorities are able to control 
their energy consumptions and productions, thus able to develop concrete strategies, and 
measure the effect of the implementation of these strategies. 

Two approaches of energy data collection and valorisation are presented, with two 
complementary aims consisting of urban energy flows monitoring and energy planning. In the 
first approach, we consider the city as a global and unique consumer. The data must be 
derived from actual and dynamic measurements, in order to benchmark with reliability the 
effect of actions undertaken by the city. Consumption data are aggregated by services and by 
sectors, and then plotted on a flow diagram incorporating energy conversion processes at the 
city-scale. In the second approach, we consider the city as a set of different consumers. 
Calculation of heat and electrical consumptions and needs of each territorial element such as 
building is made through the use of several statistical models. The potential of local 
renewable energy resources is determined based on resources availability, regulations and 
technological models. Geo-referencing all of these data provides a multi-scale vision of the 
energy situation. Furthermore, the simulation of several future scenarios allows to represent 
and to analyse the local energy situation with different temporalities. 

The global approach of energy data collection and valorisation, aiming at “energy flow 
monitoring”, has established a first draft of an urban energy information system called SIEU, 
while the multi-scale approach lead to the development of the PlanETer energy planning tool. 
The latter, designed for local decision-makers, has been tested in over 10 municipalities 
allowing us to complete and validate our method and scientific approach. The use of this tool 
has helped to launch major projects related to the energy supply and consumption of 
territories.  

Keywords: Urban data management, energy flow monitoring, infrastructures and networks, 
synergies between consumptions and resources, regional energy strategy and planning, GIS 
tool. 

INTRODUCTION  

In order to define and implement most efficiently their energy policies, cities need to know 
the specific characteristics of their territory in terms of energy needs, consumptions,
production and resources. This implies that they will have to collect a large amount of data, 
structure them and make them “available”; they will then feed tools that help decision making 

CISBAT 2013 - September 4-6, 2013 - Lausanne, Switzerland 611



through relevant indicators. Monitoring and planning tools represent two examples of such 
data valorisation. Since the objectives of these two later are clearly distinct, the 
methodological and technological approaches used to collect, process and represent data are 
also different. However, it is relevant to put these two data treatment approaches in parallel, 
not only to present their specificities, but also to identify points of convergence, with the 
perspective of developing global tools integrating the two approaches. 

METHOD 

Monitoring approach 
Frameworks having already been suggested to represent urban energy flows [1, 2], the main 
challenge consists on making the monitoring reliable, in order to benchmark as accurately as 
possible the actions undertaken by municipalities; it is thus essential to dispose of multi-
energy data based on current and dynamic measurements [3]. The objective is therefore to 
identify and implement the most appropriate approaches to obtain high quality data. It has 
been identified that the consumption data can be collected through multiple sources: 

 Automated measurements at the final consumer level. These can be done by smart-meters 
(for electricity, gas and district heating consumption), sensors (for solar thermal 
consumption) and gauges (for fuel tank level). 

 Import of existing databases. Actors that can provide local data consumption are variable:
utilities (electricity, gas, district heating), oil and wood suppliers, companies specialized 
in the oil supply logistics for housing, local municipalities, departmental and national 
services. 

 Recording and transmission of information by the final consumer, through occasional 
surveys (mail, phone, mail), online questionnaires, or energy social networks. 

 Assessment of consumption, based on installed systems (boiler power, solar panel 
surfaces), through the identification of needs, or through the extrapolation of regional 
statistics.  

The quality of these collection methods and of the data gathered is then analysed through 
performance criteria to select methods that best meet the specifications of the monitoring 
approach. These criteria are: the compatibility with the specific requirements of the approach 
(dynamic representation of the energy situation and evolution); the quality and reliability of 
methods, measurement systems and data collected; the methods and measurement systems 
implementation potential (simplicity and speed of implementation, acceptance, ...); the human 
and material costs. 

Planning approach 

The success of sustainable energy planning depends on the ability of local decision-makers to 
integrate a number of complex and dissociated elements which are exclusively dependent to 
the concerned territory. The main challenge is to bring these elements together giving 
decision-makers an overview focused on added-value in terms of energetic and sustainability 
aspects. Up until now, geographic information systems (gis) were mainly used to inventory 
and to evaluate the potential of renewable energy resources in specific case study [4, 5, 6]. 
With our approach of energy planning, the use of a geodatabase enables not only to evaluate 
local energy resources but also local energy demands and possible synergies between them. 
Our energy planning approach is based on the following steps: 

612 CISBAT 2013 - September 4-6, 2013 - Lausanne, Switzerland



 Evaluation and geo-referencing of local renewable energy resources potential mainly 
based on resources availability, regulations, technological models and existing energy 
network infrastructures.  

 Calculation and geo-referencing of heat and electrical consumptions and needs of each 
building made through the use of several statistical models related to federal and regional 
building registers for household, industry and services. The statistical model is 
continuously updated with real values if available and provided by local energy 
distributors. 

 Estimation and geo-referencing of future heat and electrical consumption depending on 
possible future scenarios mainly based on time horizon, rate of new or renovated 
building, stricter energy policies and climate objectives.  

 Evaluation and geo-referencing of possible synergies between energy resources and 
demands at different geographical scale from the building itself to the city as a whole.

 Analyse and geo-referencing of technical and economic opportunities, which take in 
account the local synergies and constraints. Design of the energy system. 

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 

Monitoring approach 
This approach has resulted in a first draft of an urban energy information system, called SIEU. 
The first component of SIEU represents the energy production and consumption flow 
diagram, incorporating conversion processes at the city-scale. Consumption data are 
aggregated by services, such as electricity, heating / cooling and transport, and by sector, such 
as building, transport and industry. The second component contains sets of indicators 
representing the overall performance of the city as well as their evolution in terms of energy 
consumption, greenhouse gas emissions, and quality of supply. These energy indicators are 
furthermore complemented by the display of demographic, socio-economic and weather 
indicators. The data collection methods were evaluated according to their performance 
(reliability, quality, cost, etc). The results are summarized in figure 1. In this figure, the width 
of discs refers to the compatibility of the method with the specifications of SIEU, and the 
darkness represents the overall application potential considering the different criteria. 

The main conclusions of the evaluation are the following, for the most relevant methods: 

 Consumptions databases that already exist, belonging to utilities, municipalities or private 
companies, reveal a very high application potential for SIEU. However, if existing, they 
are not necessarily available or usable in the state: their use requires the establishment of 
strong multi-stakeholder collaborations, but also data mining operations to translate data 
into useful information. 

 Telemetry based methods also have a strong potential for SIEU: high quality data can be 
obtained (frequency, accuracy, granularity) on actual consumption. However, both for 
economic and social acceptance reasons, these meters can hardly be deployed exclusively 
in the perspective of the establishment of a SIEU; the aim can therefore be to exploit 
meters installed by local actors (energy suppliers). 

 Data collection through online questionnaires or energy social networks may be useful:
data can be obtained quickly, easily, at low cost, and for specific consumption. This 
method enables to collect all data in the same format which no measurement systems 
allows (e.g. kerosene). However, the approach can only be used in support of the first two 

CISBAT 2013 - September 4-6, 2013 - Lausanne, Switzerland 613



approaches, since the data are of low quality (low frequency of update, risks of error) and 
the reliability of the approach, its implementation (acceptance) and long term use (the 
user could give up) are not guaranteed. 

Figure 1: Evaluation of data collection methods 

Planning approach 
This approach as resulted in the development of a new GIS- tool for regional energy planning, 
called PlanETer. To give more accuracy to this planning approach, the developed GIS-tool 
was tested in more than 10 Swiss pilot cities. These cities differ from one to another by their 
size, their natural resources availability, and their energy need. This variety offers a solid 
background to develop and validate our methodology, which can be reproducible in other 
urban area. The developed geodatabase enable us to give detailed answers to their energy 
planning territory related questions. Is district heating an energy- and cost-effective solution 
for my region? Which buildings should be connected? What is the required temperature level? 
How many geothermal probes should I install, where and at which depth? What is the return 
of investment I could expect? The answers based on our GIS-tool were convincing and highly 
considered by local authorities. One example, amongst many others, is the launch by one of 
the pilot municipality of a 100% renewable district heating project. 

614 CISBAT 2013 - September 4-6, 2013 - Lausanne, Switzerland



Fig. 2 : Synergies between energy resources and future energy needs on specific areas of a 
city with 30'000 inh. 

CONCLUSION 

Cities around the globe want to control their energy costs, to take advantage of their local 
energy resources, to reduce their carbon footprint. Since 2008, more than 4’000 European 
cities has set themselves ambitious goals by signing the Covenant of Mayors1. On one hand, 
it’s an enormous difficulty for cities to get reliable, structured and sufficient energy data of 
their territory. On the other hand, energy management is driven and impacted by many local 
actors, such as municipalities, energy providers, consumers and urban planners. Furthermore, 
they all have different approaches and responsibilities on this common thematic, mainly based 
on their own professional competencies, abilities and specific objectives.

In this context, the challenge consists on the development of a unique and multifunctional 
information system, based on reliable and dynamic urban energy data, which enables all 
actors to reach their objectives but also to interact with each other's. Such a development 
requires an intense collaboration between the local actors, particularly in terms of data 
sharing. This implies to overcome information transfer barriers such as the problems of
acceptance and protection of data. For this, economic and social gains leading to promote and 
sustain the exchange of data should be identified. From an economic perspective, new
business models, especially based on the use of ICT infrastructure, must be found to enable
stakeholders to generate mutual benefits through the sharing and valorisation of data. On the 
other hand, one should also integrate the final consumer in the development and operational 
stages of energy services, rather than leaving him at the end of the energy chain. The 
objective is to identify his real needs in terms of energy information and, on this basis, to 
establish an energy data sharing that would benefit to all.

The resulting multi-partners information system, fed by reliable and dynamic multi-energies 
data, will then be an appropriate tool leading to a more efficient energy management at the 
city level.
                                                
1 Signatories of the Covenant of Mayors voluntarily commit to increase energy efficiency by 20% and the use of 
renewable energy sources by 20% and to reduce their CO2 emissions by 20% on their territories by 2020. 

CISBAT 2013 - September 4-6, 2013 - Lausanne, Switzerland 615



REFERENCES  

1. Chapuis A., Cherix G., Capezzali M., Püttgen H. B., Finger M.: A Conceptual Framework 
for Energy Planning and CO2 Emission Counting in Urban Area. Proc. of the 9th
Conference on Applied Infrastructure Research (INFRADAY), Berlin, 8-9 October 2010 

2. Kim S. A., Shin D., Yoon C., Seibert T., Walz S. P.: Integrated energy monitoring and 
visualization system for Smart Green City development: Designing a spatial information 
integrated energy monitoring model in the context of massive data management on a web 
based platform. Automation in Construction, Vol 22, pp 51-59, March 2012 

3. Keirstead J., Jennings M., Sivakumar A.: A review of urban energy system models: 
Approaches, challenges and opportunities. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 
Vol 16, Issue 6, pp 3847-3866, August 2012 

4. Van Hoesen, J., Letender S.: Evaluating potential renewable energy resources in Poultney, 
Vermont: A GIS-based approach to supporting rural community energy planning. 
Renewable Journal, Vol. 35, Is. 9, pp. 2114-2122, Sept 2010 

5. Athanasios A-D., Biberacherb M., Dominguezc J.: Methods and tools to evaluate the 
availability of renewable energy sources. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews,  
Vol. 15, Is. 2, pp. 1182-1200, Feb 2011 

6. Piguet P., Blunier P., Lepage L., Mayer A., Ouzilou O.: A new energy and natural 
resources investigation method: Geneva case studies. Cities, Vol. 28, Is. 6, pp. 567-575, 
Dec 2011 

616 CISBAT 2013 - September 4-6, 2013 - Lausanne, Switzerland



THE MODEL OF THE RESILIENT CITY BETWEEN THE 
TRADITIONAL AND MODERN MODEL -  

THE WATER CYCLE 

Giovanna Saporiti1; Carlos Girón2; Cynthia Echave3; Albert Cuchì1.
1:  Politecnico di Milano, Dip DAStU, via Bonardi 3 - 20133 Milano 
2:  Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Dip. Humanidades, Ramon Trias Fargas, 25-27

08005 Barcelona
3:  Agencia de Ecologia Urbana de Barcelona, C. Escar 1, 3 · 08039 Barcelona
4:  Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya, Dip. Construccions Arquitectòniques I, C. Pere 

Serra, 1-15, 08190 Sant Cugat del Vallès

ABSTRACT  
The study is focused in the relationship between water and the urban form specifically in pre 
and post industrial Milan. 
Resilience is not an absolute capacity of the ecosystem but a reply to a determinate traumatic 
event. It is linked to the city and to the lack or alteration of the flows that feed it. This means 
that it is necessary to model a resilient city.  
Milan is the case study: its evolution from the traditional to the post-industrial model. The 
elements of crisis are deeped in the analysis of water cycle. It is not a casual choice because 
water is one of the fundamental elements in human life, one of the deepest matrixes of the 
human teachings. This character is recognized in the traditional model that is the one of a
resilient city in full harmony with the surrounding environment. In this city water plays a
decisive role. It is the element that shapes and structures the urban form -surface and 
groundwater. It is the key element for modelling the urban form and defining of the quality of 
the anthropized space. In the modern age, in the Western world, water was used as an element 
for aesthetic embellishment, not as a functional one. 
Therefore, starting from the traditional urban layout related to its hydrography, the hypothesis 
is that there was an unsustainable change because of the industrial age. This is necessary to 
identify characters of urban resilience in order to evaluate the resilient level in the water cycle 
of the current city. This is made with the analysis of some strategies that have been already 
developed.   
The case study is Milan that was named water city for its abundance of good quality water. 
The urban morphology evolution is based on the drinking water supply, how water is 
collected, as energy source and also as a nutrient for cultivated land. 
Keywords: urban resilience, water cycle, urban morphology 

INTRODUCTION  
From the definition of urban resilience as «(...) the whole of adaptive capacities of a urban 
system when facing stress factors and particularly climatic change phenomena and energetic 
lack» (UNEP, 2005), a resilient neo-ecosystem is able to «absorb shocks and/or perturbation 
without suffering relevant alterations in its functional organization, in its structure and in the 
characteristics of its identity» (UNEP, 2005). 
Therefore the concepts of resilience and sufficiency are tightly linked so we can understand 
which is the dimensional limit of the analysed neo-ecosystem. As a matter of fact, the 
important element of sufficiency is de capacity of using only the necessary quantity of 
elements so welfare is guaranteed for the individual and the territory he inhabits. As Sachs 

CISBAT 2013 - September 4-6, 2013 - Lausanne, Switzerland 617



says «meanwhile efficiency means doing things in the right way, sufficiency is equivalent to 
doing what is fair» (Sachs, 2007). The concept of sufficiency is linked with «the fair measure 
seen as an equal system and as the art of life» (Sachs, 2007) and also with a «new way of 
interacting with goods and services» (Sachs, 2007), this not only regarding the quantity and 
the efficiency of technology, but mostly the quality of life and the decrease of the charge in 
the natural capital. It is sure that the efficiency in the use of resources remains an essential 
element in the discussion, but this efficiency must be together with a sufficiency perspective 
regarding the natural and social capital. 
This capacity, typical of the natural ecosystems and now lost in those that are man-made, can 
be focalized and discussed in the analysis of the relationship between water and the urban 
form, most of all if it is analysed in the relations between the pre and post industrial model 
and the elements that led to the crisis of the traditional model.  
Water is a main element of the urban metabolism not only as part of the essential properties 
for the survivorship of humans and vegetables, but as a critical element for the metabolism of 
the city influencing in as source of energy and as vital nutrient. Is this way water has been 
always a fundamental vector of modelling and balance of the urban form. 

METHOD 
Milan and the crisis of the traditional model 
Milan is located in the middle of a plain and it is very rich from the hydrographical point of 
view because of the abundant ground water and also for the proximity to numerous rivers that 
arrive from the Alps to the Po Valley. The pre-industrial Milan, as a matter of fact, profited 
from good quality water supplying without too much complications. Almost every block had 
a well, private or public, that warrantied the access to a high quantity of potable water even 
for domestic use. The potable water public fountains arrived later to the city. The first one is 
located in Fontana Square, built by Piermarini in the second half of the 700 century with the 
same supplying system of the public and private wells that already existed.  
Rainwater helps to preserve the nutritional balance of the cultivated land. The first works of 
sewerage are from the imperial era. The emissary channel of the network followed the course 
of what today is Torino Street ending in the Carrobbio. With the dawn of the Roman Empire 
we have to wait until the end of the Middle Age to see how channelling sewage projects were 
resumed, but not as organic and efficient as the roman ones. This was caused by the absence 
of a general plan that led to the realization of conducts that tried to solve the contingent and 
specific problems of every single street for then carrying the water to the antique defence 
channels: Seveso and the intern pit. In any way this conducts were only used for 
meteorological water. The “problem” of the disposal of black water and the use of organic 
wastes and excrements for agriculture was easily resolved. In fact, from the first roman 
expansion, the city was equipped with a lot of channels and pits realized for transportation, 
defence, agriculture, sewage water and, later un time, for the production of energy. Some of 
them drew the water from near rivers (Seveso and Olona mainly), other ones from the 
naviglio of the Martesana that entered Milan form north and, as the name of intern Fossa, 
flowed along most part of the urban perimeter. In its way collected the private and public 
discharges delivering them later in the Vettabbia channel that was uncovered. The houses 
nearby the channels had to build the underground discharge conducts for wastewater and 
latrines mandatorily; meanwhile in the intern zones without looking out the channels had a 
black wells system.  
The morphology and hydrography of the Lombard territory facilitated the creation of mills so 
that they could profit water energy. As a matter of fact, in the Middle Age we can find 
numerous mills in the Lombard territory that were a fantastic instrument of control for the 

618 CISBAT 2013 - September 4-6, 2013 - Lausanne, Switzerland



authorities upon surrounding territories. However the apex of development of the mill activity 
is dated in the XVII century.  
Post-industrial Milan 
With the Industrial Revolution the water demand grows exponentially and so it does the 
pollution of this good. The population in the 1881 census was 321.000 habitants. That's why 
the city was forced to take actions as the construction of the sewerage network and one 
aqueduct.  
  The potable water supplying changed radically with the Industrial Revolution not only 
because of the quantity needed, but also because of the demand of a hygienic control 
substantially diverse.  The choice was to build deeper wells that reached the groundwater in 
order to warrantee the purity and sanity of the drinking water. At the beginning of 1889 the 
first pumping plant was built –called Arena– and it started its service at the end of the same 
year. To regularize the water delivery pressure two great storage tanks were build in 
proportion: one of steal in 1893 and the second one in 1903 of reinforced concrete. These 
ones were placed inside the towers of the Sforzesco castell. The success of this system 
determined the technical setting of Milan’s aqueduct. 
As for the draining of meteorological water it was until 1868 when the first real project of 
modern sewerage was presented in the town council. This one included a widespread 
network, but an unorganized one, of 123 channels partially covered and partially uncovered 
with a longitude of 153 km. A “mixed system” is adopted that collected in a unique conduct 
the meteorological waters and the wastewaters. In 1884, with the expansion of the Beruto 
plan, it was possible to deal with the problem of the sewer network in a more organic way in 
the expansion areas. The new network of conducts, that choses the “mixed system” anyway, 
was determined by the morphological structure of the city and led with his evolution to the 
formation of a system “in terraces”. Therefore, there were done concentric zones related to the 
central core of the city in decreasing proportion and served each one with its own and 
autonomous collector located in the intern zone (diagram). In this expansive phase they bet 
again for the biologic natural depuration of the campaigns irrigated south of the city. Only in 
2001 they were realized three poles of depuration (San Rocco, Nosedo and Peschiera 
Borromeo). 
The Industrial Revolution involved a radical change in the relationship between water and 
energy. As we already said water is energy, the cycle of water, in deed, allows us to maintain 
biotic balance saving a lot of energy. In particular, with the introduction of coal and new 
machines that made the development process more efficient and fast, Milan at the end of 1800 
decides to build the first thermoelectric central in Europe. Italy, generally speaking, is a 
country with a lack of fossil fuels so the technicians of the Italian Society of Electricity, in 
1884 when it was born, decided to push the studies related to the hydroelectric production of 
energy. From that moment in Lombardy will continue in that direction. The number of 
centrals built continues to grow specially during the wars that did not allowed the coal 
importation. Between 1966 and 1967 the hydroelectric energy covers almost the 50% of the 
national requirements. 
The crucial element of this change was the conviction that one city with such water wealth in 
the underground and in the surrounding territory could not do anything else that profiting the 
new technologies and the new materials available for industrial development, for creating a 
modern image, that wants to disclaim its evolution as city of water. The element of the crisis 
resides in the same objective that has persecuted, and stills do, the post-industrial city: the 
idea of a development that today only adds the adjective sustainable creating a profound 
antithesis.  

CISBAT 2013 - September 4-6, 2013 - Lausanne, Switzerland 619



What do we understand indeed as (un)sustainable development? What is development and 
what does it entails? To answer these questions is helpful to reed a passage from Scritti 
corsari that seems that was written today and give us light about some contradictions.  
«There are two words that frequently come back in our conversations: on the contrary, they 
are the keywords of our speeches. These two words are “development” and “progress”. Are 
they synonyms? Or, if they aren’t synonyms, do they indicate two different moments of the 
same phenomenon? Or do they indicate two different phenomena that are integrate with each 
other? Or, even, do they suggest two only partially similar and synchronic phenomena? 
Finally, do they indicate two phenomena that are opposed between them and which only 
appear to coincide and complement themselves» (Siti, 1999). In fact Pier Paolo Pasolini 
specifies that «the progress is an ideal (social and political) notion but the development is a 
pragmatic and economic fact» (Siti, 1999). 
Starting with this definition, the sustainable model that is called to solve the post-industrial 
crisis, is only partially effective. In fact, to manage a change of the model, it is necessary to 
consider the transmission of natural capital. It is feasible introducing the possibility of losing 
natural resources but acquiring the ability to compensate with other one that has the same 
function. 
«(…) A self-sufficient system that is truly homogeneous and where the climatic fluctuations 
are reasonably limited, a complex adaptive system» (Holling, 73) is a model that can be 
opposed to neo-ecosystems contemporaries model. It is a dynamic, sensitive to external 
changes and unexpected changes system and it is focused on the connections between them, 
and between the species of the system and the external environment with the specific 
components of the system. 

RESULTS 
A resilient neo-ecosystem «tents to keep an integrity of functions during a impairment»
(Common, Stagl, 2008). This resilient system is able to work with species that modify its 
function or replace some of other one. This means that a resilient system can be composed of 
species that tend to zero during the shock and return to a normal activity after waiting a time. 
Therefore resilience is a system property and not a property of its components. 
The resilient capacity depends on the shock and on the evaluation of the primary productivity 
of the system and the recovery time.  

Major threats of the urban neo-ecosystem

Climate change Welfare state
Scope of impact Threat Scope of impact Threat

Energetic model 
Water management model 
Material management 
model 

Resource depletion 
because of 
greenhouse

Equipment
Home 

Provision of basic 
services low (education, 
health, home)

Territorial occupancy 
model
Biodiversity
Species protection 

Biodiversity loss Public space
Urban mobility 

Loss of urban space 
quality

Activities 
Population
Economy
Participation 

Low social cohesion 

Table 1: Relation between threats of neo-ecosystem and impacts. 

620 CISBAT 2013 - September 4-6, 2013 - Lausanne, Switzerland



The second step is to specify the elements of urban resilience that depend on its scope of 
impact respect water cycle. It emphasizes that water cycle is linked to the urban metabolism, 
the territory occupancy, the biodiversity, the urban form and space and welfare.  

Urban neo-ecosystem 
components 

Elements of the resilience linked 
to the climate change 

Elements of the resilience linked to 
the welfare state

Physic structure Adapting to a model of efficiency 
and passive capacity of the urban 
form (buildings and open space) 

Ecological urban planning 

Processes Measures to improve the efficiency 
of the urban metabolism 

Ability to self organization (social and 
economy activities)

Dematerialization of the resource 
management
Urban biodiversity conservation  

Society Awareness
Reduced demands

Habitability of urban space
Awareness
Individual’s relationship with the  (rural 
and urban) environment

Table 2: synthesis of the resilient elements 

Therefore, a resilient system has three basic features: diversity of the elements of neo-
ecosystem, modularity and feedback capacity. 
A resilient system is, in fact, characterized by a diversity of elements capable of reacting in
different ways to different challenges. Overall, ecologists think that the diversity of elements 
in the resilient system is key because a complex ecosystem has a proper number of species 
and connexions of the food chain. Complexity does not depend only on the stability of the 
system. Infact, asCommonandStaglexplain, ifashockimpacts the key specie, it is not always a 
loss of resilience. For example, if the function of the key specie x is to disseminate seeds, the 
system can be composed by other species able to do the same function. This means that a 
system with another specie able to do this function may react to the shock without collapsing. 
Its startingorganizationcanchangeandcontinuetowork,although not without modifying itself.
It is modular because the components of the group are well connected to each other inside and 
they can create a community able to isolate themselves during a shock. The modularity is a
typical feature of computer networks. It evaluates the network division into modules 
(community). A module works independently from the contribution of the others modules. 
Increasing modularity, therefore, the collaboration between the different modules is 
stimulated, but the dependency between them is eliminated. Finally, a resilient system is 
characterized by a good feedback. It is the ability to store the obtained results and uses them 
to modify the characteristics of the system. It involves the cause-effect chain and allows the
system to perceive the consequences of their actions in a short time and so it is able to activate a
solution. 
The feedback capacity brings out the fundamental problem of our times: globalization and the 
loss of an overview at a global scale able to evaluate our territory and to keep it productive.
Speaking about the water cycle, the productivity challenge of the surrounding area is closely 
linked to modern sewerage system. From on side the organic matter can be used as fertilizer 
and from the other one urban rainwater can runoff and carry nutrients to farmland. Therefore 
it would be necessary to specify at a neighbourhood scale to recover and use these nutritional 
elements. It allows rediscovering the use of underground water and sewerage system to improve 
the permeability of urban areas, because water can be functional to the process described. 
Finally, the modularity is directly linked with the concept of dimensional limit, explained 
above. We cannot think to look for effective solutions only for small cities that maintain an 

CISBAT 2013 - September 4-6, 2013 - Lausanne, Switzerland 621



important link with the countryside or important waterways. Therefore this approach attempts
to work at a neighbourhood scale to redefine the urban form so that green and water are not 
only a decorative supplement that needs constant and expensive maintenance, but elements 
that shape this change. 

DISCUSSION 
The traditional model is the one of resilient neo-ecosystem and it cannot be reproduced in the 
contemporary model because of its technological, social and economic changes. Therefore a 
comparative analysis between the urban morphology of the modern city and traditional city is 
required to define and evaluate the elements of resilience and to propose improvement 
strategies of water cycle at the urban scale.  
The resilient concept is connected to the ascendenza (Ulanowicz 1986) that is a quantitative 
attribute of the ecosystem and, especially, a natural condition of it. It is the product of two 
elements: the information contained in ecological network and the data transmitted by the 
system. It includes the evaluation of the complexity of the elements of the system and its 
relations with environment. The interesting thing in the approach of Ulanowicz is the focus on 
the system organization and dimension. So each system can grow without limits. Its limit is 
the self organization habitat that is able not to «make difficult but rather facilitate food 
production, water supply, climate protection, protection of private and collective property 
organization of social relations and aesthetic satisfaction of each one» (Friedman 2009). 
This definition of habitat by Friedman is based on the idea of «critical group» (Friedman 
2009). It is connected to capacities, biologically determined by man, for wich «each structure 
of a group has a limited size (…) able to react fast to attacks from outside» (Friedman 2009).
Therefore the concept of physic limit of an urban sprawl is reflected in some problems of the 
urban grow of Milan. Surely the modern city exceeded this limit because it has created a clear 
separation between the city and its territory. Therefore, speaking about the diversity of 
components, it is important to implement and protect the variety of sources of supply 
abundant in the city and that we discussed above.  
The first one is rainwater, its collection, its ability to transport and channel organic matter and 
nutrients, not only to the countryside -now too far away from the urban centre- but also to the 
parks and brownfield sites. They can be converted into gardens or green areas that can be a 
link between the built-up and the surrounding area.  
The second one is the channels network that can be used for transporting materials and 
nutrients and that, with water sources inside the city and green spaces, can help to mitigate the 
urban microclimate, especially in the summer.  
And finally the fontanili can contribute to the drainage and agricultural development of the 
Lombardy territory. Furthermore they can be used to produce energy, using the many mills in 
Lombardy or the hydroelectric power plants. 

REFERENCES  
1. Bovesin de la Riva De magnalibus Mediolani, Libri Scheiwiller, Milano. 
2. Basilico G., Negri G., Sandri M.: Architettura d’acqua per la bonifica e l’irrigazione, Electa, Milano, 1990.
3. Common M., Stagl s.: Introducción a la Economía Ecológica, Barcelona, Editorial Reverté, S.A., 2008. 
4. Friedman Y.: , Torino, Bollati Boringhieri Editore 

s.r.l., 2009. 
5. Holling, C.: Resiliente and stability of ecological systems. Annual Rewievs , 1973. 
6. Magnaghi, A.: Il progetto locale, Torino, Bollati Boringhieri Editore s.r.l., 2010. 
7. Malara E.: Mikano città porto. Origin difensiva e trasformazione funzionale del naviglio interno, Mediaset, 1996 
8. Odum, E. P.: Basi di ecología, (L. Nobile, Trad.) Padova, Piccin Nuova Librería, 1988. 
9. Sachs, A.C. & Santarius, T.:Per un futuro equo. Conflitti sulle risorse e giustizia globale. Milano, Feltrinelli, 2007
10. Sporcinelli A.: Storia sociale dell’acqua, Mondadori, Milano, 1998.
11. UNEP: Climate change. The role of the cities. Nairobi, 2005. 

622 CISBAT 2013 - September 4-6, 2013 - Lausanne, Switzerland



THE SMART NODE: A SOCIAL URBAN NETWORK AS A CONCEPT 
FOR SMART CITIES OF TOMORROW 

A. Scognamiglio1; M. Annunziato2; R. Cosenza3; R. Germano3; G. A. Lagnese3; C. Meloni2

1: ENEA, UTTP FOTO, largo Enrico Fermi 1, 80055 Portici, Italy 

2: ENEA, UTTEI, Casaccia, via Anguillarese 301, 00123 Santa Maria di Galeria, Italy 

3: 4M Engineering, via Ilioneo 25, 80124 Napoli, Italy 

ABSTRACT  

Smart Cities are a very important topic that researchers, politicians and planners are facing 
nowadays. Due to the necessary multidisciplinary approach, still today the smart city 
definition is not univocally given, and this gives us food for thinking. 

What is a smart city in reality, and how can the concepts that it implies transform into benefits 
for the social life of a city community? To answer these questions ENEA is participating in 
several research programs. Among these, the European Energy Research Alliance (EERA) - 
Joint Program Smart Cities that was launched in 2011, which investigates the highly complex 
structure of a future smart energy system on an urban level by applying innovative solutions 
in an interdisciplinary manner based on a clear long-term research strategy. Furthermore, in 
the framework of a national funding program (City 2.0) ENEA is experimenting at the scale 
of a medium town with the development of a proper model of smart city, which focuses on 
the social dimension. 

An interdisciplinary team (researchers, architects and engineers) is working on the design of 
what we call a Social Urban Network (SUN), which will find an iconic tangible expression 
(the contact point between the community and the city) in an interactive micro-architecture 
named Smart Node. The SUN is a co-ordinated system of interventions that develops both in 
the digital scene (web, social network, etc.) and in the real scene (interactive installation, 
social events). The aim is enhancing the development and wholeness of the social capital (the 
stock of competencies, knowledge, social and personality attributes, including creativity, 
embodied in the ability to perform labor so as to produce economic value) of the social 
network of the community. If in general a SUN might focus on several topics (welfare, health, 
relationship between the citizen and the public administration, etc.), the one ENEA is 
developing focuses on cultural processes. The Smart Node is an iconic and technological 
object, with a dimension that encompasses both city elements and people (micro-
architecture), able to represent the idea of connectivity for people. In particular, by being a 
space where people can meet each other, and integrating interactive output and interaction 
devices such as touch screens, beams, and other interactive technologies, it will represent for 
people a node where information can be shared and exchanged. This way, the social capital of 
the city can thrive thanks to the possibility of introducing creative contents and sharing them 
with the community.  

The ambition of the project is placing the first prototype of the Smart Node in L’Aquila, a city 
whose historical centre was greatly destroyed by an earthquake in 2009, to help city and 
citizens to re-set up a common sense of identity. 

Keywords: smart city, smart community, interactive architecture 

CISBAT 2013 - September 4-6, 2013 - Lausanne, Switzerland 623



INTRODUCTION AND APPROACH 

In order to experiment with Smart City concepts and models, ENEA decided to work on a 
specific reality in Italy, L’Aquila, where the need of improving the “city performance” is very 
high, due to a natural catastrophe occurred in 2009.

L’Aquila is a medium size town (about 66000 inhabitants), located in the region Abruzzi 
(Central Italy). Famous in the past thanks to its architectural and historical heritage, the city 
historical city centre was widely destroyed by an earthquake in 2009. Since that date many 
buildings have been secured by means of scaffoldings and several different kinds of structure. 
To preserve the citizens security, the inner part of the historical city centre has been 
designated a so-called “red zone”, where the access is not allowed (Figure 1). People who 
used to live in the city centre have been living in “new towns” placed out of the inner city for 
five years now, with a consequent progressive loss of identity of the city itself . 

Figure 1: Historical city centre of L’Aquila before and after the 2009 earthquake  

This condition of “emptiness” of the city centre has several implications on the relationship 
between the citizens and the city. Some of them are ascribable to concrete evidence of a 
discomfort (e. g. difficult or impossible accessibility of private and public buildings), some 
others are more ascribable to a social dimension (e. g. lack of a “centre” where it is possible to 
have a social life). Despite the works in progress, it is unlikely that a kind of “new L’Aquila”, 
preserving its traditional and strong identity, can be built in the near to medium term. The 
“suspended”, “uncertain” condition in which the city is today seems to be more permanent 
than temporary, and looks like an image for the psychological condition of the citizens 
themselves. 

All these premises seem to suggest that L’Aquila can be a good domain where to experiment 
with Smart City concepts, just because there is an urgency to re-build not only the functional 
city, but also the sense of the city itself. In such a situation, any reconstruction, to be 
“sustainable” should take into account the buildings, but, also, services for citizens, the social 
wholeness and the cultural heritage preservation.  

In order to structure a possible reference model that the reconstruction might follow, ENEA is 
experimenting with a Smart Ring, a specific application of the Smart City. 

The Smart Ring is conceived as the main core of the Smart City, a connection point of both 
utilities and citizens. It is a system of different interventions related to the integration of urban 
networks, controlled and managed by a centralized City Control Room, where all the data 
coming from the city’s monitoring system are collected. The single interventions that have 
been conceived and are under construction/development are coherent with the Historical City 
Centre Reconstruction Plan, approved by the Municipality of L’Aquila. In particular: public 
mobility and info-mobility; intelligent public lighting; buildings energy diagnostics and 
analysis; environmental monitoring; last but non least, a Social Urban Network. 

624 CISBAT 2013 - September 4-6, 2013 - Lausanne, Switzerland



THE SOCIAL URBAN NETWORK AS A POSSIBLE MODEL OF DEVELOPMENT FOR A 
SMART CITY 

The SUN is an experiment with a Smart Community aimed to strengthen the sense of 
wholeness through the collective production of contributes related to the cultural heritage and 
to the cultural processes of the city. The general goals of the project are: enhancing the social 
capital of the community in L’Aquila; moving the society from a digital dimension to a 
hybrid/physical one; overcoming the social dismemberment due to the effects of the 
earthquake; re-building a cultural identity, by bridging over the past and the future; 
contributing to re-build the city from the social capital. 

To enrich and to build-up the cultural processes we focused on two main aspects: 
strengthening the identity of the community (history, memory, cultural material heritage and 
immaterial identity heritage); supporting the creative act as a continuous element of 
construction of the cultural heritage, as well as having an impact on the social sharing and 
wholeness. Having set these premises, the SUN can be seen as an aggregator of experiences, 
and as an incubator of the social processes that take place in the city, aimed to strengthen the 
social wholeness.  

From a methodological point of view, the structure of the SUN is articulated in several tools, 
performing different functions (Figure 2). 

Figure 2: The Social Urban Network (SUN) functional structure

The first tool of the SUN is the Social Network. We will ensure a structured presence on the 
main social networks where citizens insert cultural contents. 

The second tool works on the cultural contents collected in the social networks. After a 
contents analysis done by means of a semantic analysis system, the cultural contents are 
classified and stored in a “contents database”. The semantic analysis system selects indicators 
related to the social exchange that happens in the social networks, with regard to cultural 
heritage, creative contents, the community experience and membership, emotional states 
(emotional city, discomfort, etc.). These indicators will be built up on the social network 

CISBAT 2013 - September 4-6, 2013 - Lausanne, Switzerland 625



model (web theory), and from them the attempt is trying to characterise a possible evolution 
of the connectivity features (intensity of connections, web model, possible presence of hubs 
on specific topics). 

Some of the indicators will be visualised on a web portal. The web portal helps in explaining 
and showing the content of the project, in creating galleries of creative contributes; in sharing 
a kind of picture of the community, based on the most communicative indicators of the 
semantic analysis. The main aim of the web portal is, therefore, showing a structured 
representation of the city of L’Aquila.

The whole system of the SUN is supervised by a Community Promoter (CP), a person who is 
very much familiar with the city of L’Aquila (may be from cultural city associations). The CP 
is the entertainer of the Social Network and of the cultural processes; at the same time the CP 
can manage information coming from the database, both easing and filtering actions. The 
contents will be managed so as to work as inputs for the web portal and/or for the Smart
Node, being presented to the public through output tools (e. g. videos, projections, etc.). The 
CP can also organize events for the community to focus on the most interesting contents 
proposed by the community. 

The whole project has a physical representation in the shape of a Smart Node. It is an 
interactive micro-architecture that works as a kind of window for sharing creative contents 
collected in the database, as well as some contents that can be chosen either by the CP or by 
the community itself (the citizens can vote their favourite contents). More creative contents 
sent by the semantic database could be shown in the Smart Node.

THE SMART NODE 

The Smart Node is shaped in the form of three different spatial domains, made out of three 
identically sized tube-shaped cells, named “tubes”. They are arranged around a central void, 
so as to be placed at the same distance from each other; the whole system can be seen as made 
out of three tubes, connected by means of an open air space (Figure 3). 

Figure 3: The Smart Node. The main parts (cells) are: an open air space; a foyer, a 
laboratory, an archive.

The three tubes perform different functions. The first one, the foyer,  is a welcoming space, 
where people can meet each other, getting informed on the cultural processes of the city and 
sharing information. It is a kind of home page of the system SUN, that shows its contents, 

626 CISBAT 2013 - September 4-6, 2013 - Lausanne, Switzerland



aims, and approach. The second one, the laboratory, is a space devoted to creating and 
elaborating proper contents (e. g. videos, pictures, installations, etc.). Here people can go and 
insert the contents that the CP will analyse and, if indicated, promote and share with the 
community, either by means of the web or/and by the output devices of the Smart Node. The 
third tube, the archive, is the space devoted to collecting materials that people can access.  

The open air space, in between the three tubes, plays a communicative role as well as the 
other parts of the system, since on its skin, thanks to visualization devices, there are traces of 
not-filtered activities coming from the social networks (e. g. tweets). 

More in detail, the tubes are equipped with different technological system and furniture; the 
approach to the use of technology is primordial and playful at the same time. 

In the foyer, a continuos seat along the wall welcomes the visitor/s, who can watch the display 
on the wall, which visualizes information, or can interact with the touch screen integrated into 
the small table in the centre. This touch screen is the interface for accessing the information 
on the SUN and on the cultural processes of the city.  

In the laboratory some interactive monitors hang over the walls. On the deep end wall there is 
a space with an interactive board. Touch screen monitors connected to computers are 
integrated in the circular wall as well. They are available for those performative activities that 
do not require a big display (such as writings or audio recordings). Here, in the laboratory, it 
is supposed that people enter one by one, or in small groups, so as to perform a creative 
activity with a certain degree of intimacy. Audio-video materials, as well as graphic-painting 
digital works can be produced and recorded here, thanks to the technological equipment of the 
room. Appropriate software will be available for the public to help in their creative interactive 
actions. All the contents created, elaborated and recorded here, are sent to the CP, who selects 
the ones suitable to be showed and shared with the community through the web portal or the 
smart node itself. 

The archive is the space where all the materials  that the SUN produces are collected and  
preserved, to be accessible to the public. Close to the entrance there is a bookstand that 
integrates an interactive monitor, from which it is possible to control and to select the outputs 
of the other monitors integrated in the deep end wall and into the circular walls.  

The outdoor space is a communicative/exhibitive space itself. In the external skin of each 
single tube there are LEDs displays that visualize messages coming from the social networks, 
from the web community, or from the SUN. A beamer, placed upon one of the tubes, can 
project images on the walls of the surrounding buildings, or on the ground. The idea is that 
the creative contents that people insert in the smart node can be shared with the community 
through the smart node itself. This kind of functioning enables a physical relationship 
between the digital city and the real one. The Smart Node is a small architecture that people 
can use, and a technological device at the same time, that can collect inputs from the 
community and give them back to the community as cultural contents after a controlled 
process managed in the framework of the SUN. Sensors and webcams placed on the Smart 
Node, work as security devices and support interactive actions in the community: for instance 
sounds, lights, images, can be produced by the smart node when someone is stepping close to 
it.

PRELIMINARY RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS 

A multidisciplinary team has been working on a proposal for the development of a real 
experience of smart city, to help a city almost destroyed by an earthquake to re-build its social 
identity and to enhance its social capital. 

CISBAT 2013 - September 4-6, 2013 - Lausanne, Switzerland 627



Together with ENEA researchers, architects and engineers have been working  on the Smart 
Node design (4M Engineering). At the same time an analysis of the social networks has been 
carried out by a group of researchers in Clinic Psychology (University of Chieti) to 
understand how to design the SUN so as to enhance the social capital of the city of L’Aquila. 
Researchers and professionals experienced in the field of social media (the Vortex) have been 
working to understand how the SUN had to work in order to enhance the cultural processes. 
We consider the experience we made as a good starting point for experimenting with smart 
citiy concepts, that very often suffer from different disciplinary approaches as well as from 
the use of different languages. The development of the SUN, and of the Smart Node are 
occasions to verify possible trans-disciplinary approaches to smart city. 

We consider the experimentation in L’Aquila as a validation of our approach and tools. In 
particular we would like to verify that both the technological and methodological tools are 
appropriate for the project goals; the tools we develop are appropriate to be used correctly by 
the social operators; the project is effective in terms of citizens involvement (quality and 
level), and its effects on the social network. 

Right now the project of the SUN, and the project of the Smart Node are completed, and we 
are discussing with local administrators to better understand how to realize them in reality in 
L’Aquila. 

REFERENCES

1. http://www.eera-set.eu/index.php?index=30 (accessed 22/04/2013). 
2. Giffinger, R., Kraman, H., Fertner, C., Kalasek, R., Pichler-Milanovic, N., & Meiers, E.: Smart 

cities - Ranking of European medium-sized cities, Vienna, Centre of Regional Science, 2008 

3. Hollands, R., G., Will the real smart city please, stand up?, City, 12 (3). 
4. Putnam R: The prosperous community: social capital and public life, The American Prospect, 13 

(1995), 65-78, 1993. 

628 CISBAT 2013 - September 4-6, 2013 - Lausanne, Switzerland



AUTHOR INDEX 
 



 

AUTHOR INDEX 
 
 

A 
Abdul-Zahra A. ........................................ 709 
Abohela I. ................................................. 715 
Acha Román C. ....................................... 691 
Adolph M. ................................................. 433 
Afjei T. ............................................ 975, 1005 
Aghemo C. ............................................... 323 
Aguilar A. ................................................. 469 
Aissaoui O. ................................................ 17 
Alfarra H. .................................................. 631 
Alkama D. ...................................... 593, 1023 
Allegrini J. ................................................ 867 
Alonso C. ................................................. 469 
Alyami S.H. .............................................. 655 
Amado M. ...................................... 131, 1017 
Amenta V. .............................................. 1175 
Andersen M. .......................................... 1103 
Annunziato M. .......................................... 623 
Ansanay-Alex G. ...................................... 525 
Antonetti Y. ................................................ 11 
Armitage P. .............................................. 927 
Ashouri A. ................................................ 495 
Athanasopoulos A. .................................. 587 
Athanassiadis A. ...................................... 557 
Athienitis A. .............................................. 879 
Attia S. ..................................................... 921 
Aziz A. .............................................. 549, 987 

B 
Bacher P. ................................................. 903 
Baker T.A. ................................................ 385 
Ballif C. ................................................ 8, 685 
Baratieri M. .............................................. 829 
Basile M. .................................................. 109 
Basurto C. ................................................ 353 
Batungbakal A. ........................................ 957 
Baverel O. ................................................ 703 
Bechiri L. .................................................... 17 
Beckers B. ..................................... 915, 1083 
Bélanger P. .............................................. 721 
Belfiore C. .............................................. 1035 
Benabsdeslem M. ...................................... 17 
Bensalem R. ............................................ 427 
Benslim N. ................................................. 17 
Benz M. .................................................... 495 
Berggren B....................................... 127, 563 
Besuievsky G. ........................................ 1181 
Bianco L. .................................................. 133 
Biddulph P. .............................................. 475 
Blanc G. ................................................... 611 
Bockelmann F. ......................................... 745 
Bodart M. ................................................. 359 
Bodart M. ................................................. 969 
Bogensberger M. ....................................... 37 
Bolliger R. .............................................. 1109 
Borisuit A. ................................................ 305 

Bougrain F................................................ 963 
Bouillard P. ....................................... 557, 691 
Boukhabla M. ................................. 593, 1023 
Bourdais R. .............................................. 525 
Boutiller J. ................................................ 335 
Bouzaher Lalouani S. ............................. 1023 
Bovet G. ........................................... 501, 519 
Boxem G. ......................................... 265, 379 
Brezet H. .................................................. 605 
Brotas L. ........................................... 297, 341 
Brunold S. ................................................ 667 
Bunyesc J................................................. 139 
Burnier L. .................................................. 223 

C 
Cahill B. .................................................... 463 
Caltabiano I. ............................................. 151 
Cambiaso F. ............................................... 79 
Cammarano S. ......................................... 323 
Cantelli L. ............................................... 1103 
Capeluto I.G. .............................................. 49 
Capezzali M. ............................................ 897 
Carmeliet J. ..............................757, 867, 891 
Caron J.-F. ............................................... 703 
Caruso G. ................................................. 103 
Catenazzi C............................................ 1047 
Cattarin E. ................................................ 145 
Cauwerts C. ............................................. 359 
Cavaglia G. .............................................. 151 
Cecere C. ................................................. 581 
Chan Y.C. ................................................. 311 
Chapuis V................................................. 685 
Cheng H. .................................................. 279 
Cherix G. ................................611, 897, 1053 
Chochowski A. ......................................... 859 
Cifuentes-Cuellar A.V. ............................. 873 
Citherlet S. ............................................... 569 
Clementi M. .............................................. 599 
Coch H. ..................................469, 581, 1029 
Cochran E. ....................................... 365, 439 
Coker P.J. ................................................ 727 
Condotta M............................................. 1077 
Consenza R. ............................................ 623 
Constantin A.............................751, 885, 945 
Correia-da-Silva J.J. ................................ 157 
Cosnier M. ................................................ 963 
Covington C. ............................................ 987 
Cricchio F. .............................................. 1151 
Cuchi A. .................................................... 617 
Currà E. .................................................... 163 
Curreli A. ................................................ 1029 
Curti C. ..................................................... 151 

D 
Daniels L.A. .............................................. 727 
Dantsiou D. .............................................. 391 



 

Daoudi N.S. ............................................. 427 
Dartevelle O. ............................................ 969 
Das P. ...................................................... 475 
Davies M. ................................................. 475 
De Angelis E. ............................................. 91 
de Castro J. ............................................... 73 
De Herde A. ............................................. 921 
De Maria M.M. ....................................... 1095 
De Wilde P. ............................................ 1133 
Deneyer A. ............................................... 969 
Deschamps L. .......................................... 305 
Dessi V. ................................... 235, 445, 679 
Didone E.L. .............................................. 733 
Djalilian S. ................................................ 371 
Dokka T. .................................................. 787 
Dolado P. ................................................. 903 
Dominguez Espinosa F.A. ....................... 279 
Doran J. ..................................................... 29 
Dorer V. ................................... 757, 867, 891 
Dotelli G. .................................................... 91 
Dott R. ............................................ 975, 1005 
Doylend N. ............................................... 903 
Drakou A. ................................................. 397 
Dudek S. .................................................. 715 
Dupeyrat P. .............................................. 781 
Dürr M. ..................................................... 847 

E 
Echave C. ................................................ 617 
Eggers J.-B. ............................................. 909 
Elgayar W. ............................................... 451 
Engelmann P. .......................................... 739 

F 
Fassnacht T. ............................................ 709 
Fazio P. .................................................... 879 
Felsmann C. ............................................ 793 
Fernandez E. ......................................... 1181 
Ferrara C. ................................................ 169 
Ferrari B. .................................................. 637 
Ferrez P. ................................................ 1127 
Fianchini M.  ............................................ 445 
Fisch M.N. ................................................ 745 
Flourentzou F..................................... 43, 285 
Fonseca J.A. ............................................ 649 
Frank E. ........................... 667, 763, 775, 817 
Freire F. ................................................... 229 
Frontini F. ............................................... 1035 
Fuchs M. .................................................. 885 
Fuetterer J.P. ........................................... 751 
Fumey B. ................................................. 757 
Furrer P. ................................................... 697 
Fux S.F. ................................................... 495 

G 
Gagliano S. ............................................ 1175 
Gaillard L. ................................................ 841 
Galan Gonzalez A. .................................. 691 
Galiotto N. .................................................. 43 
Gallo P. .................................................... 175 

Gantenbein P. .......................................... 763 
Garde F. ................................................... 109 
Gascou T. ................................................... 11 
Gasparella A. ........................................... 829 
Gautschi T. ............................................... 835 
Georges L. ............................................... 787 
Gerber D. ................................................. 957 
Germano R............................................... 623 
Geron M. .................................................. 457 
Ghoneim A.A. ........................................... 769 
Giani M. .................................................. 1035 
Gichuyia L. ..................................... 981, 1089 
Gillich A. ................................................... 403 
Girón C. .................................................... 617 
Glicksman L. ............................................ 279 
Godoy-Shimizu D. .................................... 927 
Goia F. ..................................................... 133 
Gonzalez M. ............................................... 11 
Goodier C.I. .............................................. 805 
Gorgolis G. ................................................. 23 
Gorgone J. ............................................... 109 
Gou S. ...................................................... 181 
Gratia E. ................................................... 921 
Grobe L.O. ..................................... 347, 1011 
Guéguen H. .............................................. 525 
Guillemin A. .................................... 531, 1103 
Gustavsen A............................................. 193 
Gut W. ...................................................... 537 
Guzzella L. ............................................... 495 

H 
Haase Haase M. ...................................... 787 
Habib E. ................................................... 163 
Hachem C. ............................................... 879 
Hall M. ...................................................... 563 
Haller M.Y. ...............................667, 775, 817 
Haller N. ................................................... 697 
Hallqvist R. ............................................... 317 
Hamza N. ....................................... 715, 1133 
Hanuliak P. ............................................... 329 
Harb H. ................................................... 1041 
Hartl M. ..................................................... 903 
Hartman P. ............................................... 329 
Hässig W. ................................................. 259 
Haurant P. ................................................ 781 
Heim D. .................................................... 187 
Heinstein P. .............................................. 685 
Heiselberg P............................................... 43 
Hennebert J...................................... 501, 519 
Henning H.-M. ........................................ 1065 
Hensen J. ......................................... 921, 939 
Hersberger C.......................................... 1139 
Hessler A. ................................................... 11 
Houlihan Wiberg A.A-M. .......................... 787 
Hraska J. .................................................. 329 
Hryshchenko A. ........................................ 463 
Hu J. ......................................................... 291 
Hubert J.L................................................. 993 
Hutter A. ................................................. 1127 
Hviid C.A. ................................................. 247 



 

I 
Ichinose M. ................................................ 67 
Icibaci L.M. ............................................... 605 
Ihara T. .................................................... 193 
Ihlal A. ........................................................ 17 
Imperadori M.......................................... 1035 
Inoue T. ...................................................... 67 
Irwin D. ..................................................... 285 
Isalgué A. ......................................... 469, 581 

J 
Jakob M. ...................................... 1047, 1109 
Janicki M. ................................................. 187 
Javadi A. ........................................ 903, 1041 
Jelle B.P. .................................................. 193 
Joly M. ............................................... 11, 685 
Jones B. ................................................... 475 
Jones P. ................................................... 631 
Joss D. ..................................................... 643 
Junghans L. ............................................. 199 

K 
Kaempf J. 103, 305, 353, 867, 873, 915,1071 
Kallio S. .................................................. 1109 
Kamali A.M. ............................................. 793 
Kämpf J. .. 103, 305, 353, 867, 873, 915,1071 
Karamanis D. ............................................. 23 
Karava P. ......................................... 291, 661 
Keane M.M. ............................................. 457 
Kellenberger D. .......................................... 85 
Keller T. ..................................................... 73 
Klauser D. ................................................ 799 
Kleijer A. .................................................. 569 
Knera D. ................................................... 187 
Knopf-Lenoir C. ..................................... 1083 
Knudstrup M.-A. ......................................... 43 
Ko J. ......................................................... 205 
Koch F. .................................................... 537 
Kolb M. ..................................................... 835 
Kolosky A. ................................................ 439 
Konis K. ................................................... 957 
Kopmann N. ............................................. 433 
Kostro A. ................................................ 1115 
Kotelnikova-Weiler N. .............................. 703 
Kramer T. ................................................. 739 
Krimpalis S................................................. 23 
Kritiodi M. ................................................. 285 
Kuchler F. .............................................. 1053 
Kumar D E V S K. .................................... 951 
Kuznik F. .................................................. 575 
Kwan A. ................................................... 655 
Kyritsi E. ..................................................... 23 

L 
Labayrade R. ........................................... 359 
Labeodan T.............................................. 513 
Lagnese G.A. ........................................... 623 
Lai A. ........................................................ 271 
Lam K.P. .................................................. 549 

Lasternas B. ............................................. 549 
Lauster M. ................................................ 885 
Le Caër V. ................................................ 685 
Lee W.V. .................................................. 421 
Lefort A. .................................................... 525 
Leibundgut H. ........................................... 697 
Leicester P.A. ........................................... 805 
Lemarchand P. ........................................... 29 
Leppin L. .................................................. 763 
Leterrier Y. ............................................... 685 
Lethé G. ................................................... 969 
Li H.-Y. ..................................................... 685 
Li K. .......................................................... 987 
Li S. .......................................................... 661 
Li X. .......................................................... 181 
Li Z. .......................................................... 181 
Liang J. ................................................... 1059 
Lien A. ...................................................... 787 
Lindeloef D. .............................................. 531 
Lingfors D. ................................................ 317 
Lo Verso V.R.M. ............................... 133, 323 
Lobaccaro G........................................... 1035 
Loftness V. ....................................... 365, 549 
Lopes T. ................................................... 121 
López J. .................................................... 469 
Love J.A. .................................................. 385 
Lu T. ......................................................... 409 
Lü X. ......................................................... 409 

M 
Maaijen R. ................................................ 513 
Machniewicz A. ........................................ 187 
Madsen H. ................................................ 903 
Magnuson K. ............................................ 439 
Mahapatra S............................................. 481 
Mangosio M.............................................. 151 
Mankova L................................................ 329 
Manson J.-A. ............................................ 685 
Marchiori D. .............................................. 145 
Maréchal F. .............................................. 897 
Martius G. ............................................... 1047 
Marty H. .................................................... 763 
Masera G. .............................................. 1035 
Mathez S.A................................................. 11 
Mathieu D. ................................................ 109 
Matthes P. .............................................. 1041 
Mavrogianni A. ......................................... 475 
Mazzali U. ........................................ 115, 145 
Meagher M. ............................................ 1157 
Mehdaoui S. ............................................... 17 
Melikidze K. ............................................ 1121 
Mellegard S. ............................................. 787 
Meloni C. .................................................. 623 
Menchaca-Brandan M.A. ......................... 279 
Ménézo C. ........................................ 781, 841 
Menzel K. ......................................... 463, 823 
Merlier L. .................................................. 575 
Mestoul D. ................................................ 427 
Mihalakakou G. .......................................... 23



 

Miller W. ..................................................... 97 
Mirakbari  A.............................................. 297 
Mohammedein A.M. ................................ 769 
Mojic I. ..................................................... 817 
Monaghan R.F.D. .................................... 457 
Morales M. ................................................. 17 
Morel N. ........................................... 501, 543 
Morganti M. .............................................. 581 
Moujalled B. ............................................. 211 
Moummi N. .............................................. 593 
Mousavi F. ............................................... 371 
Mueller D. ................................................ 751 
Muenger M............................................... 643 
Müller D. ................ 433, 885, 933, 945, 1041 
Müller T. ................................................. 1145 
Münch M. ................................................. 305 
Muntwyler U. ............................................ 643 
 
N 
Nagahama T. ............................................. 67 
Nägeli C. ...................................... 1047, 1109 
Nagy Z. .................................................. 1169 
Nastri E. ................................................. 1151 
Nembrini J. ............................................. 1157 
Ng E. ........................................................ 271 
Norton B. .................................................... 29 
Novakovic V. ............................................ 507 

O 
Oberti I. .................................................... 217 
Ochoa C.E. ................................................ 49 
Oelhafen P. .............................................. 223 
Ohr F. ..................................................... 1145 
Oikonomou E. .......................................... 475 
Ökte N. ....................................................... 23 
Orehounig K............................................. 891 
Ortelli L. ..................................................... 43 
Otreba M. ................................................. 823 
Ott W. ..................................................... 1109 

P 
Pages-Ramon A. ..................................... 581 
Palumbo M.L............................................ 109 
Palzer A. ................................................ 1065 
Pansa G. .................................................... 91 
Pantet S. .................................................. 335 
Papi Reddy N........................................... 439 
Park A. ................................................... 1157 
Park J. .............................................. 487, 987 
Pascual C. ................................................. 73 
Pasini D. .................................................... 91 
Paule B. ................................................... 335 
Pellegrino A. ............................................ 323 
Pereira F.O.R........................................... 733 
Pereira J.B. .............................................. 157 
Perez D. ................................................. 1071 
Perisset B. ............................................... 569 
Peron F. ................................. 115, 145, 1095 
Perret-Aebi L.-E. ...................................... 685 
Philippen D. ............................................. 667 

Pili S. ...................................................... 1077 
Pniewska A. ............................................. 341 
Poggi F. .................................................. 1017 
Portier X. .................................................... 17 
Potter B.A. ................................................ 727 
Poumadère F. ........................................ 1053 
Prando D. ................................................. 829 
Python M. ................................................... 11 

Q 
Qu S. ...................................................... 1083 
Quenard D................................................ 963 

R 
Rabenseifer R. ....................................... 1163 
Rager J. .................................................... 897 
Ramalhete I. ............................................. 121 
Raslan R. ................................................. 475 
Ray S. ...................................................... 279 
Rebeix D. ................................................. 897 
Reber G. ................................................... 223 
Rebetez M. ................................................... 2 
Réhault N. .............................................. 1145 
Remund J. ................................................ 799 
Renevey P.............................................. 1127 
Renzi M. ................................................... 829 
Rezgui Y. .................................................. 655 
Richieri F. ................................................. 211 
Richter J. .................................................. 265 
Ridi A. ....................................................... 501 
Rist T. ..................................................... 1145 
Rodler A. .................................................. 993 
Rodrigues C. ............................................ 229 
Roduit F. ................................................... 611 
Roduit P. ................................................ 1127 
Roecker C. ............................................... 685 
Rogora A. ......................................... 235, 637 
Romano R. ............................................... 241 
Rommel M. ............................................... 835 
Rose J. ....................................................... 97 
Rossi D. .................................................. 1169 
Roux J.-J. ................................................. 993 
Rowley P. .................................805, 853, 903 
Ruch R. .................................................... 537 
Ruesch F. ................................................. 835 
Rusaouën G. ............................................ 575 

S 
Saadon S. ................................................ 841 
Sagerschnig C. ...................................... 1139 
Sala M. ..................................................... 241 
Salat S. ..................................................... 575 
Salathé A.................................................. 537 
Samri D. ................................................... 211 
Sangi R. ................................................... 933 
Saporiti G. ................................................ 617 
Sastry M. .................................................. 951 
Scalpellini L. ............................................... 61 
Scarpa M. ................................................. 115 
Scartezzini J.-L. .. 305, 353, 685, 1071, 1115 



 

Schläpfer B. ............................................. 537 
Schlegel T. ............................................... 537 
Schlueter A. ................................... 649, 1169 
Schlumpf C. ............................................. 685 
Schmidt M. ............................................... 751 
Schueler A. ................ 11, 73, 685, 1115, 223 
Scognamiglio A. ............................... 109, 623 
Scudo G. .......................................... 599, 637 
Selm T. .................................................... 775 
Sergent Ch............................................... 335 
Serra E. ...................................................... 91 
Serra V. .................................................... 133 
Sharmin T. ............................................. 1089 
Sharpe T. ................................................. 415 
Shearer D. ............................................... 415 
Shen H. ...................................................... 55 
Shrubsole C. ............................................ 475 
Sicre B. .................................................... 847 
Siddig M. .................................................. 823 
Singh M.K. ............................................... 481 
Sirr S. ....................................................... 463 
Skarning G.C.J. ....................................... 247 
Spinazzè F. ............................................ 1095 
Srivastava R. ................................... 365, 439 
Stach E. ..................................................... 97 
Stähr C. .................................................... 745 
Stasis T. ................................................... 285 
Steemers K. ..................................... 391, 421 
Stettler S. ................................................. 537 
Stevanovic M. .......................................... 691 
Stevanovic S. ........................................... 999 
Stevenson V. ........................................... 631 
Streblow R. .... 433, 751, 885, 933, 945, 1041 
Struck C. .................................................. 939 
Strutz S. ................................................... 739 
Stryi-Hipp G. ........................................ 4, 909 
Sunarjo B. .............................................. 1047 
Sunikka-Blank M. ............................. 391, 403 
Svendsen S. ............................................ 247 
Szczepanska-Rosiak E. ........................... 187 

T 
Tahbaz M. ................................................ 371 
Tatano V. ............................................... 1095 
Taylor J. ................................................... 475 
Teller J. .................................................... 481 
Testa D. ................................................... 637 
Thalmann P. .............................................. 43 
Thirkill A. .................................................. 853 
Thissen B. ................................................ 817 
Time B. .................................................... 787 
Timmeren A. van ..................................... 605 
Tina G.M. ............................................... 1175 
Tonnesen J. ............................................. 507

Tourre V. ................................................ 1181 
Trabucco D............................................... 145 
Trachte S. ................................................. 253 
Trombadore A. ........................................... 61 
Tsangrassoulis A. .................................... 397 
Tween R. .................................................. 685 
Tzempelikos A. .................................. 55, 311 

V 
Valentin E. Roy N. .................................... 335 
Valmont E................................................. 957 
Vardoulakis E. ............................................ 23 
Vassilopoulos  A.P. .................................... 73 
Vermeulen T............................................. 915 
Veselý M. ................................................. 379 
Vicente Iñigo C. ........................................ 169 
Viljanen M. ............................................... 409 
Virgone J. ................................................. 993 
Vissers D.R. ............................................. 379 
Volotinen T. .............................................. 317 
von Grünigen S. ..................................... 1109 

W 
Wagner A. ........................................ 709, 733 
Wall M. ............................................. 127, 563 
Wallbaum H............................................ 1047 
Wang H. ........................................... 181, 549 
Wang T.-H. ............................................... 487 
Weber R. .................................................. 757 
Widder L. .................................................. 205 
Wieser C. ................................................. 697 
Wiesner P................................................. 537 
Winteler C. ............................................. 1005 
Witt A. ....................................................... 487 
Wittkopf S.K. ..........................347, 673, 1011 
Wojcicka-Migasiuk D. ............................... 859 
Wolisz H. .................................................. 945 
Wyss S. .................................................... 259 

X 
Xu R. ........................................................ 673 

Y 
Yang X. .......................................... 347, 1011 
Yun R. ...................................................... 549 

Z 
Zachopoulos N. ........................................ 285 
Zarkadis N. ....................................... 501, 543 
Zbicinski I. ................................................ 187 
Zeiler W. ...................................265, 379, 513 
Zhao J. ..................................................... 549 
Zhao Q. .................................................... 181 
 



 

 
 
 
 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
 

 
 

CISBAT 2013 would not have been possible without the efficient contribution of the 
secretariat of the Solar Energy and Building Physics Laboratory as well as that of our 
scientific and technical staff.  
 
Our scientific partners from Cambridge University and the Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology as well as the members of the international scientific committee and the session 
chairs have enthusiastically supported the conference and ensured its quality. We would like 
to express our sincere thanks for the time and effort they have spent to make it a success.  
 
CISBAT can only exist thanks to the patronage of the Swiss Federal Office of Energy. We 
are grateful for their continuing support. 
 
We also owe sincere thanks to the Zeno Karl Schindler Foundation, whose financial support 
was vital for the conference.  
 
Finally, we cordially thank all speakers, authors and participants who have brought CISBAT 
2013  to life. 
 
 
 

Prof. Dr J.-L. Scartezzini 
 
Chairman of CISBAT 2013 

Head of EPFL Solar Energy and Building 
Physics Laboratory 

 


