












































Microsoft Word - 0434_alexis_aguilar.docx


1 
 

 
 
 
 

LUMINANCES AND VISION RELATED TO DAYLIGHTING 
 

Alexis Aguilar, Urtza Uriarte, Antoni Isalgue, Helena Coch, Rafael Serra 
Architecture & Energy 

School of Architecture of Barcelona.UPC 
Av. Diagonal, 649, 7th floor, 08028 Barcelona 

E-mail: alexis.aguilar@upc.edu 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

ABSTRACT 
 
Daylighting has an excellent color rendering, as human 
eyes have been developed under the sun’s rays, and it 
yields very proactive elements to human behavior.  
 
In the field of luminance contrast, it has been noted that 
the probability of excessive contrast is lower when 
considering daylighting in relation to artificial lighting. 
 
As a result, in activities which require more demanding 
visual accuracy, daylighting can offer more and better 
conditions for light and space variations considering the 
wide range of the field of vision.  
 
This paper proposes a new approach to the methodology 
of calculating luminance balances considering the surface 
position in space and its relative weight in the final mean 
luminance value. This is based on ergonomic field of 
vision distribution, which confers major importance on 
what is in the solid angle analyzed by the cones area of 
the eye. The starting point when constructing numerical 
models of lighting comfort is the human eye’s sensitivity 
to light.  
 
Assessing interior architectural visual comfort conditions 
is the ultimate purpose of this work, along with the 
possibility of taking advantage of photography-related 
software programs that could be useful tools for architects 
and interior designers.  
 
Avoiding uncomfortable visual situations is an 
environmentally efficient approach because the end effect 
of poor visual conditions is a higher demand for artificial 

lighting, leading to energy consumption that could be 
saved with lighting conditions adapted to human comfort. 
 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
 
Lighting comfort in an inhabitable space depends on the 
amount of light and how it is distributed. Naturally, users 
are more demanding when they find themselves in work 
spaces that require a high visual effort. Projects that aim 
to create an interior space with bright light yet without 
thinking about the balance of the light lead to 
uncomfortable situations, such as glare, for example. 
 
Light sources are the main cause of unsatisfactory 
luminance balances [1]. For this reason, projects that use 
artificial lighting are so different to those that are resolved 
with natural daylight. Artificial lighting is more flexible 
when the distribution of lamps is planned (isolated light 
sources or smaller sources with lower intensity). 
However, daylighting depends on the windows (extensive 
light sources with high luminance), which always provide 
lateral light and often yield spaces with imbalanced 
lighting. The lighting levels tend to be quite high near the 
windows, and there is the risk of it being quite low in 
spots far from the windows. Furthermore, when the 
window appears within the user’s field of vision, its high 
luminance is often the cause of glare. 
This risk is particularly noticeable in climates 
characterized by having clear skies, such as the 
Mediterranean. The luminance of the sky associated with 
the window is quite high and proves to be more of a 
stumbling block to design solutions [2]. 
 



2 
 

But design solutions are not the only problem. The 
evaluation methodologies themselves must be sensitive to 
the diversity of possible cases (artificial or daylight, 
cloudy or sunny skies). The classic formulation associated 
with glare offers coherent results when it evaluates cases 
of artificial lighting, but it is more difficult to apply in 
cases with daylighting, which is especially critical when 
dealing with very bright skies. In this last scenario, the 
calculations of glare would reveal that almost any 
window, regardless of its position with regard to the user, 
causes glare. However, experience tells us that this is not 
always so. [3] [4] 
 
The purpose of this article is to provide further details and 
offer possible alternatives to calculation methods related 
to the luminance balance. The goal is for these methods to 
be more suitable to the particularities of daylighting, more 
specifically when evaluating cases with very luminous 
skies. 
 
 
2. METHODOLOGY 
 
The methodology used inspires an explanation with 
special reference to the particularities of the proposed 
calculation. Table 1 summarizes the stages in the 
evaluation process. Below the table, the particular 
features of each stage are explained in detail with a 
section for each of them. 
 
TABLE 1: SUMMARY OF THE STAGES IN THE 
PROCESS  
 

No. STAGE DESCRIPTION 

1 Measuring instruments 
Fisheye photography 
+ Luminance meter 

2 Luminance maps HDR software + Calibration system 

3 Image processing Visual field + Solid angles calculation 

4 
Average luminance 
calculation of the 

visual field 

Physiology of the eye + 
Comparative calculations 

with different models 

5 Luminance balance of the visual field 
Proposal for a calculation 

model 

 

2.1 Measuring instruments 
 
Two measuring instruments were used. 
The first is a camera fitted with a circular fisheye lens 
(Sigma 4.5 mm F2.8). The result of the photographs taken 
with this lens is circular pictures inside the projection 
frame. The projection used is hemispheric and is known 
as the “equisolid angle projection”. Its unique feature is 
that it retains the proportions among the solid angles. The 
purpose of the photographs taken with this lens is to 
simulate the visual field of the human eye. However, 
vertically, the aperture angles of the lens are greater than 
those of the eye. As a result, the pictures are processed to 
eliminate the upper and lower parts from the evaluation, 
which should not be counted when simulating human 
vision. [5] 
The second instrument is a device to measure luminances 
(Konica Minolta LS-110). Its acceptance angle is 1/3º and 
its measurement range is from 0.01 to 999900 cd/m2.  
Both limits are enough to verify the measurements taken 
in this case study, as these margins were not exceeded in 
any case. 
 
2.2 Luminance maps 
 
By using the WebHDR software created by Axel Jacobs 
[6], digital photography can become a “map of false 
colors” which represents the luminances present in a 
space. This software enables us to choose between a 
logarithmic or linear scale of representation. The 
logarithmic scale is used since it more clearly represents 
the luminances in the case study. The scale offers ten 
possible luminance values (Fig. 1) which fit a 
predetermined range between 0 and 1000 cd/m2. This 
range is sufficient to represent the luminances existing in 
an interior space. 
Only the luminance from the outdoors, present in the 
windows with a value higher than 1000 cd/m2, is outside 
the range. The software represents their value by 
associating them with the maximum value on the scale. In 
these cases, the value is replaced by the one provided by 
the luminance measuring tool. 
 
Furthermore, a second reason justifies correcting the 
luminance of the windows. The WebHDR software 
graphically uses red and blue to warn that certain areas do 
not offer reliable luminance values, such as the areas that 
represent the luminance of the windows. When 
overexposed to light, their luminance value must be 
reconsidered. The luminance measuring tool solves this 
problem by providing the precise value, plus it also serves 
to calibrate the WebHDR software. 



3 
 

 
In parallel, and specifically for this study, the authors of 
this article developed their own software to read the 
luminosity of each pixel in a picture. The program reads 
the three RGB coordinates of each pixel, and adds them 
together to yield a luminosity value for a photograph 
which can vary between 0 and 765. After that, this 
luminosity value becomes a luminance value of surfaces 
through a normalization factor that is defined using the 
values of the luminance measuring tool. The purpose of 
this software is to provide a calculation tool that allows 
for a higher degree of detail. 
 
2.3 Image processing 
 
Image processing enables us to quantify the presence of 
each luminance within the field of vision. The first 
geometric operation is to eliminate two portions (an upper 
and a lower) from the circular image. The angular 
apertures of human vision define the limits of each 
portion. The lens used yields images that respect the 
“equisolid angle” geometric projection, whose main 
characteristic is that it retains the proportionality among 
solid angles, so we can directly measure the image. Two 
surfaces of the same size represent the same solid angle, 
regardless of their position in the image. Once this 
property is known, two calculation methods are put into 
practice. 
 
The first consists of superimposing a template over the 
image yielded with WebHDR (Fig. 1), which is used to 
measure the area units of the same size (same solid 
angle). Each area is then associated with a given 
luminance and an angular deviation with regard to the 
centre of vision. 
 

 
Figure 1: Subdivisions with the same solid angle 
superimposed on the WebHDR image. 

 
The second method uses an original photograph and the 
software created by the authors of this article. The 
software enables the luminosity of each pixel (turned into 
luminance) to be associated with its position with regard 
to the centre of vision. 
 
2.4 Average luminance calculation of the field of vision 
 
The calculations of glare offer a comparison between the 
luminance of a light source and that of a visual 
background, which can be associated with the average 
luminance of the field of vision. The average luminance 
can be calculated using the following mathematical 
expression: [7] 
 

(1)  
( )

0ω
θω∑ ××

=
fL

Lmed ii  

Where: 
  
Li is the luminance associated with a solid angle; 
ωi is the solid angle of each luminance; 
ω0 is the solid angle of the field of vision; and 
 (θ) is the function that weighs the luminance by 
lowering its value according to the deviation angle with 
regard to the centre of vision.  
 
(2)  ( ) αθ cos=f  
 
The “weight” function (θ) is usually the cosine function 
[8]. However, knowledge of the physiology of the eye 
gives rise to the proposal of other alternative functions in 
this article. The central region of the fovea has the highest 
density of cones [9]. At 10% eccentricity, the cone 
density is 100 times lower than in the center, and at 40º 
eccentricity, the density is 2000 times lower. The cone 
density justifies the fact that visual acuity is maximal in 
the center of the field of vision. An eccentricity of 10º 
implies a visual capacity ten times lower, while 60º 
eccentricity means that the visual capacity is 100 times 
lower. Bearing in mind these relations, the authors of the 
article propose four functions (alternatives to the cosine 
function) to weigh the prominence of luminances in the 
field of vision. Two functions are exponential (functions 3 
and 4), while two functions stem from the Lorentz 
function, with two different width constants (function 5). 

 (3)  ( ) 2
2

cef
α

θ
−

=  
 
Where: 



4 
 

 
α is the deviation angle with regard to the centre of 
vision; 
c = 5º. 

(4) ( ) 4
4

cef
α

θ
−

=  
 
Where: 
 
α is the deviation angle with regard to the centre of 
vision; 
c = 5º. 
 
(5)   ( )

⎟
⎠
⎞

⎜
⎝
⎛

+

=

c

f
α

θ
2

1

1  

 
Where: 
 
α is the deviation angle with regard to the centre of 
vision; 
c = 5º in the first case and c = 10º in the second. 
 
Figure 2 compares all five functions. The four functions 
proposed differ considerably from the cosine function. 
They all accentuate the value of luminances present in the 
centre of vision and drastically lower the peripheral 
luminances. The one that does this the most mildly is the 
Lorentz function (c=10º). 

 
Figure 2: Comparative graph of the 5 weighing functions. 
 
The study then continues by duplicating all the 
calculations, performing them with both the cosine 
function and the Lorentz function (c=10º). This system 

serves to evaluate whether the Lorentz function yields 
more useful results when evaluating average luminance, 
and later when evaluating the balance of luminances in 
the space with regard to an observer. 
 
Finally, we must outline one last clarification. To 
calculate the average luminance, all of the luminances in 
the field of vision were considered, including the 
luminance of the source (window) which is regarded as 
likely to cause glare.   
 
2.5 Luminance balance of the field of vision 
 
The calculation of the luminance balance present in the 
field of vision uses the formulation which yields a glare 
index G and an index DG expressed as: [8] [10] 
 
(6)  gG 10log10=  
 
(7)  )14(3/2 += GDG  
 
Where: 
 

(8)  ( ) bb
a

s LfLg θω ××=  
 
With: 
 
Ls being the value of the luminance source; 
ω being the value of the light source solid angle; 
a and b being coefficients; they are 1.8 and 0.8, 
respectively; 
 (θ) being the function that weighs the luminance by 
lowering its value according to the deviation angle with 
regard to the centre of vision; and 
Lb being the luminance value for the background of the 
light source. 
 
The evaluation of the case studies below considers that 
the light source (Ls) is a window that provides light from 
the outdoors, while the background lighting is associated 
with the average luminance. As mentioned above, the 
calculation of (θ) is duplicated, using both the cosine 
function and the Lorentz function. 
 
 
3. CASE STUDY 
 
The case studies test the methodology proposed to 
evaluate luminance balance. A classroom at the School of 
Architecture of the Polytechnic University of Catalonia in 

0

0,2

0,4

0,6

0,8

1

1,2

0 0,25 0,5 0,75 1 1,25 1,5

Fu
nc

tio
n 

 V
al

ue

angle from the center in radians

Series1
Series2
Series3
Series4
Series5

Function 3 
Function 4 
Function 5 c=5º 
Function 5 c=10º 
Function 2



5 
 

Barcelona was the subject of the evaluation. The main 
feature of the classroom is that its façade is made of a 
modulation that alternates glass with opaque parts.  
 
Two photographs, in which the only variation is the 
position of the window with the blinds open (more or less 
centered) enables us to test the sensitivity of the two 
formulations being compared (the cosine and Lorentz 
functions). 
 
First, we took a photograph in which the blackboard is in 
the center of the vision. In the first version of this 
photograph (Fig. 3), just one window near the blackboard 
illuminates the scene. In the second version (Fig. 4), the 
open blind is far from the blackboard, on the periphery of 
the field of vision. 
 
 

 
 
Figure 3: Blackboard 1 

 
 

 
 
Figure 4: Blackboard 2 

In the second case, the same photographs were taken in 
the same circumstances with regard to the open blind, but 
situating a computer screen in the center of vision on the 
table. The screen remains in both photographs with the 
same white background (luminance of 89 cd/m2). Both 
photographs in which the screen appears in the middle are 
not included in this article because of its similarities to 
previous photographs. 
 
 
4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
 
Table 2 summarizes the results obtained by applying the 
methodology to the case studies. In all cases, the 
luminance of the source (the window) is 3700 cd/m2. Its 
position is variable, either closer (42º and 54º) or further 
(72º and 78º) from the centre of the visual field (VF). 
What is more, the opening of the window leads to slight 
variations in all the luminances in the scene. The centered 
window raises the luminances near the blackboard, while 
the more lateral window boosts the peripheral luminance. 
 
TABLE 2: SUMMARY OF THE RESULTS 
 

VF Ls α (θ) Lmed G DG 

Blackboard 
1 3700 42 

Cos 188 33 31 

Lor 96 25 26 

Blackboard 
2 3700 72 

Cos 102 32 31 

Lor 56 22 24 

Screen  
1 3700 54 

Cos 177 32 31 

Lor 92 23 25 

Screen 
 2 3700 78 

Cos 90 31 30 

Lor 64 21 23 

 
 
The results on this table correspond to the results obtained 
by processing the image using WebHDR and to the 
geometric screen corresponding to the “equisolid angle” 
projection. The results of the authors’ own software 
which evaluates the behavior pixel by pixel yields similar 
values. Therefore, this exercise enables us to validate the 
results obtained with both methods of calculation. 
 



6 
 

The discussion of the results addresses two issues (the 
value of the Lmed and of the G index), which enables them 
to be distinguished even though they bear a close 
relationship to each other. We should recall that the new 
weighing via the Lorentz function changes the result of 
both concepts (Lmed and the G index). 
 
With regard to Lmed, the results with the classic 
formulation (cosine) are more sensitive to the window 
position. Its values are higher since the luminance of the 
window has an important relative weight. In contrast, the 
results with the formulation proposed (Lorentz) are less 
sensitive to the window position. The resulting average 
luminance bears a close relationship to the luminances 
that predominate in the center of the field of vision. 
Therefore, its values are lower and less changing if the 
position of the open blind varies. It is acceptable to say 
that the new Lmed attempts to be more faithful to the visual 
faculties of the eye, which sees more centered luminances 
more easily. 
 
With regard to the G index, the results with the classic 
(cosine) formula are extremely high and largely exceed 
the maximum index of the classification (equal to 28), 
which describes situations with no comfort which are 
considered intolerable. In contrast, the experience at the 
time the photographs were taken and the results shown in 
the pictures enable us to state that the problem is not so 
dire and that the effect of the glare does not correspond to 
the results of the cosine formulation. The same evaluation 
methodology applied with the weight of the Lorentz 
function offers results which appear to be more in line 
with reality. 
 
Another factor which deserves mention in relation to the 
G index is the differing sensitivity of both formulations 
(cosine and Lorentz) to the position of the light source. 
With the cosine function, the G index undergoes hardly 
any variation (one unit) when the open blind varies. 
However, as expressed in the reflection above, both 
experience and the photographs convey the sense of 
varying comfort, as the scenes in which the light source is 
more centered may be noticeably more uncomfortable. 
Once again, the same methodology, weighed using the 
Lorentz function, seems to more faithfully capture this 
sensation. The G index varies more when the position of 
the light source varies. In the case of the blackboard, the 
G index varies three units, while in the case of the screen 
it varies two units. 
With regard to the DG index, the results and the 
conclusions are similar to those obtained with the G 
index.  

5. CONCLUSION 
 
This article starts with the existing methodologies to 
evaluate the balance of luminances and the risk of glare. 
The goal is to modify the function that weighs the 
importance of luminances in the field of vision (while 
remaining faithful to the human eye) in order to be able to 
apply the same methodology to scenes with daylighting 
(with more extensive and intense light sources than in the 
case of artificial lighting). The proposed weighing 
function (Lorentz) offers convincing results for two 
reasons. First, the glare indexes are lower, bringing them 
closer to the sensation noticed by users, and secondly, it is 
more sensitive to changes in the window position, 
showing that more centered light sources are more 
uncomfortable for users. 
 
 
6. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
 
The authors would like to thank Axel Jacobs and his team 
for their generosity in offering the scientific community 
unlimited use of their WebHDR software. Without a 
doubt, this tool facilitates studies that address light 
comfort in architectural spaces. 
 
This work has been supported by the Spanish MICINN 
under project ENE2009-11540. 
 
 
6. REFERENCES 
 
[1] Hopkinson R.G., Petherbridge P, Longmore J. 
Daylighting. London, UK: Heinemann; 1966 [2] Coch H., 
Serra R., Isalgué A. The Mediterranean blind: Less light, 
better vision, Renewable Energy 15 431-436, 1998 [3] 
Ruggiero F., Serra R., Dimundo A. Re-interpretation of 
traditional architecture for visual comfort, Building and 
Environment, 2009 [4] Osterhaus, W., Discomfort glare 
assessment and prevention for daylight applications in 
office environments, Solar Energy, 2005 [5] SareyKhanie 
M., Andersen M., Hart B.M., Stoll J., Einhäuser W. 
Integration of eye-tracking methods in visual comfort 
assessment, Proceedings CISBAT, 2011 [6] 
http://www.jaloxa.eu/webhdr/index.shtml [7] Torricelli 
M.C., Sala M., Secchi S. Daylight -technologies and 
instruments to design. Florence: Alinea 1995 [8] Velds 
M., Knupp D. Glare from windows - Report of CIE 
Division, 3–R3. 2006 [9] Barre A., Flocon A., La 
perspective curviligne. Paris, France: Flammarion, 1968 
[10] Fisekis K., Davies M., Kolokotroni M., Langford P. 
Prediction of discomfort glare from windows. Lighting 
Research and Technology 2003; 35(4):360–71. 


