























































CESB 07 Prague Master Layout


 1

Collective dwellings 

Sara Cardoso Silva 
Architecture, Energy and Environment Group. School of Architecture of Barcelona. UPC, Spain 

Helena Coch 
Architecture, Energy and Environment Group. School of Architecture of Barcelona. UPC, Spain 

 
 
 
 

ABSTRACT 

This paper presents evidence that the sustainable dwelling involves the collective use of spaces and 
services at home. By exploring the possibility of sharing spaces and services and establishing a 
common use, we will save space and energy, increase the economic efficiency of dwellings, and gain 
new forms of socialization between users. 

In order to find these new forms of socialization that satisfy both users and environmental 
demands, we need to question the separation between private and common use. In this process we 
must guarantee individual privacy and comfort and probably divide users according to similar 
interests and profiles. With this model each person contributes his or her lifestyle to a sustainable 
society. Instead of having a society in which each home uses all the necessary services and spaces 
individually, acting as an isolated bubble and resulting in an inefficient consumption of resources, we 
should have a society in which homes and buildings are designed as a system of individual and 
shared spaces and services with intelligent resource consumption. This new sustainable society is 
only possible through new design proposals for the dwellings people live in. This is clearly the 
responsibility of architects. 

In the history of architecture several types of collective dwellings offer important and useful 
examples for the design of future proposals. These models have mostly responded to social needs 
and political visions, whereas today’s society demands an environmental purpose. 

1. CHANGES IN DWELLINGS 

Although dwellings are a conservative reflection of society because they are normally not open to 
changes, our ways of living do adapt. The dwelling goes side by side with social transformations, 
reflecting in its organization the users’ social realities. Homes therefore respond to social demands. 

The evolution of habits is not reflected so much in the type of activities carried out at home, 
which remain almost the same. The major difference in today’s homes is the change of the type of 
relations inside dwellings, which is reflected in how these activities take place. Generalizing, we can 
say that activities that were once collective have now become individual. In the last few years there 
has been a reduction in the occupation of dwellings and an increase in single people’s homes, 
resulting in the demand for greater privacy. New lifestyles also have real effects at home. Internet 
has allowed people to work from home and people claim that this results in better comfort. There is a 
major ecological awareness, which starts at home, and a decreasing dedication to domestic tasks. 
(Paricio, 2000) 

1.1 Population changes and their repercussions 

It is not only the activities taking place at home that have changed. The users have also changed, so 
the offer of dwellings must adapt to this new reality. Analyzing the evolution of Spain’s population, 
we found a falling number of inhabitants per home, from 3.2 in 1991 to 2.9 in 2001. (INE, 2001) In 
the same time period Spain has doubled the number of single-person households (Fig. 1). 



 
Figure 1: Variation in the census of the number of inhabitants per home between 1991 and 2001. Source: INE. 
 
 
This change affects two social groups: young people between the ages of 25-34 and elderly people 
aged over 65 (Fig. 2). These two groups suffer from a lack of available dwellings on the property 
market. Young people cannot afford an apartment and the elderly have special needs that cannot be 
satisfied in normal dwellings. In these two cases the solutions are residences for students and the 
elderly, or the social housing offered by the authorities. Residences are associated with a lifestyle 
that many people do not identify with. With low pay in their first years of work, young people cannot 
afford a flat by themselves, so they normally decide to rent a room or share an apartment with other 
people. With the increase in life expectancy, after retirement older people need to live in a 
community but are still too independent to live in nursing homes. 
 

 
Figure 2: Single-person homes by age groups and gender in the 2001 census. Source: INE. 
 
 

The decrease in the average family size and the increase in building and land prices have resulted 
in the saturation of cities and the reduction in the floor area of flats. The smaller flats offered by the 
market are not efficient. They have higher energy consumption than large ones, in both construction 
and use. (Pagès et al. 2008)The inefficiency of a flat does not increase in direct proportion to its size. 
A smaller flat requires a proportionally larger area to supply the same services, but also consumes 
more energy for heating. However, the most important fact is that energy consumption per person is 
higher in small flats than in large ones. The solution for this lies in the design of dwellings. The 
performance of small dwellings improves when some spaces and services are common with other 
homes. 

1.2 Bubble homes 

The increase in the number of small flats and the lifestyle related to them creates a new kind of 
home. We associate individuals with a range of activities that they perform inside their houses. At 
home they sleep, eat, share, work, read, and so on. Every activity is related to one space in the 

 2



dwellings (although some activities can be carrying out in the same space, and some activities have 
no specific space). We can determine that the habitat-space of a user is the sum of the space needed 
to perform the activities that take place inside the dwelling. Based on this model, homes are like 
activity containers (Fig. 3 and 4). This means that each user has his or her own “bubble dwelling”, 
where he or she is one of the pieces that fills it. The “bubble home” is delimited and contains the 
possibility of performing all the activities necessary for the user’s life. It is self-sufficient, because 
the users need (almost) nothing from the exterior habitat. 
 

  
 
Figure 3: Nagakin Capsule Tower. Nisho Kurokawa. Tokyo, Japan, 1971-73. 
 
Figure 4: Basic Home, experimental prototype in metalized polyester. Martin Ruiz Azua, 1999  
 

Today’s society is formed by “bubble homes” organized into buildings, neighborhoods, and cities. 
Each of these homes has its owns spaces, services and characteristics, but the main attribute is the 
lack of communication and sharing between different dwellings. These homes are therefore “bubble 
dwellings”: isolated homes with no kind of network system. 

2. THE COLLECTIVE HOUSE 

2.1 Benefits 

It is essential to design dwellings that are adapted to the populations’ needs, so there is an urgent 
need to explore the possibility of sharing services of homes by collectivizing them. In our cities we 
find collective residences that are mostly for young and elderly people. These residences are like the 
addition of bubble homes, because they do not have a network system. The best way to join the three 
traditional units of coexistence—individual, family and society—is to create network buildings. 

It is important to understand the main target population for a collective living system. In Spain, 
for example, young and active people now choose to live in shared flats. Working people until the 
age of 40, sometimes with low range salaries, rent a room in a shared flat with people with whom 
they have no family ties. In some flats people already live in a common system, but these flats are 
designed for families and are not suited to the coexistence of people who have no family ties and 
sometimes even have different backgrounds, lifestyles and aims.  

Collective houses, working as a network system, have social benefits and save space, energy and 
money. 

 
 

 3



 4

- Economic benefits 
Space and services are two important factors that increase the price of housing. Some spaces and 

services that are traditionally considered to be for private use can be separated from the individual 
dwellings, thus leading to a decrease in their cost. Furthermore, collective houses give users access to 
more services, such as a gym or a garden, for the same price as a home without them. 
- Users’ benefits 

A collective home promotes socialization between users, thus bringing about social and cultural 
changes. To achieve a community there are two essential conditions. First, living in a collective 
house must be a choice of the users, or they will consider it as an imposition; second, users must 
participate in the decisions from the outset, because it is the only way to get them involved.  
- Architectural benefits 

Centralizing and collectivizing services makes it possible to reduce the floor area of dwellings and 
thus offer homes to social groups who are currently excluded from the housing market. These groups 
have new ways of living, new family structures, and therefore new user profiles. They are more 
receptive to changes and improvements in their home, if it means that they can obtain one. Architects 
must create new typological possibilities by designing dwellings adapted to the population’s needs. 

It is important to start thinking about the requirements of dwellings. Houses must respond to 
demands for space, comfort and services, but this does not mean that they have to be privatized. 
Collective houses meet the same or more requirements but move a hierarchal system of spaces and 
services from private to public use. 
- Floor areas 

As stated above, family units have decreased in size, but users’ needs have also changed. Floor 
space means quality. Living alone does not mean that users do not have spatial needs. 
Collectivization in houses gives them access to facilities that would not be available in a 30-square-
metre home. This means that the floor area of homes would be the sum of the private spaces and all 
the shared service areas. 
- Energy benefits 

The collectivization of some services allows energy systems to be centralized. This has immediate 
and long-term economic advantages. It allows more efficient systems, better control and 
maintenance, and a high capacity of adaptation to changes and innovations. Another benefit is the 
role of the user as an energy controller, so inhabitants are in charge of energy saving. 

2.2 Characteristics 

After understanding the benefits and target populations of collective houses, we analyzed several 
examples from the history of architecture. The main purpose was to gather their most important 
aspects, in the knowledge that they were designed for different purposes. Collective housing as a 
network system is a different concept resulting from a new demand, but some ideas can be gathered 
from collective houses designed for protection, for social reasons and even for political reasons. 

Protection has always been an aim of collective dwellings, and good examples are the tulou 
towers in China. (Fig. 5) These round towers permit the equalitarian distribution of all inhabitants 
(all the individual cells are equal), and at the same time create a fortress protecting them from 
exterior attacks. (Knapp, 2005) Other buildings do the same but to protect life from the extreme 
environmental conditions or simply to create a space protected from the city’s streets, as in the Sea 
Ranch Condominium (MLTW, California, 1964-65) and the Harold Way Apartments (Fig. 6). 
 



   
 

 5

 
 
Figure 5: Tulou. Most are located in the regions of Fujian, Jiangxi and Guangdong, in China 
 

 Figure 6: Harold Way Apartments. Koning Eizenburg Architecture. Hollywood, California, USA. 
 

 
A general characteristic of collective dwellings is that they have common services. We can 

separate two types. One is the minimum individual cell, in which the living area is reduced to one or 
two spaces, and outside the cell there are several common services, such as the toilets and bathrooms, 
a common kitchen or simply an oven, the laundry and the socialization areas. This means that the 
common spaces are essential to the daily routine and hygiene. Such buildings were made specially 
for social or political reasons. The courtyard houses in Sevilla, corrales, are buildings with a single 
entrance composed of a courtyard surrounded by single or double-space dwellings that open 
(exclusively) onto it. (Morales, 1997) With all services in common use (one kitchen, one toilet and 
one washing place), community life was unavoidable (Fig. 7 and 8). 
 

  
 
Figure 7: Coliseo courtyard building dating from the 16th century. Seville, Spain. 
 
Figure 8: Escoberos courtyard building floor plan. In grey are the individual dwellings; in yellow the common kitchen, 
laundry and toilet. 

 
The second kind of common services are those that are extra to the living spaces. The private 

dwelling is self-sufficient but the building provides extra spaces like a gym or a nursery. The best 
example of this system is the Unité d’Habitation in Marseilles by Le Corbusier [6]. 



 6

Collective dwellings are associated with a community lifestyle. Rather than an architectural type, 
cohousing is a social model established for a specific lifestyle. Originating in Denmark, cohousing is 
described as neighborhoods that combine the autonomy of private dwellings with the advantages of 
shared resources and community living. Residents usually own their individual homes, which are 
clustered around a common building.  

Another way to increase the relations between users is by reducing the limits between private and 
common spaces. As can be seen in the Nemausus building’s balconies (French, 2008), the private 
cell extends to the outside, removing the limits between private and public. In these cases the 
solution is to make a gradual distinction of spaces from exclusively private to mixed use and public 
areas. 

The last characteristic of the collective dwelling is the capacity to bring together people from 
different profiles. It is important for collective buildings to allow the presence of different kinds of 
family structures, from single people to families with children. This characteristic allows a better 
integration of collective dwellings in the city. 

3. ARE PEOPLE READY TO SHARE? 

After investigating how our society changes, and understanding the benefits of collective way of 
living, it is important to know whether people are willing to share. 

3.1 Survey 

To understand the motivations and frustrations related to sharing, we carried out an internet survey 
among 140 persons aged 20 to 40 years old, most of them from Spain and Portugal. More than 60% 
of the respondents had at some time of their lives shared a flat with someone other than their 
relatives or partner. They stated that economic reasons were the main reason for this choice, but 
lifestyle was also an important factor. The best way to achieve emancipation is to share a flat with 
friends or colleagues. Associated with the economic factor, there is always a factor of time. 
Collective dwellings are normally a transition situation for young people, between their parents’ 
home and their own family home. Nevertheless, 78% of respondents had shared homes more than 
twice, and for 5 to 6 years. 

This survey also questioned people about their awareness of the social, economic and 
environmental impact of sharing an apartment. The answers were very interesting: 94% thought that 
sharing a home is the best solution for economic reasons (not surprisingly, because that was the main 
reason why they shared an apartment), but 55% and 62% of the respondents thought that sharing an 
apartment can provide benefits from a social and environmental point of view, respectively. 

The second part of the survey compared spaces and services shared by users in three different 
situations. The first considered the services and spaces shared by users when they shared homes with 
people other than their relatives or partners. The second considered the spaces and services in their 
present home that they share with the other apartments of the building. The last considered their 
willingness to share as a personal choice. 

3.1.1 Spaces  

When comparing the three answers we realized that desire and reality are not always the same. The 
living and dining rooms, the kitchen and the bathroom were spaces that users shared. Users were 
willing to share spaces that they did not have, such as a swimming pool, a garden, a gym or a parking 
space. The balcony, the hall, the storage space and the laundry area were spaces that had once been 
shared and there was some willingness to continue sharing them. The conclusion about sharing 
spaces was that, depending on their stage in life, people are willing to share some spaces or others, 
but they are always willing to share spaces that they do not have. The meaning of this is that when 
the result is the improvement of life quality there is more willingness to share (Fig. 9). 
 



 
 
Figure 9: Survey results: shared spaces. 
 

3.1.1Services 

The situation was different for shared services. Most of them were shared when users shared homes. 
The willingness to share them in the future was not very high (mostly under 40%), but was always 
higher than for the services shared in their present homes. Users are always willing to share services, 
probably because services are easier to divide (Fig. 10). 
 

 
Figure 10: Survey results: shared services. 
 
 
 
 

 7



 8

4. CONCLUSIONS 

Collective dwellings place architecture in the role of finding solutions for users, but also for cities 
and for the environment. At present there are people living collectively but occupying houses that 
were designed for another purpose. To meet the demands of these users, it is urgent to design new 
collective dwelling typologies adapted to today’s lifestyle and allowing the cohabitation of people 
with different profiles and interests. 

Our cities are composed of collective dwellings in which sharing is reduced to a minimum 
expression. Users are willing to blur the line between private and common spaces by collectivizing 
some parts of their homes. Collective dwelling must be a living system rather than just a spatial 
concept. The network system will start in the architectural design and will be supported by new 
technologies. Information systems can contribute to the management and organization of collective 
homes, for example by centralizing the environmental control with the user as a controller. 

To make collective dwellings a reality, we must create a model, a program that represents this 
living system, so that architects and promoters can follow it. 

REFERENCES 

FRENCH, H. Key Urban Housing of the Twentieth Century. Plans, sections and elevations. Laurence King Publishing, 
London 2008, pp. 82-85; 178-179. 

INE Instituto Nacional de Estadística: Census de poplacion y viviendas 2001 (Population and dwelling’s census 2001) 
[online]. INE, 2001 WWW: <http://www.ine.es/jaxi/menu.do?type=pcaxis&path=/t20/e242&file=inebase&L=>. 

MORALES, F. Los Corrales de vecinos de Sevilla: informe para su studio. 3rd ed. Publish by Universidad de Sevilla, 
Spain, 1997 

PAGÈS, A., PALME, M., COCH, H., ISALGUÉ, A. Energy consumption and CO2 emissions in the construction and use 
of flats according to floor area. In World Renewable Energy Congress X. WREC, 2008 

PARICIO, I., SUST, X. La vivienda contemporánea :Programa y tecnología. 2nd ed. Itec, Barcelona 2000, pp. 11-15. 
KNAPP, R. Chinese house: The architectural heritage of a nation. Tuttle, Boston 2005, pp. 184-191. 


