












































MAS CONTEXT  6 | AMUSEMENT

22 23

In Front of 
the Sea
Essay by Eduard Bru, architect and director 
of Cercle (Research Group & Review from ETS 
Architecture of Barcelona)

A waterfront, a place for contemplation or neglect; a place of 
relaxation or intensity; a place for muse or amusement. Every 
city and every designer deals with that limit between land and 
water in a different way. Architect Eduard Bru explores some 
of the cities that have addressed that powerful edge.

Benidorm West Beach Promenade



MAS CONTEXT  6 | AMUSEMENT

24

IN FRONT OF THE SEA

25

A waterfront is a proposal of relationship between land and sea, or, 
almost always, between city and sea. Who owns that carpet between 
nature and the artificial? It can belong to one or the other, or a bypass 
between both: mediations that separate or connect, or cut through 
like a blade. 

A few priviledged cities need only to show to the sea what they 
already are. That is the case with Rio de Janeiro. Roberto Burle Marx 
proposes an intensification of what Rio already is: more of the sinuous 
topography that defines the curves of the Sugarloaf Mountain; more, 
and even tighter, exuberant vegetation; more color than Rio already 
possesses. A project as a lesson and exaltation of the city, and its natu-
ral connection with the sea. 

Not always does a city own the exceptional physical structure of 
Rio: for example, Toronto or Benidorm. The people responsible for 
intensifying that relationship in those cities chose, respectively, enter-
tainment and decoration.

 In plan, the pavements, bridges, platforms and accessories of 
the project by West 8 and DTAH in Toronto propose a texture that 
identifies the transition between the artificial – the city – and the 
natural - the sea. In terms of usage, entertainment is introduced as the 
leitmotif shared with the boundary between land/sea. There is a lot 
of earthy quality in the main material used, which is wood, and quite 
a lot of watery quality in the sinuous movements with which Adrian 
Geuze moves it: in its bridges and ramps, and in its sidewalks divided 
in bands almost like bowling lanes.

There is something of a collective childishness in the proposal: 
what the citizen can do in front of the sea, and also the sea itself that, 
without claws or fangs, is presented almost as an aqua park for free. 
The solution by West 8 and DTAH already has an extensive tradition, 
for example, in obsolete urban ports turned into commercial and rec-
reational areas, perhaps statements of a reduction of our perspective 
of what we can do, feel, or imagine in front of the sea from the city.  

Carlos Ferrater and Xavier Martí from the Office of Architecture 
in Barcelona (OAB) decided in Benidorm, Spain, to invent a Burle 
Marx. On top, they added volume. There is nothing in that summer 
city to support the project from the context; it is a cliff, a wall of mas-
sive buildings in front of a languid coastline.

It’s nothing like the cross movements in Toronto: there is no pos-
sible cross movement before the wall parallel to the water. It is only 

Simcoe WaveDeck, 
one of four 
uniquely Canadian 
wavedecks planned 
for the Waterfront 
Toronto

Spadina WaveDeck 
with its curves 
that are constantly 
changing to create 
ledges for seating 
and new routes to 
access the water’s 
edge

Simcoe WaveDeck 
and its curves that 
soar as high as 2.6 
metres above the 
lake.



MAS CONTEXT  6 | AMUSEMENT

26

IN FRONT OF THE SEA

27

Aerial view of the 
Benidorm West 
Beach Promenade, 
a project that, with 
its organic layout, it 
recreates the shape 
of the cliffs and the 
waves

The promenade 
is built of a single 
material, white 
concrete, with 
pavements of 
various textures 
and colours

Night view 
showcasing the 
stairs connecting 
the level of the 
beach and the level 
of the city

possible to act in the same strict line betwen nature and extreme ver-
tical construction. Because of that, the whole project happens there. 
Ferrater and Martí blew air into the tropical sinusoids turning them 
into volumes that allow the user to go up and down, penetrate, select 
the height and hang over the sea.

There are no elements with which nature can collaborate in this 
operation. The color, like the rest of the elements, is introduced by the 
project. Colors as intense and contrasting as premeditated planta-
tions, sequences of shades organized by the movements ordered 
by the line turned into volume. From the abstraction, the project 
resolves, brilliantly, everything that neither nature nor the project for 
the existing city have ever imagined.  

There is not much to say either, between city and sea, in the area 
of Matosinhos, Portugal, in which Eduardo Souto de Moura operates. 
The same inane architecture, but with less volume and presence, and 
the same irregular linear coastline. Souto creates his project out of 
that lack of communication. He proposes to be between the city and 
the sea. His project is a kind of bridge that cleaves the border line. 
The main character is neither the city nor the sea. The transit itself 
between them is the element that Souto creates. The parallel views 
to the coast take priority: even in the crosswalks he avoids the cross 
circulation. It never tempts us to leave the grounded platform. To feel 
strange both in the city and in the sea, to not go through one or the 
other, but in between them, so much so that we wouldn’t be surprised 
if at any given moment the flat barge, sharply cut on the sides and 
from which we are the load, would start a slow movement, a slow and 
heavy, uncertain adrift. 

A little bit north of the Matosinhos of Souto’s setting, in areas of 
lower urban density and close to the parks of Fernando Távora, the 
coastline becomes rocky and rugged, nude and exposed to the winds. 
It is the land where the Boa Nova restaurant, designed by Alvaro Siza, 
is situated, as well as his swimming pools of Leça da Palmeira.

Between the first and the latter, with a few added smaller interven-
tions, an open waterfront takes place proposing an encounter of sea/
city, not from the context of mediation but from their difference. Siza 
says simultaneously two contradictory aspects: cuts like a blade the 
areas of land and water, but he makes it evident to us that both are 
matter, two matters that look and understand each other and a geom-
etry as a rasp that defines them.



MAS CONTEXT  6 | AMUSEMENT

28

IN FRONT OF THE SEA

29

Aerial view of the 
waterfront designed 
by Eduardo 
Souto de Moura 
in Matosinhos, 
Portugal

Aerial view of the 
waterfront designed 
by Alvaro Siza north 
of Matosinhos

View of the Bay of 
Naples, Italy

Aerial view of the 
Leça da Palmeira 
swimming pools 
designed by Alvaro 
Siza in 1966 

The rock and the city share destiny and function: both have cavi-
ties that the sea fills and that we call swimming pools. The area of 
the bowl that belongs to nature is made fiercely, by the aggregation, 
still and forever visible, of the magma that stopped and cooled down 
there. The built half is made by manufactured materials, concrete 
adapting the rectilinear geometries that its artificial nature and 
construction technique demand. Both meet each other and accept 
together the water and the passage of time that is inexorable, that 
sometime will separate them: that tense temporary community is 
the project.

Otherwise, I like more the cities when they reach the sea without 
mediation at all, when they reach the sea with all their energy. All the 
construction, the agreement between material wishes and the things 
that the city is, all stopped right in front of the water… it is mutual 
fascination without the possibility of any kind of surrender or agree-
ment. Naples or Syracuse, hanging by the edge of the water.  

My city, Barcelona, progresses each day with an excessive agree-
ment between sea and city: there is so much mediation that you 
hardly perceive the water. Calm, like liquid asphalt. With Mamen 
Domingo and Conxita Balcells, besides friendship and academic 
activities, we share big scale projects on the Barcelona coast. Conxita 
is the author of the Marine Zoo. Mamen proposes to live in front of 
the sea – as Le Corbusier did with the GATPAC of Josep Lluís Sert, 
Torres Clavé, etc – but now at the foot of Montjuich, which can there-
fore play a vital role in the city, beyond being the “green lung” and 
traditional venue for exhibitions.



MAS CONTEXT  6 | AMUSEMENT

30

IN FRONT OF THE SEA

31

Volumetric view 
of the proposed 
residential 
neighborhood  
at the foot of 
Montjuich

Plan of the Campus 
de Llevant in 
Besós at the end of 
Diagonal Avenue in 
Barcelona

Model of the 
Campus de Llevant 
in Besós

Plan of the 
proposed Marine 
Zoo in Barcelona 

Mamen from the South and Conxita and myself from the North 
prefer to live with the sea instead on walking by it. As a result, in my 
project for the Campus de Llevant in Besós I try to extend the urban 
tension all the way to the edge: like the Venetian Arsenal, like our na-
val dockyards when they were in front of the sea. I take the pattern of 
the main road, from my master plan done with Josep Lluís Mateo and 
the late Enric Miralles, and the plan of the Forum building by Herzog 
and de Meuron, and I transform it into a zigzag line, that is a water-
front, that creates plazas of land and plazas of sea, a zipper between 
water and soil.

Probably, what these three projects in Barcelona have in common 
is their wish not to insert a waterfront between city and water; it is the 
whole urban public space that offers itself to the water to turn it, also, 
into city.


	Cover - Yosigo
	Introduction - Iker Gil
	Table of Contents
	Empty Amusement - Yosigo
	In Front of the Sea - Eduard Bru
	Audience as Participants - Matt Clark
	Comic book movies - Paul Butt
	de[FENCING] - Joseph Altshuler
	Amusement film - Jon Cole
	Game Seeds - Liselore Goedhart
	Delivering an Emotion - Jenova Chen
	What Amuses You? - Your responses
	She Was Not Amused - Mike Walsh
	Contributors
	Team, Acknowledgements & Photographic Credits



