






































DECOMPOSING THE VALUE OF RABBIT MEAT. A JOINT USE OF THE 
CONTINGENT VALUATION AND THE ANALYTICAL HIERARCHY 

PROCESS. 
 

Zein KALLAS 
E-mail: Zein.kallas@upc.edu 

 
José Maria GIL 

E-mail: Chema.Gil@upc.edu 
Center for Agro-food Economy and Development 

Polytechnic University of Catalonia 
Casteldefells, Barcelona, SPAIN 

 
 

ABSTRACT 
 

 
Our paper makes use of the Analytical Hierarchy Process (AHP) in order to derive the willingness to pay 
(WTP) for complex goods with a range of attributes and attribute levels. Weights obtained from the AHP 
are used to decompose the aggregate WTP obtained from Contingent Valuation (CV) in a hypothetical 
simulated market. The empirical analysis uses consumer-level questionnaires to elicit information 
regarding consumer attitudes and preferences towards rabbit meat in Catalonia (Spain). Our results 
demonstrate the convenience of our approach to analyze consumer WTP for complex goods. Furthermore, 
results demonstrate a higher preference for rabbit meat from the “Catalan” region followed by higher 
quality certification information 
 
Keywords: AHP, Contingent Valuation, willingness to pay 
 
 
 
1. Introduction 
 
Several alternatives are available when analyzing individual stated preferences for product attributes and 
levels. The Analytical Hierarchy Process (AHP) has been show to be able to assess individual preferences 
following a hierarchical structure. The AHP allows for the search of relative importance placed on 
product attributes and attribute levels of the analyzed complex goods. Several studies have compared 
individual preferences and customer decisions using AHP and other monetary stated preference such the 
Conjoint Analysis (CA) and the Choice Experiments (CE) (Malvinas, et al., 2005; Scholz, et al., 2005; 
Meißner et al., 2008, Moran, et al. 2007, Colombo et al., 2009 and Kallas et al., 2011). 
 
However, the AHP has shown some limitations in introducing monetary attributes in the paired 
comparison task. As a result, the willingness to pay (WTP) for the product’ attributes and levels are 
hardly derived using only the AHP method. The objective of this study is to cope with this limitation, 
proposing a theoretical model based on a joint use of the Contingent Valuation (CV) and the AHP in an 
analogue way to the model developed by kallas et al., (2007) in order to derive the individual willingness 
to pay for level of a product. 

                                                             
 Corresponding author 



Proceedings of the International Symposium on the Analytic Hierarchy Process 2011 
 

2 
 

2. The theoretical framework 
Let suppose a “choice set” (Sn) with the presence of three hypothetical “alternatives of election” (i.e. 
hypothetical product) in a simulated market: Alternative “A” (P1), alternative “B” (P2) and alternative 
“neither of them” (statu-quo option or opt-out option). In addition, let suppose that consumers are asked 
in a contingent valuation exercise to choose their preferred alternative and to set their maximum 
willingness to pay for it. 
 
The contingent valuation assumes that consumers derive utility from two goods, a selected good (Pi) and 
all other goods treated as a composite good with price (Y). Thus, in an analogue way to the model 
developed by kallas et al., (2007), our valuation question elicits maximum WTP for the chosen product 
(Pi) consistent with the following indifference situation: 

( ; ) ( ; - )Pi iU Y WTP P U Y statu quo option      (1) 
where WTPPi is the willingness to pay for moving from the statu-quo option (i.e. the alternative “neither 
of them” or “do not purchase”) to the selected good (Pi). 
 
Rearranging the previous expression, the monetary equivalent of the decision to purchase the good (Pi) 
rather than keeping the preference toward the alternative “opt-out option” (i.e. the keeping the statu-quo 
situation) can be expressed as: 

( ) ( - )Pi iWTP U P U opt out option        (2) 
On the other hand, the product utility can be expressed as: 

1 2( ) ( , ,..., )i nU P U A A A       (3) 
and for the opt-out option as: 

1.ref 2.ref .ref( - ) ( , ,..., )nU opt out option U A A A     (4) 

Where Ai are the attributes of the product (i = 1… n) and Ai.ref are the value of attribute at the reference 
situation (i. e. value of attributes that describe the opt-out option). Replacing equation (3) and (4) into (2): 

1 2 1.ref 2.ref .ref( , ,..., ) ( , ,..., )Pi n nWTP U A A A U A A A      (5) 
However, individual values cannot be assigned to Ai without further assumptions about the shape of the 
utility function U. Multicriteria analysis (in particular The Analytical Hierarchy Process, AHP) helps. 
Assuming a linear and additive utility function specification, AHP allows us to estimate weights (wn) as 
follow: 

1 1 2 2( ) ( ,..., )i n nU P w A w A w A       (6) 
and  

1 1.ref 2 2.ref .ref( ) ( ,..., )n nU opt out w A w A w A       (7) 

Combining equation (5), (6) and (7) we obtain: 
1 1 2 2 1 1.ref 2 2.ref .ref

1 1 1.ref 2 2 2.ref .ref

( ,..., ) ( ,..., )

( ) ( ) ( )

Pi n n n n

n n n

WTP w A w A w A w A w A w A

w A A w A A w A A

    

      
 (8) 

In the case of the opt-out option, the reference values of attributes describing this alternative (An.ref) are set 
to zero, since the alternative “neither of them” does not contain any product descriptors. Therefore, we 
can state that the WTP for an individual attribute of the good is as follow: 

An n PiWTP w WTP        (9) 



Z. Kallas, J. Gil 
 

3 
 

Following the above mentioned model, the WTP of the hypothetical products (Pi) can be decomposed into 
the WTPs of their attributes and levels. In this line, our theoretical framework relies on a joint use of three 
techniques: 
To build up an array of different “choice sets” (Si) that contains several hypothetical products (Pi). This 
can be reached by using the “experimental design” techniques. 
The Contingent Valuation (CV) exercise to estimate the WTP for passing from the statu-quo option to the 
chosen hypothetical product (WTPPi). 
The Analytical Hierarchy Process (AHP) to estimate the weights (wn) of product descriptors (attributes 
and levels) within each hypothetical product. 
The first step is to construct the array of the hypothetical products (i.e. the choice sets; Si) in order to 
valuate product in a further step using the contingent valuation. 
 
2.1 The Creation of choice sets of the hypothetical products 
 
To ensure a valid representation of attributes and levels, they should be included within the hypothetical 
products in a balanced and equilibrated way. Among the available experimental designs, the "factorial 
design" is one of the most used. It ensures that each level of each attribute is combined with all level of all 
others attributes (Cochrane and Cox, 1957 and Winer, 1971). The total combination of levels and 
attributes of a product (full factorial design) requires a consideration of LA possible “choice alternatives”, 
where L is the number of levels and A is the number of attributes. The full factorial design has the 
advantage, from a statistical point of view, in ensuring that all main and interaction effect among 
attributes and levels are independently estimated (the orthogonality property). Despite this advantage, it 
suffer from the problem of the generated number of “hypothetical products” which increases 
exponentially with the number of attributes and levels, reaching numbers beyond the capacity and ability 
of a respondent to choose among them. As a solution to this difficulty, a fraction of this general factorial 
design is usually used. This new design is a selection of some “choice alternatives” from the all possible 
combinations. In the process of selecting the desired number of “choice alternatives”, orthogonality 
property should be respected. The identification of the orthogonal fractional factorial design allows 
creating different and independent “choice alternatives” (i. e. hypothetical products). In a following step, 
we need to identify which combination of the created “hypothetical products” should be within “choice 
sets”. To create the alternatives within each choice sets the "swapping" procedure (Street and Burgers, 
2003), known also as "shifting” (Bunch, et al., 1996, and Huber and Zwerin, 1996) is usually used. 
 
 
2.2. The Contingent Valuation 
Once choice sets are created, CV question is introduced by asking consumers their maximum willingness 
to pay (WTP) for their preferred “hypothetical product” from each choice set. The multiple payment 
format can be a convenient way as it combines the advantages of open-ended formats (elicitation of point 
information of WTP) and closed formats (ease of cognitive burden on interviewees) whereas minimizing 
the risk of ‘‘starting price bias’’. For more detailed information about the CV theory see among other 
Mitchell and Carson (1989), Arrow et al., (1993) or Carson, (2006). Following the format of multiple 
payments, in each choice set a question about WTP is included with several monetary options as can be 
seen in Figure 1. Respondent are asked to choose from the available values their WTP for the preferred 
product from each choice set 
 
 
 
 
 
 



Proceedings of the International Symposium on the Analytic Hierarchy Process 2011 
 

4 
 

Choice set # 1 Product “X” Product “Y” Opt-Out Option 
Attribute1 

… 
Attribute n 

Combination “X” 
of different levels 

Combination “Y” of 
different levels Neither of them 

Please select from the values below your maximum WILLINGNESS TO PAY for 
your preferred product: 

 € WTP1  € WTP2  € WTP3  
       

Figure 1: Description of a choice set for the Contingent Valuation experiment 

 
 

2.3. The Analytical Hierarchy Process (AHP) 
The AHP is a multi-criteria decision-supporting method in discrete environments (Saaty, 1977; 1980). It 
aims to decompose a complex decision problem in a hierarchy into smaller constituent sub-problems. In 
order to implement the AHP, first product attributes (An) and levels (Ln.m), where n is the number of 
attributes (n=1,..., N) and m is the number of levels within each attribute (m=1, ..., M), should be 
identified to create the simulated market of the hypothetical products. In a subsequent step, a survey is 
needed to ask individuals about the relative importance or weights (w) of the different attributes (An) and 
levels (Ln.m) obtained from pairwise comparisons following a hierarchical structure. Following the AHP 
estimation procedure the local (attribute) and Global (levels) weights within the hierarchical results can be 
obtained. 
 
 
3. The Joint use of CV and the AHP 
As a result of applying the abovementioned three stages, the WTP (from the CV) can be decomposed 
using weights of levels (from the AHP) following equation 9 to estimate the WTP of levels as can be seen 
in Table (shadowed cells). 

 
Table 1: Joint use of AHP and CV 
Attributes Choice set #1 

N
ei

th
er

 o
f t

he
m

 

Product “X” Product “Y” 

Attribute 1 

(A1) 

Local weight of attribute A1 wA1 Local weight of attribute A1 wA1 
Local weight of levels m of A1 wL1.m Local weight of levels m of A1 wL1.m 
Global weight of levels: wG_L1.m = wL1.m × wA1 Global weight of level wG_L1.m = wL1.m × wA1 
WTPs of levels: WTPL1.m  = wG_L1.m × WTPX WTPs of levels: WTPL1.m = wG_L1.m × WTPY 

…
 

…
 

…
 

Attribute n 

(An) 

Local weight of attribute An wAn Local weight of attribute An wAn 
Local weight of level m of An wLn.m Local weight of level m of An: wLn.m 
Global weight of levels: wG_Ln.m = wLn.m × wAn Global weight of levels wG_Ln.m = wLn.m × wAn 
WTPs of levels: WTPLn.m  = wG_Ln.m × WTPX WTPs of levels: WTPLn.m = wG_Ln.m × WTPY 

 Total WTP of “X” WTPX   Total WTP of “Y” WTPY   
 

4. The Empirical application 
For the empirical application we have selected the rabbit meat consumption sector in Catalonia (Spain) to 
realize our exploratory study. This study will focus on consumers’ preference and attitudes toward a 
quality brand of rabbit meat. Data used in this analysis were obtained from face-to-face questionnaires 
with consumers carried out during February 2009. The questionnaire collects extensive information on 
consumer’s characteristics and their attitudes and perceptions toward rabbit meat. The final sample 
consists of 113 consumers mainly located at Barcelona province. To mitigate the order effect in realizing 



Z. Kallas, J. Gil 
 

5 
 

the AHP and CV exercises, we followed a design based on ordering change, both within and between 
techniques as advised by Charzan (1994). We have split our sample into four sub-samples, generating 
four versions of the survey differentiated by different orders between and within methods such as 
attributes, levels, choice sets and pairwise comparisons. For the identification of attributes and levels of 
fresh rabbit meat, the elements that consumers take into consideration when purchasing this product need 
to be clearly defined, including the quality brand as an attribute of interest. The final set of attributes was: 
origin, format and price beside the brand attribute. In the same context, a pilot questionnaire was applied 
where no posterior problems were identified. The final attributes and levels are shown in Table 2. 
 
Table 2: Attributes and levels for rabbit meat preference 

Attributes Levels 
Origin  Foreign (L1.1), Spain (L1.2), Catalonia (L1.3) 
Format  Boneless (L2.1), Pieced (L2.2), Entire (L2.3) 
Brand  Unbranded (L3.1), Commercial (L3.2), Quality (L3.3) 
Price  €5.50 (L4.1), €7.00 (L4.2), €7.50 (L4.3) 

5. Results 
Results obtained from the AHP are shown in Figure 3. The “Catalan” origin is the most important level 
(60.7%) followed by “Spain” (26.8%) and “Foreign” (12.5%). Within the “format” attribute, the highest 
weight is assigned to the “entire” level (52.1%) followed by the “pieced” (31.8%) and the “boneless” 
rabbit meat (16.0%). Finally, in relation to the “brand” attribute, the most important weight is associated, 
as expected, to the “quality brand” (57.4%), followed by the “commercial brand” (22.1%) and the 
“unbranded” levels (20.4%). Global weights of levels are also reported in Figure 3. These values can be 
compared between all levels for all attributes since they are normalized with their corresponding attribute’ 
weight. Results show that consumers prefer in the first place the “entire” rabbit meat (25.0%), produced 
in “Catalonia” (18.6%). The third preferred level is “pieced” rabbit meat (15.3%) followed by “quality 
brand” (12.2%). Results show that the “ideal” product is “entire” or pieced” rabbit meat produced in 
“Catalonia” with “quality brand”. 
 
The results of the joint use of the CV and AHP are summarized in Figure 3. Results show that for the 
“origin” attribute, consumers are willing to pay 1.016 (€/Kg) for the Catalan origin of the rabbit meat, 
0.236 (€/Kg) for the Spanish origin. Theses value decrease drastically to 0.086 (€/Kg) in the case of 
foreign level. For the “format” attribute, the entire level receives the highest WTP (1.380 €/Kg) followed 
by the “pieced” (0.720 €/Kg) and Boneless (0.432 €/Kg) meat. Finally, for “brand” attribute is the less 
valued attribute. Consumers have a WTP of 0.483 (€/Kg) for “quality” level, 0.154 (€/Kg) for 
“commercial” brand and 0.156 €/Kg for the “unbranded” level. 
 
5. Conclusions 
 
Our paper try to assess the WTP of attribute’ levels of an Agro-food product on the basis of a joint use of 
the CV and the AHP. We develop a theoretical model that try to decompose the aggregate WTP of a 
product into the WTPs of his descriptors. The CV allow to obtain an aggregate value of the WTP of the 
product in a holistic way, whereas the AHP allow for decomposing this value according to the relative 
weights of levels obtain from consumers’ pair wise comparisons. 
 
For the empirical application, consumers’ preference and attitudes toward a quality brand of rabbit meat 
are analyzed. Data used in this analysis were obtained from face-to-face questionnaires with 113 
consumers located at Barcelona province. The joint use of the AHP and CV show that the ideal product is 
the “entire” or pieced” rabbit meat produced in “Catalonia” preferably with a “quality brand”. In this 
context, the AHP show its capacity to be a valid complement technique to decompose the WTP obtained 
from a monetary valuation technique such as the CV on the basis of an additive utility function. 



Proceedings of the International Symposium on the Analytic Hierarchy Process 2011 
 

6 
 

 
REFERENCES 

Kallas, Z., Gómez-Limón, J.A. & Barreiro, J. (2007). Decomposing the value of agricultural 
multifunctionality: Combining contingent valuation and the analytical hierarchy process. Journal of 
Agricultural Economics, 58(2), 218 – 241. 
 
Kallas, Z.; Lambarraa, F. and Gil, J.M. (2011), “A stated preference analysis comparing the Analytical 
Hierarchy Process versus Choice Experiments”, Food Quality and preferences, 22, pp. 181-192. 
 
Malvinas, F., Mangkoesubroto, K., Suryadi, K. & Yudhistira, T. (2005) Development of customer 
decision model in selecting product concept based on conjoint-analysis-like AHP . Honolulu. Hawaii. 
 
Meißner, M. & Decker, R. (2009) An empirical comparison of CBC and AHP for measuring consumer 
preferences. International Symposium of Analytical Hierarchy Process, Pittsburgh 

Scholz, S.W. & Decker, R. (2007) Measuring the impact of wood species on consumer preferences for 
wooden furniture by means of the Analytic Hierarchy Process. Forest Products Journal, 57(3), 23 - 28. 
 
Arrow, K., Salow, R., Portney, P., Leaemer, E., Radner, R. & Schuman, H. (1993) “Report of the NOAA 
Panel on Contingent Valuation”. Federal Register, Vol. 58, nº 10, pp. 4016-4064. 
 
Street, D., Burgess, L. (2003) “Optimal and near-optimal pairs for the estimation of effects in 2-level 
choice experiment”. Journal of Statistical Planning and Inference, 118 (1), pp.185-199. 
 
Huber, J. & zwerina, K. (1996) “The important of utility balance in efficient choice set designs”. Journal 
of Marketing Research, 33 (3), pp. 307-317. 



Z. Kallas, J. Gil 
 

7 
 

 
Figure 3: Result of the joint use of the Analytical hierarchy process and CV 


