












































acs82_25_kallas.indd


1

Agriculturae Conspectus Scientifi cus . Vol. 82 (2017) No. 2 (1-5)

ORIGINAL SCIENTIFIC PAPER

| a
cs

_p
ro

of
 |

Summary

In this research we proposed an integrated methodological approach to measure the 
“real” consumers’ preference towards new Traditional (TPP) and Innovative Pork 
Products (ITPP) from three untapped pig breeds in Spain (Porc Negre), Italy (Cinta 
Senese) and Slovenia (Krškopolje). We fi rst analyse consumers’ perception towards the 
traditional concept in pork products. Results showed high preference heterogeneity 
amongst countries. Aft er the eating experience, the expected preferences were aff ected 
signifi cantly in particular in Italy and Slovenia. Th e likelihood to purchase the 
innovative pork products increased as well.

Key words

consumers’ preference, consumers’ acceptance, pork products

Measuring Consumers’ Preferences 
for Traditional and Innovative Pork 
Products 

Zein KALLAS 1( )

Meta ČANDEK-POTOKAR 2 

Urška TOMAŽIN 2

Carolina PUGLIESE 3

Chiara AQUILANI 3

José Maria GIL 1

1 Centre for Agro-food Economy & Development, CREDA-UPC-IRTA, 
Castelldefels 08860, Spain

 e-mail: zein.kallas@upc.edu
2 Agricultural Institute Of Slovenia (KIS), Ljubljana 1000, Slovenia
3 Universita Degli Studi Di Firenze (UNIFI), Florence 50121, Italy

Received: April 30, 2017 | Accepted: September 25, 2017

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This study has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and 
innovation programme under grant agreement No 634476 (project acronym TREASURE). The 
content of this paper reflects only the author’s view and the European Union Agency is not 
responsible for any use that may be made of the information it contains.



Agric. conspec. sci. Vol. 82 (2017) No. 2

2 Zein KALLAS, Meta ČANDEK-POTOKAR, Urška TOMAŽIN, Carolina PUGLIESE Chiara AQUILANI, José Maria GIL

Introduction
Th e analysis of consumers’ preference towards traditional 

food products (TFP) and innovative food products (ITFP) is 
gaining relevance in the last decades. Th e European Parliament 
and the Council of the European Union (2012) identifi es the TFP 
as a product with a proven usage on the domestic market for a 
period that allows transmission between generations; this period 
is to be at least 30 years”. Th us analyzing consumers’ perception 
and the consumer-driven defi nition towards the TFP is highly 
relevant to understand consumers’ reaction to new products at 
market place (Balogh et al., 2016). Th e meat industry has started 
introducing innovations to improve the nutritional and health 
properties of meat processed products (Toldra & Reig, 2011). Th e 
demand for food products enriched with natural ingredients 
that provide health benefi ts is increasing. Th us, the production 
of healthier products is one of the innovations that is being con-
tinuously incorporated into processed meat products. Th e in-
novative pork products with healthy benefi t are still at an early 
stage, with only a few products launched on the global market 
(Grasso et al., 2014). 

In this context, consumers’ preferences and purchase inten-
tion towards pork products obtained from three untapped pig 
breeds in Spain (Porc Negre), Italy (Cinta Senese) and Slovenia 
(Krškopolje) were analysed. In each case study, and according 
to each market interest and potential expected demand, specifi c 
products and innovations were identifi ed. Table 1 shows a sum-
mary of the selected products.

Within the range of techniques that analyze preferences, 
several alternatives are available. Th e Choice Experiment (CE) 
is one of the most used in the exploration of individuals’ prefer-
ences (Alfens, 2004). Th is method has demonstrated its capacity 
to analyze preferences for “complex goods” such as food prod-
ucts. Th e choice experiment aims at identifying the individual’s 
indirect utility function associated with attributes of products by 
examining the trade-off s consumers make when making choices 
at the retail outlet. Th us, several alternatives (products) that are 
described by several attributes (breed, innovations and price) 
with varying levels (breed types, innovation types, price levels) 
are presented to the respondents in an array of choice sets or 
cards. Th ese cards show diff erent competing products at diff er-
ent prices. Within each choice card, respondents are then asked 
to select his/her preferred product (alternative) or to rank the 
products from the best to worst product, thereby revealing his/
her preference for certain attributes and levels. Subsequently, the 
willingness to pay for the diff erent attributes (and consequently 
the breed or the innovation) can be indirectly recovered from 
respondents’ choices. Th e conceptual foundations of CE rely on 

Lancaster’s Th eory of Value (Lancaster, 1966), which proposes 
that utilities for goods can be decomposed into separable utili-
ties for their characteristics or attributes, and Random Utility 
Th eory (Th urstone, 1927), which explains the dominance judg-
ments made between pairs of off erings.

Consumers’ preferences were analyzed before (expected pref-
erence) and aft er the eating experience (experienced preferences). 
We applied a real Discrete Choice Experiments (DCE) in order 
to avoid the hypothetical bias. In a hypothetical DCE, consum-
ers choose their preferred product from each choice set without 
any real consequence derived from this selection (i.e. they choose 
one product but they do not have to buy it). Several studies have 
criticized this approach since some results seem to show diver-
gence between what consumers select as their preferred product 
and what they would purchase in real life, posing under ques-
tion the validity of hypothetical experiments (Loomis, 2014). 
Previous studies indicate that individuals, in general, respond 
to hypothetical scenarios surveys diff erently from the way they 
act in real life (Murphy et al., 2005). It is quite common to fi nd 
that individuals say they are willing to pay higher prices than 
those that they are really willing to pay. Th is is due to the dif-
fi culty in calculating the exact impact of these higher expenses 
on the household economy. It is easy to be generous when in re-
ality one does not need to pay more.

To overcome such disparity, some alternatives have been 
developed in the literature. One of the most convincing ones 
is the inclusion of economic incentives by creating a real shop-
ping scenario. In such a situation consumers have an incentive 
to behave truthfully and to choose the products he/she would 
actually buy in a real setting. To create a real shopping scenario, 
consumers are usually unexpectedly informed that they will be 
rewarded with some additional income. Participants who par-
ticipate in the survey should “purchase” their preferred prod-
uct and pay its price.

Material and methods
We fi rst analyzed the consumer-driven defi nition of the 

traditional concept in pork products on the basis of literature. 
Twenty-two statements were evaluated using 9-point Likert scale 
(“1” disagree very strongly, “2” disagree strongly, “3” disagree 
moderately, “4” disagree slightly, “5” neutral, “6” agree slight-
ly, “7” agree moderately, “8” agree strongly and “9” agree very 
strongly). Th e most relevant statements were: anchored in the 
past (Guerrero et al., 2009), tied to specifi c localities, regions 
or countries and typically evoke strong memories of childhood 
(Cerjak et al., 2014; Rudawska, 2014), passed from one generation 
to generation and usually in a domestic setting or by artisans 

Table 1. Th e Traditional and Innovative Pork Products in each case study

 Spain Italy Slovenia 

Untapped breed Porc Negre Cinta Senese Krškopolje 
Traditional Pork Product (TPP) Patties Salami Salami 
Innovative Traditional Pork Product (ITPP1) Enriched with a natural source of 

Antioxidants 
With natural preserving 
agent 

Without preserving  
agent 

Innovative Traditional Pork Product (ITPP2) Enriched with a natural source of dietary fibre – – 



Agric. conspec. sci. Vol. 82 (2017) No. 2

3Measuring Consumers’ Preferences for Traditional and Innovative Pork Products

(Guerrero et al., 2009), possess distinctive and positive sensory 
merits (Molnár et al., 2011, Almli et al., 2011), genuine and au-
thentic (Tregear et al., 1998, Guerrero et al., 2009), part of an 
area’s gastronomic heritage (Guerrero et al., 2009), familiarity 
and the natural content (Pieniak et al., 2009).

Th e relevance of the methodological approach proposed in 
this study is its ability to mimic how consumers react in “real 
life” when facing a novel/new product. When consumers face 
new/novel products in a retail outlet, they create expectations on 
the basis of their past experience and available information. Th e 
analysis of consumers’ preferences following this experimental 
design (i.e. before tasting the product) is identifi ed as “expect-
ed preferences” and are elicited taking into account consumers’ 
choices. Th e range of products off ered to consumers includes the 
existing ones in the market and the new ones in order to simu-
late a real purchasing situation. In a subsequent step, consum-
ers taste the new/novel products and existing products and then 
they create a subjective “sensory experience” (consumer accept-
ance analysis). Th is eating experience in real life is crucial as it 
allows consumers to decide if they are willing to repurchase the 
product. Aft er tasting the products, the decision to repurchase 
the product might be aff ected. Th us, the preferences analysis is 
repeated because the sensory experience may result in agreement 
or disagreement with what they expected and therefore the de-
cision to repurchase the product will be diff erent among them. 
Th e analysis of preferences at this point is identifi ed as “expe-
rienced preferences”. Th erefore, we followed a combination of 
the preferences analysis (real willingness to purchase) and the 

consumer acceptance (sensory liking). Th e complementarity of 
these analyses allowed us to analyze if the proposed products 
may reach successfully the market by comparing what consum-
ers expect and what they experience aft er tasting the product.

For the choice sets construction, we put the diff erent TPPs 
and ITPPs jointly with two conventional pork products that are 
actually sold in the markets but with two diff erent qualities: a 
regular one with low market price (CONV) and a premium one 
with the high market price (PREM). Each choice set contains 
the TPP, the ITPP, the CONV and the PREM products catego-
ries that appear at diff erent price combinations. A NONE option 
was also off ered if consumers reject to purchase any products. 
Data collection for consumers’ acceptance and preference (real 
choice experiment), was carried out for the same 120 consumers 
in each case study. A quota sampling approach was used strati-
fi ed by gender and age. Consumers eligible to participate were 
over 18 years of age who regularly purchase food and beverages 
and having purchased and consumed the products proposed in 
the last month. Consumers were economically “compensated” 
for their participation by direct payment of money delivered at 
the end of the experiment. At the end of the whole experiment, 
the amount of the “unexpected payment” was paid to consumers 
to participate in the real purchasing scenarios of the “products”.

Results and discussions
As can be seen in Figure 1, we fi rst identifi ed the consum-

er-driven defi nition of the Traditional Pork Products concept.

Figure 1. 
The consumer driven definition of the 
traditional concept within the pork products



Agric. conspec. sci. Vol. 82 (2017) No. 2

4 Zein KALLAS, Meta ČANDEK-POTOKAR, Urška TOMAŽIN, Carolina PUGLIESE Chiara AQUILANI, José Maria GIL

Figure 2. Expected and experienced purchase intention if the products have the same price



Agric. conspec. sci. Vol. 82 (2017) No. 2

5Measuring Consumers’ Preferences for Traditional and Innovative Pork Products

In general terms, the perception towards the Traditional 
Pork products were positive, showing high agreement level with 
the positive statements in all countries and low mean value for 
the negative statements. Th e traditional concepts in all coun-
tries was highly identifi ed as part of area gastronomic heritage 
in agreement with the results found in Guerrero et al., (2009). 
It was also recognised the role of this type of products in main-
taining the local economies and the highest perceived quality 
they have. Th ere was also an agreement on their handmade and 
artisanal production system. However, observed heterogene-
ity is found, especially regarding the safety aspect. While these 
types of products are considered safe in Slovenia and Spain, 
they received lower score in Italy. Th e same for the healthy per-
ception, where in Slovenia were considered less healthy than in 
Italy and Spain. Further analysis is needed to understand this 
observed heterogeneity with regards to the socioeconomic and 
cultural variables.

Th e preliminary results regarding the expected and the ex-
perienced purchase intention extracted are presented in Figure 
2. It is worth mentioning that these results were extracted from 
only one card from the DCE where the products appeared to 
have the same price.

As can be seen in Figure 2, two preliminary results can be 
retrieved. First, the percentage of respondents who showed the 
intention to purchase the TPPs and the ITPPs aft er the eating ex-
perience increased in Spain but decreased in Italy and Slovenia. 
Results from the sensory experiment may shed light on these 
fi nding. However, these results are beyond the objective of this 
paper. Second, the total percentage of purchase intention of the 
TPP and the ITPP in Italy and Slovenia was relatively high in 
comparison to the other products off ered in the choice sets and 
also in comparison to the Spanish TPP and ITPP products. It 
seems that innovations regarding the expected purchase inten-
tion in Slovenia and Italy were more accepted in comparison to 
the Spanish case study. However, innovations regarding the ex-
perienced purchase intention were more accepted in Italy com-
pared to Spain and Slovenia.

In all cases, results should be treated carefully because they 
represent only a part of the choice experiment results, and because 
of the relatively small samples in each case study. Furthermore, 
results should be interpreted as specifi c to each case study due 
to the diff erence in products, the price and innovations levels. 
Future research with large sample should be carried out to better 
shed light on conclusion with more signifi cant results.

Conclusions
We analysed the “real” purchase intention towards tradi-

tional and innovative pork products before and aft er the eating 
experience. Th e preliminary results of the expected real pur-
chase intention showed that the TPP and the ITPP are likely to 
be purchased if the decision is only based on the products’ char-
acteristics. However, the expected purchase intention decreased 
in Slovenia and Italy while increased in Spain aft er the eating 
experience. Further analysis is need from the sensory point of 
view to shed light on these results.

Reference
Alfens, F. (2004) Stated preferences for imported and hormone-

treated beef: Application of a mixed logit model. European 
Review of Agricultural Economics, 31(1), 19-37.

Almli, V.L., Verbeke, W., Vanhonacker, F., Næs, T., Hersleth, M., 
2011. General image and attribute perceptions of traditional 
food in six European countries. Food Quality and Preference. 
22, 129–138.

Balogh, P., Békési, D., Gorton, M., Popp, J., & Lengyel, P. (2016). 
Consumer willingness to pay for traditional food products. 
Food Policy, 61, 176-184.

Cerjak, M., Haas, R., Brunner, F., Tomić , M., (2014). What moti-
vates consumers to buy traditional food products? Evidence 
from Croatia and Austria using word association and laddering 
interviews. Brit. Food J. 116, 1726–1747.

European Parliament and the Council of the European Union, 
(2012). Agricultural Product Quality Schemes (COM 
(2010) 0733 – C7–0423/2010 – 2010/0353 (COD)). European 
Parliament, Brussels.

Grasso, S., Brunton, N. P., Lyng, J. G., Lalor, F., & Monahan, F. J. 
(2014). Healthy processed meat products - Regulatory, refor-
mulation and consumer challenges. Trends in Food Science & 
Technology, 39(1), 4-17.

Guerrero, L., Guàrdia, M.D., Xicola, J., Verbeke, W., Vanhonacker, 
F., Zakowska-Biemans, S., Sajdakowska, M., Sulmont-Rossé, C., 
Issanchou, S., Contel, M.,Scalvedi, M.L., Granli, B.S., Hersleth, 
M., (2009). Consumer-driven defi nition of traditional food 
products and innovation in traditional foods. A qualitative 
cross-cultural study. Appetite 52, 345–354.

Lancaster, K. (1966) A new approach to consumer theory. Journal of 
Political Economy, 74, 132-57.

Loomis, J.B. (2014). Strategies for overcoming hypothetical bias in 
stated preference surveys. Journal of Agricultural and Resource 
Economics, 39(1), 34-46.

Molnár, A., Gellynck, X., Vanhonacker, F., Gagalyuk, T., Verbeke, 
W., (2011). Do chain goals match consumer perceptions? Th e 
case of the traditional food sector in selected European Union 
countries. Agribusiness 27, 221–243.

Murphy, J. J., Allen, P. G., Stevens, T. H., & Weatherhead, D. (2005). 
A meta-analysis of hypothetical bias in stated preference valua-
tion. Environmental and Resource Economics, 30(3), 313-325.

Napolitano,F.; Braghieri,A.;Piasentier, E.; Favotto,S.; Naspetti, S.; 
Zanoli, R. (2010) Eff ect of information about organic production 
on beef liking and consumer willingness to pay. Food Quality 
and Preference 21, 207–212.

Pieniak, Z., Verbeke, W., Vanhonacker, F., Guerrero, L., Hersleth, 
M., (2009). Association between traditional food consumption 
and motives for food choice in six European countries. Appetite 
53, 101–108.

Rudawska, E.D., (2014). Customer loyalty towards traditional prod-
ucts – Polish market experience. British Food Journal 116, 
1710–1725.

Th urstone, L. (1927) A law of comparative judgement. Psychological 
Review, 34, 273-286.

Toldra, F. & Reig, M. (2011). Innovations for healthier processed 
meats. Trends in Food Science & Technology, 22(9), 517-522.

Tregear, A., Kuznesof, S., Moxey, A., (1998). Policy initiatives for 
regional foods: some insights from consumer research. Food 
Policy 23, 383–394.

acs82_25




