












































Microsoft Word - Documento1


Consumers’ acceptance of health-related innovations in dry-cured ham from Turopolje pig 
breed 

D. Karolyi1, M. Cerjak1, M.A. Oliver2, J. Dilme2, M. Vitale2, Z. Kallas3, J.M. Gil3 and M. Čandek 
Potokar4 

1University of Zagreb, Faculty of Agriculture, Svetošimunska ulica 25, 10000 Zagreb, Croatia, 
2IRTA, Finca Camps I Armet s/n, 17121 Monells, Spain, 3CREDA UPC IRTA, C/Esteve Terrades 8, 
08860 Castelldefels, Spain, 4Agricultural institute of Slovenia, Hacquetova ulica 17, 1000 
Ljubljana, Slovenia; dkarolyi@agr.hr 

Turopolje pig (TP) is a local Croatian breed which nearly extinct in the second half of the 20th 
century. Currently, despite the state support, the TP is still endangered and to self-sustain the 
breed a new marketing strategy, based on the meat products with an extra added value, is 
needed. As consumers nowadays increasingly demand for more convenient and healthier types 
of products, in present work (within TREASURE project) we investigated consumers’ acceptance 
of health-related innovations associated with the reduction of salting or smoking of TP dry-cured 
ham. A consumer (n=120) sensory test was carried out in Zagreb city area with the three types 
of TP hams (typically salted and smoked, less salted or less smoked) and two types of standard 
hams (conventional and premium) from modern pig breeds. Effect of information on innovation 
and/or breed on ham preferences was tested using three-step procedures as blind, expected 
and actual (informed) test on liking scale from 1 (dislike extremely) to 9 (like extremely). Data 
were analysed by GLM procedures at 0.05 α-level. In the blind test, in the absence of 
information, no significant differences between ham liking scores were found. In the expectancy 
test, when only information is given, all types of TP ham were more preferred than conventional 
ham, but only typical TP ham was preferred over the premium ham. Finally, when tasting is 
repeated with the information, all TP hams were scored higher than premium ham, while 
innovative TP hams were scored similar as conventional ham. This results suggest the preference 
of TP hams over the standard hams and a good acceptance of health-related innovations in TP 
ham by Croatian consumers. Funded by European Union’s H2020 RIA program (grant agreement 
no. 634476). 



*Results were obtained within the TREASURE project funded by European Union’s H2020 RIA program (Grant agreement No 634476).
Poster reflects the authors’ view. European Union Agency is not responsible for any use that may be made of the information it contains.

69th Annual Meeting of the European Federation of Animal Science, 27th to 31st August 2018, Dubrovnik, Croatia

Karolyi Danijel1, Cerjak Marija1, Oliver Maria Angels2, Dilme Jaume2, Vitale Mauro2, Kallas
Zein3, Gil José M. 3 and Čandek Potokar Marjeta4

1University of Zagreb, Faculty of Agriculture, Zagreb, Croatia
2 IRTA, Institute of Food Research and Technology, Monells, Catalonia, Spain
3 CREDA UPCIRTA, Centre de Recerca en Economia i Desenvolupament Agroalimentari, Castelldefels, Catalonia, Spain
4 Agricultural institute of Slovenia, Ljubljana, Slovenia

69th Annual Meeting of the European Federation of Animal Science, 27th to 31st August 2018, Dubrovnik, Croatia

MATERIAL AND METHODS
A consumer (n=120) sensory test was carried out in Zagreb city area
with the three types of TP hams (typically salted and smoked, less
salted or less smoked) and two types of standard hams (conventional
and premium) from modern pig breeds. Effect of information on
innovation and/or breed on ham preferences was tested using three-
step procedures as blind, expected and actual (informed) test on liking
scale from 1 (dislike extremely) to 9 (like extremely). Data were
analyzed by GLM procedures at 0.05 α-level .

BACKGROUND AND AIM – Turopolje pig (TP) is a local
Croatian breed which nearly extinct in the second half of the
20th century. Currently, despite the state support, the TP is still
endangered and to self-sustain the breed a new marketing
strategy, based on the meat products with an extra added value,
is needed. As consumers nowadays increasingly demand for
more convenient and healthier types of products, in present
work we investigated consumers’ acceptance of health-related
innovations associated with the reduction of salting or smoking
of TP dry-cured ham.

CONCLUSION
 Results suggest the preference of TP

hams over the standard hams and a
high market potential of TP breed
products

 Good acceptance of health-related
innovations in TP ham by Croatian
consumers

CONSUMERS’ ACCEPTANCE OF HEALTH-RELATED INNOVATIONS
IN DRY-CURED HAM FROM TUROPOLJE PIG BREED

MAIN RESULTS
In the blind test, in the absence of information on innovation and/or
breed, no significant differences between ham liking scores were
found. In the expectancy test, when consumers received a form only
with the information about the innovation and/or breed, all types of TP
ham were more preferred than conventional ham, but only typical TP
ham was preferred over the premium ham. Finally, when tasting is
repeated with the information on innovation and/or breed, all TP hams
were scored higher than premium ham, while innovative TP hams were
scored similar as conventional ham.

Corresponding author: Danijel Karolyi
e-mail address: dkarolyi@agr.hr

Photo
author

Effect of information on innovation and/or breed on ham preferences
tested using three-step procedures as blind, expected and actual
(informed) test

Unlike letters in the same row (X, Y, Z) mean different for p<0.05 between phases of the test; Unlike letters in the same column
(a, b, c) mean different for p<0.05 between treatments; Category scale from 1= dislike extremely to 9= like extremely; LSM –
least squares means; se – standard error

Turopolje pig ham

(Photo by Blaž Šegula)

From consumer sensory testing's

View publication statsView publication stats

mailto:dkarolyi@agr.hr
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/327646734

	ABSTRACT EAAP 2018 S49P18.pdf
	S49p_18.pdf

