



















































KNOWLEDGE AND WILLINGNESS


 1 

KNOWLEDGE AND WILLINGNESS TO PAY FOR ORGANIC 
FOOD IN SPAIN: EVIDENCE FROM EXPERIMENTAL AUCTIONS 

 

 
José M. Gil (corresponding author) 

CREDA-UPC-IRTA 
Edifici ESAB – Parc Mediterrani de la Tecnologia 

Av. del Canal Olimpic s/n; 08860-Castelldefels (Barcelona-Spain) 
chema.gil@upc.edu 

 
Francisco Soler 

ACCIONA, Zaragoza (Spain) 
mirifran@terra.es 

 
Abstract 

The aim of this paper is to analyse the main determinants of consumers’ knowledge and their 
willingness to pay for organic food products. Moreover, the relationship between knowledge and 
buying behaviour is explored. Virgin olive oil is taken as an example. Data was generated by way of 
an experimental auction carried out in two cities in northeast Spain. A three-equation model is 
estimated: 1) Consumer knowledge; 2) the decision to pay a premium for organic olive oil; and 3) how 
much premium consumers are willing to pay. Results indicate that socio-economic variables are main 
determinants of consumer knowledge, and that consumer attitude, lifestyle and knowledge all 
influence the decision to pay a premium for organic olive oil. 

Key words: experimental auction, knowledge, willingness to pay, organic olive oil, Spain.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 2 

KNOWLEDGE AND WILLINGNESS TO PAY FOR ORGANIC 
FOOD IN SPAIN: EVIDENCE FROM EXPERIMENTAL AUCTIONS 

 

 

 

1. Introduction 

Fifteen years have passed since the arrival of specialty organic food products in Spain. 

Yet, the market is still very narrow as only 0.7% of total food expenditure is devoted to 

organic products. Padel et al. (2003) in a Delphi analysis, catalogue Spain as an emerging 

market for these products. While small, organic production in Spain has expanded by 25 fold 

between 1995 and 2003 (MAPYA, 2004). Increasing subsidies have promoted a certain 

degree of substitution between conventional and organic farming. Foreign markets have been 

a natural destination for organic production. In particular, 50% of organic fruits and 

vegetables are exported to other European countries, leaving domestic consumers unattended 

to a certain extent. However, competition in European markets is growing (Michelsen et al., 

1999) and might affect Spanish producers in the near future. In this context, the enlargement 

of the domestic market could be crucial for the survival of Spanish producers. 

Domestic market growth faces three significant hurdles. First, prices are much higher 

than non-organic counterparts. Spanish producers are used to getting a premium price when 

selling in foreign markets and want to earn the same premium in the domestic market. 

Furthermore, most conventional food products purchased in Spain are less expensive than in 

other European countries, so the gap between conventional and organic product prices is 

greater. Second, Spanish consumers are less sensitive than consumers in other European 

countries to environmental and health concerns (Padel et al., 2003), which some authors have 

shown to be the main determinants of the demand for organic food products (Bigne 1997; 

Roosen & De Pelsmaker 1997). As a result, Spanish consumers are less aware of the specific 

benefits of organic food, with label recognition being one of the most important issues (Gil et 

al., 2000; Padel et al., 2003). Finally, Spain still faces some marketing problems due to supply 

heterogeneity and seasonality. For example, organic food is mainly sold in specialised retail 

stores (Michelsen et al., 1999) and not in the conventional outlets where consumers do most 

of their shopping. 

Any hope of increasing domestic demand requires a better understanding of consumer 

reaction towards organic food. It is widely acknowledged that consumers’ decisions are the 



 3 

result of a complex process in which many personal and environmental factors can contribute 

to the final choices. Consumer knowledge, beliefs, attitudes and behaviour are interdependent 

according to some kind of causal chain mesh. Recent food scares have increased consumer 

concern about food products. As a consequence, consumers have become more rational and 

want better information before making decisions. Hence, purchases are becoming highly 

dependent on the degree of knowledge owned by consumers (Verdurme et al., 2001) 

 Assuming the price difference to be the main determinant of future demand, a number 

of studies have tried to indirectly analyse the potential consumption of organic food products 

by measuring consumers’ willingness to pay (WTP) a premium for organic over conventional 

food products,. Differences in willingness to pay among consumers were found to be related 

to their life styles, socio-economic characteristics and health and environmental concerns. 

(Misra et al., 1991; Byrne et al., 1991; Weaver et al., 1992, Huang, 1996; Hartman & New 

Hope, 1997; Sanjuán et al., 2002; among others). Although some authors have included 

consumer knowledge as a potential explanatory variable on consumer’s willingness to pay a 

premium for an organic food, as far as we know no one has tried to analyse the main 

determinants of consumer knowledge and how this knowledge is related to their WTP.   

The aim of this paper is twofold: first, to analyse the existing relationship between 

consumer knowledge about organic food and their buying behaviour. Second, if a positive 

relationship exists, we wish to find what is the most effective communication channel to 

inform consumers about the benefits of organic food products. Virgin olive oil is taken as an 

example. 

To achieve this objective, a tree-equation model is specified. A direct measure of 

consumers’ knowledge about organic production is generated from responses to specific 

questions included in the survey. Knowledge is then incorporated into a willingness to pay 

(WTP) equation as an explanatory variable. Both the knowledge and the willingness to pay 

variables are treated as endogenous and are jointly estimated. Then, two types of WTP 

equations (a binary choice and a level of WTP) are used to fully capture consumer WTP 

behaviour. 

Data was generated from an experimental market with non-hypothetical scenarios 

conducted in two cities located in northeast Spain. Experimental markets have proved to be an 

interesting and alternative methodology to elicit consumers’ WTP (Menkhaus et al., 1992; 

Buhr et al., 1993; Hayes et al., 1996; and Shogren et al., 1999; among others), since 



 4 

experiments can be implemented so as to respect incentive compatibility. By using monetary 

incentives and real products which can be purchased by participants in an auction, this 

procedure allows the researcher to evaluate consumers’ acceptance of new products as well as 

to measure the impact of using different sources of information to communicate the specific 

attributes about the new product. Furthermore, an experiment can place subjects in a context 

where consumption is required, forcing individuals to put cognitive effort into their bidding 

decisions (Fox, 1995)1. As a result, experimental auctions reduce problems associated with 

hypothetical bias in stated preference methods such as Contingent Valuation and Choice 

modelling. As an added innovation, our paper is the first application of experimental auctions 

to the olive oil market.2  

The rest of the paper is organised as follows. Section 2 describes the experimental 

auction design. Results from the experimental auction are shown in Section 3. In Section 4 a 

three-equation model is estimated to explore the main factors affecting consumers’ 

knowledge and their willingness to pay for an organic virgin olive oil. The paper finishes with 

some concluding remarks. 

 

2. Experimental markets 

In recent years, experimental studies have been employed to investigate consumer 

acceptance and WTP for new products (Lusk et al., 2004a). Using real money and real 

products, that can be purchased during the experiment by participants, a non-hypothetical 

valuation scenario tries to replicate a point-of-purchase decision. This methodological 

approach is derived directly from experimental economics research, which is a relatively new 

theoretical framework. Based on an economic incentive structure, experimental economics 

tries to influence individual behaviour in a laboratory environment. Experimental methods 

allow the researcher to control certain variables and also to test alternative theoretical 

hypotheses (Davis & Holt, 1993; Friedman & Sunder, 1994; Kagel & Roth, 1995). 

Biases detected in contingent valuation methods, due to participants’ awareness of the 

hypothetical nature of their choice (Hayes et al., 1996; Buzby et al., 1998; Stefani & Henson, 

                                                 
1 The criticism of experimental auctions is that consumers’ decisions on food at the point of sale are often done 
with less far involvement. Furthermore, consumers in a normal retail setting are not bidding for a limited stock. 
Finally, Hayes et al., 1996) showed that the WTP value elicited in a one-time purchase scenario is likely to be 
greater than if individuals were allowed multiple purchases. 
2 As far as we know, previous applications have elicited the WTP a premium for olive oil using conjoint analysis 
(Fotopoulus & Kristalis (2001) or choice experiments (Scarpa & Del Giudice, 2004).  



 5 

2001) are overcome in experimental methods by using real products which can be purchased 

subject to budget constraints. Most of the literature in marketing research has used 

experimental auctions either to elicit consumer’s willingness to pay (WTP) for a new or 

improved product or to exchange an endowed conventional product for another with new 

characteristics. Recently, Lusk et al. (2004b) estimated the willingness to accept (WTA) 

compensation to give up a non-genetically modified (GM) product. Neoclassical theory 

suggests that WTP-WTA measurements should provide similar results, although empirical 

evidence seems to show that observed values tend to diverge, with WTA being higher than 

WTP. Taking into account the nature of the product (organic food) and the scope of this 

study, we believe it is more appropriate to elicit consumer’s willingness to pay for it. 

Among the different alternatives, a second-price sealed-bid auction has been chosen to 

carry out the experiment. This auction format is theoretically regarded as incentive 

compatible, the price is endogenously determined and participants can incorporate feedback 

from the market, which has been proved to generate rational behaviour consistent with 

economic theory (Shogren et al., 2001a). Moreover, it has been one of the most popular 

methods used in the literature, although some authors have pointed out the limitation that 

subjects tend to over-bid (Kagel et al., 1987). Other alternatives such as the first-price or the 

random nth-price have also been subject to some criticism (Shogren et al., 2001b). In any case, 

from a theoretical point of view, we have reasons to expect our auction format will give 

similar results to the five-price or random nth-price techniques.  

In a second-price auction, participants submit their bids to the auctioneer 

anonymously. The winner is the participant with the highest bid, but the purchase price 

corresponds to the second highest bid. Repeat bidding allows the participants, through 

experience, to arrive at their real price offer for the product being auctioned, and also permits 

experimenters to test the effect of changing conditions on participants’ valuation of the 

product in question. In order to avoid the so-called “income effect”, a bidding round is 

randomly selected among multiple rounds and the highest bidder of this selected round 

becomes the auction’s winner (Menkhaus et al., 1992; Buhr et al., 1993; Shogren et al., 1994). 



 6 

The experimental market design 

So, an experimental auction has been used to elicit, in absolute terms, consumers’ 

WTP for an organic food. The product chosen was a 75 cl. bottle of organic olive oil3, and it 

was selected for several reasons. Olive oil is a traditional ingredient in Mediterranean cuisine. 

It is consumed in the vast majority of Spanish households and consumers are usually well 

informed about its attributes. Olive oil is mainly purchased in supermarkets (90% of total 

market share) (MAPYA, 2006). 

Participants in the experiment were given the opportunity to purchase the bottled olive 

oil, properly labelled according to government standards as organic, replicating a real market 

experience. We looked at two possible influences on this purchase. First, we tested the effect 

of informing consumers about the price of conventionally produced non-organic olive oil 

prior to the auction. Second, we compared the effect of using alternative information channels 

to communicate certain specific beneficial attributes of the organic product prior to the sale.   

In the first case, the basic assumption is that by providing reference prices (the normal 

situation of a buyer in a retail outlet), the perceived transaction value of the organic virgin 

olive oil increases and then the perceived value of the product also increases (Monroe, 1990). 

Additionally, two distinct information channels were used to increase consumer knowledge 

about organic farming: 1) a written one: a leaflet used by the Organic Farming Committee in a 

promotion campaign in a supermarket retail chain was provided to participants; and 2) an oral 

one: a five minute talk given by a qualified representative of the Organic Farming 

Certification Authority. The information supplied was almost identical in the two cases. 

The experimental design was of a randomised blocks type, considering both of the 

hypotheses mentioned above: 1) the “reference price” effect, with two levels: information on 

reference prices for non-organic virgin olive oil and no information; and 2) the “information 

source” effect, with three levels: no information, leaflet, and oral. The six resulting treatment 

combinations were randomly assigned to six groups of participants: 

• Group 1: No information on organic farming – No reference to non-organic olive oil 

prices 

• Group 2: No information on organic farming – Reference to non-organic olive oil prices 

                                                 
3 All organic olive oil is extra-virgin. Although, for simplification purposes, throughout the text we have used the 
names organic and non-organic olive oil, we are always comparing organic extra-virgin with non-organic extra-
virgin olive oil 



 7 

• Group 3: Leaflet – No reference to non-organic olive oil prices 

• Group 4: Leaflet – Reference to non-organic olive oil prices 

• Group 5: Oral presentation – No reference to non-organic olive oil prices 

• Group 6: Oral presentation – Reference to non-organic olive oil prices 

The experimental auction was carried out in two cities in northeast Spain. One 

hundred twenty (120) participants were recruited from consumer protection organisations. 

The participants recruited were the principal food purchasers for their households and 

voluntarily agreed to attend the experimental session without any prior information about the 

purpose or the conditions of the study. We formed groups of around ten participants to make 

each session manageable 

The experiment was divided in several steps. First, the purpose of the study was 

announced to participants, who were then endowed with 15€ and an identification number in 

order to preserve anonymity4. Then, detailed information about how the auction works was 

provided to participants. To familiarize them with the procedure, a non-hypothetical auction 

with bottled water was carried out. Finally, the experimental auction began. Eight rounds of 

bids were made – all for the same 75 cl. bottle of olive oil, emphasizing that only one of those 

eight rounds would later be randomly selected as the valid round. After each round, the 

number of the highest bidder and the corresponding price were announced to all participants. 

To test for the effect of information on participants’ bids, after the fourth round, participants 

were informed about organic olive oil production methods, labelling and quality controls, 

using either one of the two information sources mentioned before. After providing the 

information, the auction went on to complete the last four of the eight rounds. One base group 

was given no product information at any time. Once the experiment had finished, one round 

was randomly selected to determine the winner of the bids, who had to pay for the product the 

existing purchase price in that round. Finally, participants were asked to fill out a 

questionnaire in which information was collected on their socio-economic characteristics, 

consumption habits, and attitudes towards food safety, nutrition, the environment, labelling 

and food prices.   

 

                                                 
4 Buhr et al. (1993), Shogren et al. (1999) and Stefani and Henson (2001) have tested the endowment effect in 
second-price auctions, finding empirical evidence of an upward bias when no money was given before the 
auction started. 



 8 

3. Consumers willingness to pay for organic olive oil 

Table 1 shows the socio-economic characteristics of participants in the experimental 

auction. A higher share of participants was female, aged 50 to 64 years and with an 

elementary school level of education. One out of five households has children under 16 and 

two-thirds have tried organically produced food at least once. Although we have not used a 

stratified random sample, the socio-economic characteristics of the selected sample do not 

substantially differ from those of the population of reference taking into account the data from 

the Instituto Nacional de Estadística (INE) (National Institute of Statistics).  

Figure 1 and Table 2 show some descriptive results from participant’s bids. Bidding 

prices ranged from 3.50 to 6.25 Euros for organic virgin olive oil. The average bid in the last 

four rounds (once the information was provided) shows that 10.8% of participants were 

willing to pay more than 4.80 euros for the product and that only 5.8% bided more than 5.10 

Euros, the minimum market price at which organic virgin olive oil was sold at that time in the 

two cities where the experiment was held5. If we take into account the 90th percentile in Table 

2, we observe that for those groups to whom no information was provided, the average bids 

were closest to the threshold of 5.10 Euros. This result is consistent with those found in 

Shogren et al. (2000), who indicated that it is the novelty of the product and not the novelty of 

the procedure (experimental auction) what can bias bids upwards. 

(Insert Table 1) 

Figure 2 shows the average WTP for each group mentioned above, and that 

participants’ bids increase significantly as the eight rounds advance. This would suggest that 

participants have a kind of strategic behaviour, submitting their own low bids for the first 

round and yet expecting the first winning price to reveal what everyone else thinks is the true 

value. Alternatively, it can be argued that each group follows a different path, which can only 

be explained by the idiosyncrasy of its membership. For example, the level of bidding has to 

do with the presence of group members who are inclined to buying organic products. 

(Insert Figure 1) 

 The reference price effect 

 In order to see if there is a significant effect on participant’s willingness to pay based 

on the a previous presentation of non-organic virgin olive oil prices, standard t-tests were 

                                                 
5 Market prices for organic extra-virgin olive oil price at the marketplace ranged from 5.1 to 6.8 Euros per bottle. 



 9 

conducted between average bids from participants to whom reference prices were provided 

and those to whom this information was not given. The analysis was carried out for the eight 

rounds. Results are shown in Table 3. In all cases, those possessing reference prices bid 

higher, although differences are more marked from the third round onwards. This is consistent 

with Monroe (1990), who showed that reference prices increased the perceived value of the 

product.  

(Insert Table 2) 

 (Insert Figure 2) 

 The information effect 

 Providing information about the intrinsic beneficial characteristics or attributes of a 

new specific product has been found to be quite an important influence on the consumer’s 

final acceptance of that product. In this paper, we have tried to analyse the effect on consumer 

WTP for one organic food product, of not only the information on how the olive oil is 

produced but also of the way this information is communicated,. To find this out, t-tests have 

been conducted comparing the fourth and fifth round bids, that is, just before and just after the 

information was provided. The analysis has been done for both the written and oral 

presentation of the information.  

(Insert Table 3) 

 Table 4 shows the main results. As can be observed, when no information is supplied 

to participants after the fourth round, differences between bids are not significant. Bids 

follow one another, smoothed by bidding “inertia”. The leaflet is not very effective, hardly 

disturbing the bidding flow. Differences are only marginally significant in the case where 

reference prices had not been provided. However, information provided by a specialist has a 

significant effect on participant’s bids. It seems that the technician’s information is regarded 

as more reliable by the participants. A similar result was found in List & Shogren (1998). 

The main conclusion is that both the information and how it is provided matter6. 

(Insert Table 4) 

 

4. Factors affecting consumer’s knowledge and WTP for organic olive oil 

                                                 
6 Following Roosen et al. (1998), to ensure that differences found between the fourth and the fifth rounds did not 
stem from an increasing trend in the auction bids, we also tested for differences between the third and fourth 
rounds and between the fifth and the sixth rounds. No significant differences were found in these cases. 



 10 

4.1. Model specification 

The relationship between consumer knowledge and their willingness to pay in the case 

of an organic food product has not received too much attention in the literature. Blend & 

Ravensway (1999) and Underhill & Figueroa (1996) are the only exceptions. Both include a 

“knowledge” variable in the willingness to pay equation but they found contradictory results. 

While in the first paper, a positive and significant relationship was found, in the second one, 

the knowledge was not found to be relevant.   

Consumers make food choices in order to get greater utility from their decision. It is 

acknowledged that part of this utility can be derived from using food to maintain their health 

or to preserve the environment, two inherent characteristics associated with organic food. In a 

net benefit approach, consumers will choose organic food if the perceived marginal benefit of 

improving their diet or preserving the environment is greater than the marginal cost of buying 

such a product. The perceived marginal benefit will depend on the information consumers 

have about organic food although, on the other hand, the level of consumers’ knowledge will 

be determined by factors that affect the expected value or costs associated to acquire that 

knowledge. What those factors are is one of the issues addressed in this paper. 

The empirical model used in this paper is composed of three equations: a reduced form 

equation (1) of knowledge about what constitutes organic food, and two structural equations 

of consumer willingness to pay (2) and (3): 

)I,C,F,(SPoisson)Pr(K iiiii =      (1) 

)u,A,S,g(K0)Pr(y iiii
*
i =>      (2) 

[ ] )ε,A',S',h(K'1yWTP iiiiii ==      (3) 
The first equation describes the “knowledge” equation where each respondent’s 

amount of knowledge is measured by the number of correct answers (Ki) to a set of seven 

statements included in the survey. Equation (1) is specified as a count model in which the 

count random variable Ki is assumed to follow a Poisson distribution
7. Explanatory variables 

include the socio-economic characteristics of respondents (Si), the information sources used 

(Fi), the respondent past experience on organic food consumption (Ci) and, finally, the 

information received during the experiment (Ii). Among the socio-economic characteristics, 

                                                 
7 The Poisson distribution is chosen since the mean and the variance of the “knowledge” variable were very 
similar.  



 11 

the education level is included as a proxy of information capital, since well-educated people 

have been exposed to more information and are more capable of understanding the 

information provided. Household income may also affect the level of knowledge about 

organic food, although the sign of this relationship is not evident. While wealthier people may 

show more efficiency in processing information8 they also probably have a higher opportunity 

cost of time, generating potential for a substitution of information by brand loyalty, 

confidence in the retailer, etc. Finally, household composition may also affect the degree of 

knowledge. Households with young children, as well as older people without children, may be 

more aware of the health characteristics of new products.  

Equation (2) is a binary choice willingness to pay equation, which describes the 

probability that the ith respondent is willing to pay a premium for the organic food product 

over the conventional counterpart. The variable *iy indicates the difference in utility provided 

by the organic food product in relation to the non-organic one. If the difference is positive 

( *iy >0), then yi takes the value 1 (the respondent is willing to pay a premium). Otherwise, if 

the difference is negative ( *iy <0), yi is 0. The error term ui is assumed to follow a standard 

normal distribution (Probit Model). Explanatory variables include the consumer knowledge 

about organic food (Ki), socio-economic characteristics of respondents and consumer attitudes 

(Ai) towards: a) the impact of agriculture on the environment; b) food safety; 3) food diet; 4) 

food prices; and 5) organic food products. 

Finally, equation (3) represents the premium respondents are willing to pay for an 

organic food product over the conventional counterpart once they have decided to pay a 

premium (WTPi| yi=1). The error term is also assumed to follow a standard normal 

distribution. This set of explanatory variables can be different from those included in equation 

(2). 

4.2. Estimation procedure 

As mentioned above, equation (1) is a count model where each Ki is drawn from a 

Poisson distribution with parameter θi, which is related to the set of explanatory variables Zi = 

(Si, Fi, Ci). The primary equation of the model is: 

0,1,2,...k
!k

θe
)k(KPr i

i

k
i

θ

ii

ii

===
−

 

                                                 
8 Wealthier people have a real chance to buy any product, even the more expensive ones. So, they may take into 
account the whole set of information available to them.  



 12 

The most common formulation for θi is: 

ii Zβ'lnθ =  

The Maximum Likelihood (ML) estimator is used to derive β̂  from the data in the 

sample.  

However, in the case of equation (2) the ML procedure is inconsistent since an 

endogenous variable (Ki) is included among the explanatory variables (Kim et al., 2001). 

Thus, the two-stage conditional maximum likelihood estimator (TSCML) (Rivers & Vuong, 

1998) is used. In the first stage, the knowledge equation is estimated following the procedure 

described above. In the second stage, the Probit Model is estimated by ML, with Ki, Si, Ai and 

the estimated residuals from equation (1) ( iii θθv ˆˆ −= )
9 are used as explanatory variables. The 

null of no significance of the residuals coefficient can be used as an endogeneity test of the 

“knowledge” variable in the binary choice willingness to pay model. If the null of no 

significance is rejected, then the estimation procedure described is consistent. If we fail to 

reject that the knowledge variable is exogenous, then equation (2) can be directly estimated 

by ML. 

In equation (3) we find a similar endogeneity problem. In this case, we use the 

exogeneity test developed by Grogger (1990), which has the following form: 

( )
[ ])ˆ(Var)ˆ(Var

ˆˆ
h

EXEND

2

EXEND

δ−δ
δ−δ

=     (4) 

where iδ̂  is the coefficient estimate of the regressor K assuming endogeneity or exogeneity, 

and var ( iδ̂ ) is the corresponding estimated variance. Under the null of exogeneity, this 

statistic is distributed as a χ2 with one degree of freedom.  

Equations (2) and (3) can be specified as: 

*
iii

*
i

*
i

i

ii
*
ii

*
i

WTPyWTP

0yif0

0yif1
y

εβXWTPuγW'y

=








≤

>
=

+=+=
    (5) 

                                                 
9 Note that under our specification for the Poisson distribution: [ ] [ ] iZβ'iiiii eθZ|kVarZ|kE ===  



 13 

where yi and WTPi are the observed dependent variables; 
*
iy  and 

*
iWTP  are corresponding 

latent variables; Wi and Xi are vectors of explanatory variables; γ and β are the corresponding 

vectors of parameters; and ui and εi represent the error terms in equation (2) and (3), 

respectively.  

The Maximum Likelihood estimation of equations in (5) provides efficient estimates 

of the unknown parameters when the sample size is large enough. However, we have found 

impossible to implement such procedure as we did not arrive to convergence, even changing 

the starting values, as we have a relative small sample (120 observations) and the number of 

potential explanatory variables was relatively large. Then, we have implemented a two-step 

estimation procedure which consists of applying the probit estimator to the selection 

mechanism and then the method-of-moments estimator to an augmented WTP equation by 

including a correction factor obtained in the first step. Heckman’s (1976) procedure has been 

extensively used in the empirical literature. Basically, it consist of obtaining the ML probit 

estimates of γ̂  for the selection mechanism and then estimating with SUR the WTP equation 

augmented by an “inverse Mills ratio” defined as )γW(η)/γWφ(η iiii ˆˆ Φ , where ηi = 2yi -1 and 

Φ(.) and φ (.) are the standard normal cumulative and the density functions, respectively. 

However, Shonkwiler & Yen (1999) showed that in the Heckman’s procedure there is an 

internal inconsistency, since it generates an incorrect expression of the unconditional 

expectation of the WTP. They proposed an alternative approach, which uses the whole sample 

and is based on the work by Wales & Woodland (1980). They assume that the error terms 

(u,ε)’ are jointly distributed as a bivariate normal with λε)Cov(u, = . Under this hypothesis 

the unconditional mean of WTPi is given by (Amemiya, 1985): 

γ)λφ(Wβγ)XΦ(W)X,WE(WTP 'i
'
i

'
iiii +=    (6) 

 Based on expression (6), the system in (5) can be written as:  

i
'
i

'
i

'
ii ξγ)λφ(Wβγ)XΦ(WWTP ++=    (7) 

where )E(WTPWTPξ iii −= ;  and  .0)(E i =ξ  

 Equation (7) is estimated using a two-step procedure. In the first step the ML probit 

estimator is used to estimate the γ parameters. In the second step; )γΦ(W í ˆ  and )γφ(W í ˆ are 

calculated, and the following equation  

i
'
i

'
i

'
ii ξ)γλφ(Wβ)XγΦ(WWTP ++= ˆˆ      (8) 



 14 

is estimated by SUR, where:    

[ ] [ ])γφ(W´γ)φ(W´λβX´)γΦ(W´γ)Φ(W´εξ iiiiiii ˆˆ −+−+= . 

This procedure guarantees consistent estimates of jγ̂  and iβ̂  in the first stage, but the 

second stage ones are inefficient since error terms in equation (8) are heteroskedastic. To 

solve this problem, which affects the size of the standard errors, and hence the individual 

significance of the variables, the covariance matrix has been adjusted using the Murphy & 

Topel (1985) procedure.  

4.3. Results 

To estimate the parameters of the above-mentioned model (equations1-3), the 

dependent variables have been defined as follows. In relation to participants’ knowledge 

about organic food products, the questionnaire included seven definitions as to what an 

organic food product was. Respondents were asked to indicate whether the definition was true 

or false. The number of correct answers was taken as a proxy of the “objective knowledge” of 

the subject. The WTP variable was measured as the difference between the average bid 

provided by each participant in the last four rounds minus the reference price of the 

conventional product (independently of whether or not such information had been provided to 

the participant). If the difference is negative, a zero value was assigned. This means that the 

WTP variable is continuous but with a number of zeros (30% in this study). To tackle this 

issue the WTP model contained a bifurcation between equations (2) and (3) assuming that the 

consumer’s decision is a two-step process. First, the consumer decides whether or not to pay a 

premium for the organic olive oil. Second, he/she decides how much to pay. Thus, the second 

decision is conditional on the first one. The first step could be considered as a decision to 

enter the market. The existence of a price gap between organic and conventional olive oil 

could be viewed as an entrance barrier for consumers. Given such a gap, only those 

participants who wish to pay a premium will enter the market and become potential 

consumers. If in the second step, the premium that the participants are willing to pay is equal 

to or greater than the actual gap prevailing in the market, the participant will purchase the 

organic product.  

Four types of explanatory variables have been considered: 1) socio-economic 

characteristics of participants; 2) participant’s experience with organic food consumption; 3) 

control variables used in the experiment: price references and information sources; and 4) 



 15 

participant’s attitudes. The first three groups of variables have already been described in 

Table 1 and Section 3. Participant’s attitudes have been measured using five scales related to 

their awareness about the potential impact of agricultural production on the environment, 

price sensitivity, nutritional issues, food safety concerns and organic food attributes. 

Participants were asked to rate their agreement with several statements related to each of these 

issues on a five-point scale (1 = totally disagree; 5 = totally agree). These scales have been 

reduced by principal component analysis to extract the main dimensions of each aspect, which 

puts them in the form of explanatory variables in the model. 

Results from the factor analyses are shown in Table 5. Participant attitudes towards the 

potential impact of agriculture on the environment have been summarised into three factors, 

which account for 61% of the total variance. The first factor, “preference for less intensive 

farming” is positively correlated with attitudes towards a monitored and less polluting 

farming system; the second factor, “demand for more ‘natural’ products”, is related to an 

interest in eco-labelled products; the third factor, “higher price”, refers to the statement that 

organic food should be more expensive than the conventional food. 

(Insert Table 5) 

 Food safety concerns can also be represented by three main factors, which account for 

54% of the total variance. The first factor, called “demand for food safety”, includes 

consumer’s awareness of food processing, although considering that food safety should not 

imply higher prices; the second factor, “no risk perception” is related to a general trust in the 

agrifood system, assuming that food scares are isolated cases; finally, the third factor has to 

do with concerns about the healthiness of food products and the idea that certified products 

with appropriate labels are a guarantee of food safety. 

 Attitudes towards nutritional aspects are summarised in two factors, which account for 

51% of the total variance. The first factor, “nutritional concerns”, is related to the participant’s 

interest in nutritional aspects of food, while the second factor, “diet concerns”, refers to 

different aspects related to nutrient intake. The sensitivity to food prices is summarised in 

three factors, which account for 57% of the total variance. The first one, “price sensitivity”, 

refers to the importance of prices in the purchasing decision; the second factor, “price as a 

sign of quality”, is related to the perception of a relationship between price and quality. The 

third factor, “price unawareness” is positively related to the fact that prices are not relevant 

when purchasing food. 



 16 

 Finally, participant’s attitudes towards organic food attributes can be represented by 

four factors, which explain 66% of the total variance. The first factor, “post-purchase 

experience”, is related to consumer’s perception that organic food is more tasty and has better 

quality; the second factor, “positive image”, emphasises the relationship between organic 

food and health; the third factor, “higher priced”, is related to the assumption that these 

products are more expensive than the conventional counterparts; finally, the fourth factor, 

“negative aspects”, is related to the negative perception that participants have about these 

products because either they are considered a fraud or they have a worse external appearance.  

 A summary of all possible variables to be included in equations (1) to (3) is shown in 

Table 6. In equations (2) and (3) the “knowledge” variable has also been included. The results 

from the estimation procedure followed in this paper are summarised in Table 7.10 In the 

following paragraphs we will describe the main factors affecting both the participants’ 

knowledge about organic food and their willingness to pay for an organic olive oil. 

(Insert Table 6) 

Participant knowledge about organic food 

 It is interesting to observe that the information provided during the market auction had 

no significant effect on the participant’s knowledge about organic food. Neither the leaflet nor 

the oral presentations significantly increased participant knowledge, even though the 

information had been provided only one hour before! Participants have a very short memory 

or they weren’t particularly interested in retaining the facts. This is not a surprising result 

since, first, organic food still is a relatively unknown product in the Spanish market and 

consumers usually take some time to process new information. Second, there exists some 

confusion in the consumer mind due to a relatively large number of competing products 

branded as “green”, “natural” or “bio”. As a new product, organically produced food 

products are best promoted by satisfied consumers who then convince their friends, 

following the traditional shape of the product life cycle. 

 Second, participants who usually receive food information mainly through family 

and/or friends and newspapers showed a better objective knowledge about organic food. 

Personal communication has been shown to be the most efficient way to transmit information. 

                                                 
10 Only main significant variables have been included in Table 7 after following a step-wise variable selection 
process. The complete set of results is available from authors upon request.  



 17 

But, objective knowledge was lower for participants who principally rely on radio and 

television mass media to get food nutritional information. 

 Among the socio-economic variables, both income and education levels significantly 

affect the degree of knowledge about organic food. In relation to the income level, the 

relationship is negative, that is, participants with the lowest income level have less knowledge 

about organic food. Since organic food is generally perceived as more expensive, there is a 

lower incentive to be informed about unaffordable products.  

 The level of education is positively related to the amount of knowledge. However, the 

only significant differences have been found between participants with primary school and the 

rest. Participants with children under 16 living in the household are more worried about 

nutrition and so, independently of their sex or age, have more knowledge about organic food.  

 The final interesting result related to the degree of knowledge is the negative 

relationship found between “objective knowledge” and past experience in consuming organic 

food: more experienced consumers have less knowledge about these kinds of products. This 

surprising result can be understood as rooted in confusion in the Spanish market about what 

organic food really is. As Gil et al. (2000) showed, Spanish consumers mainly associate 

organic food with fruits and vegetables that are grown non-commercially in family gardens in 

rural areas11. Second, as already mentioned, many products are labelled in a confusing way12. 

Moreover, this result suggests two realities that should be dealt with by producers. First, 

consumers are not aware that government-controlled organic food certification exists, and 

they are unable to recognise the organic label producers and manufacturers must use. Second, 

the good news for this sector is that there exists a consumer segment willing to consume new 

organically produced food products. This potential market niche must be adequately 

informed, and could expand by word-of-mouth. 

(Insert Table 7) 

 Willingness to pay 

    The estimated parameters for equations (2) and (3), corresponding to the two-step 

decision process, are presented in the last two columns in Table 7. But first, let us consider the 

results from exogeneity tests carried out on the “knowledge” variable in the two equations. In 

                                                 
11 Results from their survey indicated that around 20% of the respondents’ total consumption of fruits and 
vegetables was organic while their expenditure on organic food products hardly arrived to 15€ per month per 
household (less that 1% of total food expenditure).  
12 Since the beginning of 2006 claims on food labels such as “green”, “natural” or “bio” are forbidden. 



 18 

the first equation, results from the test indicated that the null of exogeneity of the knowledge 

variable was rejected (the estimated parameter of iv̂  was 0.35, which was significant at the 

5% level of significance). In the second equation, results from the Grogger’s test indicated 

that the null of exogeneity could not be rejected (the value of the statistic was 0.06, which was 

well under the critical value of a 21χ at the 5% level of significance of 3.84). Moreover, as we 

show below, explanatory variables in both equations are substantially different. We will now 

explain the main results of these calculations. 

 When it comes time to decide whether or not to enter the organic olive oil market, 

knowledge about organic food has a positive and significant influence. The higher the 

knowledge, the higher the probability of participating in the market. This result is consistent 

with results in Blend & Ravensway (1999) and indicates that a correct identification of an 

organic product is a key factor for its future success and for overcoming some of the main 

obstacles limiting its development in these early stages of the product life cycle. 

 While participant socio-economic characteristics figure little, their attitudes are the 

main determinants that explain their decision to enter the market (to pay a premium). This is 

not a surprising result since many studies have pointed out the relevance of attitude and 

lifestyle variables as determinants of food consumption behaviour. Furthermore, these 

results are independent of both the reference price variable and the information provided; 

neither are significant variables in explaining the consumers’ decision to pay a premium for 

an organic olive oil. 

Among the psychographic variables, subjects’ attitudes towards the potential impact 

of agriculture on the environment have a positive and significant effect. A consumer 

segment does exist that is looking for new consumption alternatives; they are aware of the 

negative impact of the abuse of chemical products in intensive production systems and that 

new and more “natural” food production methods are now available.  

 Estimates from the probit model also illustrate that the decision to participate in the 

organic market is unrelated to food safety issues (the variable “Demand for food safety” has 

not been found to be significant). Even though there exists a demand for increasing control 

and regulation of food production and transformation processes, this demand does not affect 

the organic olive oil market. Consumers seemingly do not purchase organic olive oil because 

it is perceived as safer. The decision stems mainly from health issues (the sign of the variable 

“Demand for labelled products due to health concerns” is positive and significant). Organic 



 19 

products are perceived as more natural, healthier. However, it is also true that as consumer 

confidence in the overall agro-food system increases, the probability of participating in the 

organic food market diminishes. 

 Nutrition concerns are also one of the main determinants for entering the market. The 

relationship, as expected, is positive. A higher interest among consumers in the food 

composition and, in particular, in the presence of artificial additives increases the probability 

that they are willing to pay extra for organic olive oil. On the other hand, there does not seem 

to be any significant relationship between attitudes towards food prices and the willingness to 

pay factor for organic olive oil. 

We have also found a significant relationship between the consumers’ willingness to 

pay a premium for organic olive oil and the perceived characteristics of organic food. Those 

consumers, who have a positive image about organic food in terms of taste, quality, positive 

impact on health, etc, are more likely to participate in the market. 

Results from the second-step willingness to pay equation (how much premium 

participants are willing to pay for an organic olive oil, once they have decided to enter the 

market) are shown in the last column in Table 7. We will focus our analysis on the signs and 

significance of the estimated parameters, as they cannot be interpreted in a straightforward 

way due to the fact that they are multiplied by the correction factor )γΦ(W í ˆ . As can be 

observed for the second-stage decision, the socio-economic characteristics of respondents 

play a more significant role. 

The first interesting result is that respondents’ price sensitivity is negatively correlated 

(although no significantly) with the premium they are willing to pay for an organic olive oil. 

As mentioned above, organic food is perceived to be more expensive. So, participants who 

declared that price was one of the most important attributes when shopping are only willing to 

pay a lower premium. Furthermore, in relation to prices, estimated results indicate a positive 

relationship between perceived value (variable “Higher priced”) and the premium respondents 

are willing to pay. This perception has led consumers to increase the premium they are willing 

to pay for the organic olive oil. No other psychographic variables were found to be 

significant. 

Among the socio-economic variables, income level did not have any significant effect 

on the premium participants were willing to pay. However, even though the effect was not 

significant, it is interesting to note that the poorest were willing to pay a higher premium for 



 20 

organic olive oil. We think this result is the outcome of the economic incentive provided to 

participants at the beginning of the market experiment. Within this group of participants, who 

are not going to buy the product (as they are more price sensitive and have less knowledge 

about what a organic product is), the economic incentive generated a wealth effect, which 

gave a slightly upward bias to the premium this consumer segment was willing to pay. 

We have also found a positive relationship between the premium consumers were 

willing to pay and their age,13 but this effect only kicks in for the older group. We have shown 

in the previous equation that one of the significant factors affecting the decision to enter the 

market was health, which is clearly of great concern among the elderly. Since many other 

necessities are already satisfied, this group can afford to allocate a higher budget share to buy 

healthy products, among which organic olive oil could be perceived as an interesting 

alternative. 

 The presence in the household of children under 16 also increases the amount 

participants are willing to pay for an organic olive oil, although this effect is only marginally 

significant. This group is one of the better informed about what an organic food is.  

 Unexpectedly, the “knowledge” variable is not significant. Although better knowledge 

increases the likelihood to pay a premium for an organic olive oil, it is not significant in 

explaining the premium amount.  

 We conclude by noting to two interesting results. First, only those participants who 

have at some previous time bought organic products, perhaps out of curiosity, are willing to 

pay a significant higher premium. As they have already bought organic food, they have a 

clearer idea about organic food market prices and, if they are really interested in buying the 

organic olive oil, the premium they are willing to pay is the closest to the market price. 

Second, those participants who were exposed to the reference prices for non-organic olive oil, 

and for whom no information was provided during the experiment about what an organic food 

is, are willing to pay a higher premium. In relation to reference prices, this result is consistent 

with expectations since they had an exact reference price and did not have to remember the 

price they had paid the last time they bought olive oil. In relation to the information provided, 

results from this study are consistent with those found by Shogren et al. (2000) who argued 

that product novelty biases participants’ bids upwards.  

                                                 
13 Initially, we introduced three dummy variables to account for age differentials. However, only the dummy 
variable for people over 65 was significant. 



 21 

 

5. Concluding remarks 

In this paper we report results from an experimental auction used to assess consumer 

willingness to pay for an organic olive oil at prices that are higher than the non-organically 

produced variety. The experiment was supplemented with a specific questionnaire 

administered to participants to get information about their knowledge on organic food 

products, as well as about their socio-economic characteristics, attitudes and purchase 

behaviour. Results from this survey allow us to analyse the relationship between participants’ 

knowledge and their willingness to pay, and important factors affecting these two aspects of 

consumer behaviour. To achieve this objective a three-equation model is estimated. 

Results from this study allow us to draw a number of conclusions. First, experimental 

market auctions are a very useful tool to assess consumers’ WTP. They provide more reliable 

information compared to stated preference methods (contingent valuation and choice 

modelling) since participants are given the option to really purchase real products subject to a 

budget constraint. During the experiment two different effects were looked for. The first is 

“the reference price effect”: what difference will it make in the bidding providing the 

consumer with the reference price of non-organic olive oil? No significant differences were 

found. The second effect is “the information effect”: what difference will it make in the 

bidding if we provide information to participants about how the organic product had been 

produced? And, what is the most effective communication strategy for this information? In 

this case, oral communication displayed a higher influence on consumers’ responses than 

written information.  

In spite of these effects, the main conclusion is that, according to our results, the 

market for organic oil in Spain is still very limited. Although 70% of participants were willing 

to pay a premium for an organic olive oil, only 5% would be willing to pay the market price. 

This percentage may be considered rather small.  

Organic food products in Spain are still in the earliest stages of their life cycle. Few 

Spanish consumers have a clear idea about what organic food really is! Our study reveals, on 

the other hand, that more and better information may make the market grow, since a positive 

relationship between knowledge and willingness to pay was found. Producers and 

manufacturers should design specific promotion and/or information campaigns addressed to 

target groups they consider open to organic, environment-friendly and healthy products. The 



 22 

public sector should support these campaigns instead of allocating subsidies to support 

producers’ incomes, which should be only kept at the early stages of farms transformation 

from conventional into organic agriculture. 

Oral communication proved more effective in our sample. However, taking into 

account that our participants often forgot some attributes of the organic olive oil only one 

hour after the information was provided, we would suggest that instead of concentrated short-

term public and private information campaigns, it would be more useful to design smaller, 

longer running campaigns. Up to now, no such promotion/information campaigns have been 

attempted. In most cases, promotions have been carried out at the point-of-sale, mainly in 

retail chains, and have tried to attract consumers to organically produced products based on 

their quality and environmentally friendly attributes. 

 

References 

Amemiya, T. 1985. Advanced Econometrics. Harvard University Press. 
Bigne, J.E. 1997. El consumidor verde: bases de un modelo de comportamiento. ESIC Market, 96, 29-

43 
Blend, J. & Van Ravenswaay, E. 1998. Consumer demand for ecolabelled apples: survey methods and 

descriptive results. Staff paper 98-20. Dept. of Agricultural Economics. Michigan St. University. 
Buhr, B., Hayes, D., Shogren, D. & Kliebenstein, K. 1993. Valuing ambiguity: the case of genetically 

growth enhancers. Journal of Agricultural and Resource Economics, 18 (2), 175-184. 
Buzby, J., Fox, J. & Cruchfield, S. 1998. Measuring consumer benefits of food safety reductions. 

Journal of Agricultural and Applied Economics, 30 (1), 69-82.  
Byrne, P., Toensmeyer, U., German, C. & Reed Muller, H. 1991. Analysis of consumer attitudes 

toward organic produce and purchase likelihood. Journal of food distribution research, vol. 6, 49-
62. 

Davis, D. & Holt, C. 1993. Experimental economics. Princeton university press (EEUU). 
Fotopoulous C. & Krystallis A. 2001. Are Quality Labels a Real Marketing Advantage? A Conjoint 

Application on Greek PDO Protected Olive Oil. Journal of International Food & Agribusiness 
Marketing, 12(1), 1-22. 

Friedman, D. & Sunder, S. 1994. Experimental methods: a primer for economists. Cambridge 
University Press (United Kingdom). 

Gil, J., Gracia, A. & Sánchez, M. 2000. Market segmentation and willingness to pay for organic 
products in Spain. International Food and Agribusiness Management Review, 3, 207-226. 

Grogger, J. 1990. A simple test for exogeneity in probit, logit, and Poisson regression models. 
Economics Letters, 33,. 329-332. 

Hartman & New Hope 1997. The evolving organic marketplace. Hartaman & New Hope Industry 
Series Report.  

Hayes, D., Shogren, J., Fox, J. & Kliebenstein, J. 1996. Test marketing new food products using a 
multitrial non hypothetical experimental auction. Psychology & Marketing, vol. 13 (4), 365-379. 

Heckman, J.J. 1976. The common structure of statistical models of truncation, sample selection and 
limited dependent variables and a simple estimator of such models. Annals of Economics and 
Social Measurement, 5, 475-492. 

Huang, C.H.L. 1996. Consumer preferences and attitudes towards organically grown produce. 
European Review of Agricultural Economics, 23(3), 331-342. 



 23 

Instituto Naconal de Estadística (2006). Encuesta Continua de Presupuestos Familiares. Resumen 
Anual, 2004. Madrid. www.ine.es (Consulted 20th October, 2006). 

Kagel, J. & Roth, A. 1995. The handbook of Experimental Economics. Princeton University press 
(EEUU). 

Kagel, J.H., Harstad, R.M. & Levin, D. 1987. Information impact and allocation rules in auctions with 
affiliated private values: a laboratory study. Econometrica, 55, 1275-1304. 

Kim, S.Y., Nayga, R. & Capps, O. 2001. Health knowledge and consumer use of nutritional labels: the 
issue revisited. Agriculture and Resource Economics. 30 (1), 10-19. 

Lusk, J., Alexander, C. and Rousu, M. 2004a. Designing Experimental Auctions for Marketing 
Research: Effect of Values, Distributions and Mechanisms on Incentives for Truthful Bidding. 
Selected paper presented at the American Agricultural Economics Association annual meeting, 
Denver, CO. 

Lusk, J., House, L.O., Valli, C., Jaeger, S.R., Moore, M., Morrow, B. & Traill, W.B. 2004b. Effect of 
information on benefits of biotechnology on consumer acceptance of genetically modified food: 
evidence from experimental auctions in the United States, England and France. European Review 
of Agricultural Economics, 31(2), 1-26. 

MAPYA 2004. Información estadística sobre agricultura ecológica. www.mapya.es (Consulted 22nd 
July, 2004)  

MAPYA 2006. Consumo Alimentario en España. www.mapya.es (Consulted 24th May, 2006) 
Menkhaus, D., Borden, G., Whipple, G., Hoffman, E. & Field, R. 1992. An empirical application of 

laboratory experimental auctions in marketing research. Journal of agricultural and applied 
economics, 17 (1), 44-55. 

Michelsen, J., Hamm, U., Wynen, E. & Roth, E. 1999. The European market for organic products: 
growth and development. Organic farming in Europe: economics and policy. Vol. 7.  

Misra, S., Huang, Ch. & Ott, S. 1991. Consumer willingness to pay for pesticide-free fresh produce. 
Western Journal of Agricultural Economics, 16(2), 218-227 

Monroe, K. 1990. Política de precios. McGraw Hill. (Madrid, Spain) 
Padel, S., Seymour C. & Foster C. 2003. Report of all three rounds of the Delphi Inquiry on the 

European Market for Organic Food. Deliverable from the project: Organic Marketing Initiatives 
and Rural Development. QLK5-2000-01124. 

Rivers D. & Voung, Q.H. 1988. Limited information estimators and exogeneity tests for simultaneous 
probit models. Journal of Econometrics, 39, 347-366. 

Roosen, J., Fox, J., Henessy, D. & Schreiber, A. 1998. Consumer’s valuation of insecticide use 
restrictions: an application to apples. Journal of Agricultural and Resource Economics, 23 (2), 
367-384. 

Roosen I.T.M. & de Pelsmaker P. 1997. Consumer’s Perception of a Green Consumption Behaviour. 
26th European Marketing Association Congress, Warwick Business School  

Sanjuán A.I., Sánchez M., Gil J.M., Gracia A. & Soler F. 2002. Brakes to the organic market 
enlargement in Spain: consumers and retailers’ attitudes and willingness to pay. International 
Journal of Consumer Studies, 27(2), 134-144. 

Scarpa R. & Del Giudice T. 2004. Market Segmentation via Mixed Logit: Extra-Virgin Olive Oil in 
Urban Italy. Journal of Agricultural & Food Industrial Organization. 2 (1), Article 7.  
Available at: http://www.bepress.com/jafio/vol2/iss1/art7  

Shogren, J., Fox, J., Hayes, D. & Roosen, J. 1999. Observed choices for food safety in retail, survey 
and auction markets. American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 81 (5), 1192-1199. 
Shogren, J., List, J. & Hayes, D. 2000. Preference learning in consecutive experimental auctions. 

American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 82 (4), 1016-102. 
Shogren, J.F., Cho, S., Koo, C., List, J., Park, C., Polo, P. & Wilhelmi, R. 2001a. Auctions 

mechanisms and the measurement of WTP and WTA. Resource and Energy Economics, 23, 97-
109. 

Shogren, J.F., Margolis, M., Koo, C., List, J. 2001b. A random n-th price auction. Journal of 
Economic Behaviour and Organization, 46, 409-421. 

Shogren, J., Shin, S., Hayes, D. & Kliebenstein, K. 1994. Resolving differences in willingness to pay 
and willingness to accept. American Economic Review, March, 255-270. 



 24 

Shonkwiler, J. S. & Yen, S. 1999. Two-step estimation of a censored system of equations. American 
Journal of Agricultural Economics , 81, 972-982. 

Stefani, G. & Henson, S. 2001. Assessing the value of labels about food safety attributes. Article 
presented at the 71st European Association for Agricultural Economics Seminar. Zaragoza 
(Spain). April. 

Underhill, S. & Figueroa, E. 1996. Consumer preferences for non-conventionally grown produce. 
Journal of Food Distribution Research, 27 (2), 56-66. 

Verdurme, A., Gellynk X. & Viaene J. 2001. Consumer’s acceptance of GM food. Contributed paper 
presented at the 71st EAAE Seminar-The Food Consumer in the Early 21st Century, Zaragoza 
(Spain). April, 2001. 

Wales T.J. & Woodland A.D. 1980. Sample selectivity and the estimation of labour supply 
functions. International Economic Review, 21 (2), 437-468.  

Weaver, R.D., Evans, D.J. & Luloff, A. 1992. Pesticide use in tomato production: consumer 
concerns and willingness to pay. Agribusiness, 8(2), 131-42. 



 25 

Table 1. Sample socio-economic characteristics (%) (N=120) 

  This study Population 

Sex 
Male 
Female 

16.7 
83.3 

n.a. 
 

Age (years) 

18-34 
35-49 
50-64 
More than 65 

15.0 
20.8 
50.0 
14.2 

10.5a 
20.9 
39.2 
29.4 

Education level 
Primary 
Secondary 
University 

45.0 
35.8 
19.2 

47.8a 
38.1 
14.1 

Household size  

1 
2 
3 
4 
More than 4 

9.2 
28.3 
24.2 
26.7 
11.6 

14.9b 
26.7 
22.2 
21.5 
14.8 

Household monthly income 

Less than 900 Euros  
900-1500 Euros 
1500-2100 Euros 
2100-3000 Euros 
More than 3000 Euros 

14.2 
35.0 
37.5 
10.0 
3.3 

 
n.a. 

 
 

Children 
No children 
Children under 6 years old 
Children between 6 and 16 

79.3 
6.6 

14.1 

61.8b 
15.6 
22.6 

Consumption level of organic 
food 

Regularly 
When I find them 
Curiosity 
Never 

1.0 
23.3 
34.2 
32.5 

n.a. 

n.a. not available 
Sourcea:  a INE (2006)). Encuesta Continua de Presupuestos Familiares, 2004. www.ine.es 
 b MAPYA (2006). Consumo Alimentario en España, 2004. www.mapya.es 



 26 

Table 2. WTP for an organic olive oil for the different groups of participants (average bid in 
the last four rounds after the information is provided) (Euros) 

 Last four rounds average bid 
 

Mean Median 
Standard 
deviation 

Percentile 
90 

Group 1(n=20): 
No information – No reference on non-organic virgin olive oil prices 3.99 4.17 0.83 4.95 

Group 2 (n=20): 
No information – Has reference on non-organic virgin olive oil prices 

4.15 4.13 1.09 6.64 

Group 3 (n=17): 
Leaflet – No reference on non-organic virgin olive oil prices 

3.07 3.23 0.52 3.83 

Group 4 (n=23): 
Leaflet – Has reference on non-organic virgin olive oil prices  

3.85 4.13 0.77 5.05 

Group 5 (n=18): 
Oral presentation – No reference on non-organic virgin olive oil prices 3.64 3.61 1.28 4.67 

Group 6 (n=22): 
Oral presentation – Has reference on non-organic virgin olive oil 
prices 

3.60 3.63 0.55 4.53 

 



 27 

Table 3. The reference price effect (Euros)  
 Bid without information minus bid with information on non-

organic virgin olive oil prices (mean values) 

Round 1 
Round 2 
Round 3 
Round 4 
Round 5 
Round 6 
Round 7 
Round 8 

-0.15   
-0.18 

       -0.27 *** 
       -0.31 *** 
       -0.25 *** 

     -0.32 ** 
       -0.31 *** 
       -0.34 *** 

*, **, *** Significant differences at 1, 5 and 10% respectively. 



 28 

Table 4. The information effect (Euros) 

 Bid differences 
between the 4th and the 

5th rounds 

Group 1: No information – No reference on non-organic virgin olive oil prices 0.07 

Group 2: No information – Has reference on non-organic virgin olive oil prices 0.09 

Group 3: Leaflet – No reference on non-organic virgin olive oil prices 0.16* 

Group 4: Leaflet – Has reference on non-organic virgin olive oil prices  0.04 

Group 5: Oral presentation – No reference on non-organic virgin olive oil prices 0.25* 

Group 6: Oral presentation – Has reference on non-organic virgin olive oil 
prices 

0.17** 

*, **, *** Significant differences at 1, 5 and 10% respectively. 



 29 

Table 5. Factor analysis of participant’s attitudes 
Attitudes towards the impact of agriculture on the environment 

 Preference for less 
intensive agriculture 

Demand for more 
“natural” food 

Higher 
price 

Agriculture should reduced the use of chemicals 0.774 0.024 -0.054 
Food production should be monitored 0.749 0.256 0.104 
A non-polluting agriculture is possible 0.698 -0.264 -0.099 
Food is less natural than in the past 0.09 0.704 -0.232 
I am not interested in “green” or eco labelled products 0.236 -0.618 -0.142 
I know potential effects of agriculture on the environment 0.453 0.590 0.131 
Organic food is more expensive to produce than conventional -0.008 -0.012 0.960 
%  of variance explained 28.4 18.5 14.6 

Food safety concerns 
 Demand for food 

safety 
No risk perception on 

food 
Demand for labelled 
product due to health 

Food processing should be monitored more 0.791 0.043 0.018 
There is a lack of food safety monitoring 0.685 -0.369 0.167 
Food safety does not necessarily imply higher prices 0.619 0.114 0.094 
I am not concerned about food processing 0.033 0.680 0.155 
Food scares are isolated cases 0.032 0.669 0.006 
I fully trust the quality of what I eat -0.097 0.633 -0.278 
I try to buy brand-named products 0.001 0.130 0.813 
Food is not so healthy 0.227 -0.171 0.702 
%  of variance explained 24.4 17.2 12.7 

Nutrition concerns 
 Nutrition concerns Diet concerns 
I am concerned about food nutritional characteristics 0.782 0.06 
Food has become less tasty 0.70 -0.107 
Concern about the presence of food additives 0.643 0.389 
I care about cholesterol and fat  0.251 0.759 
I keep a strict diet 0.03 0.730 
I eat everything 0.05 -0.476 
%  of variance explained 32.6 18.8 

Price sensitiveness 
 Price sensitivity Price as a quality signal Price unawareness 

I try to buy food items that are on sale 0.767 -0.018 -0.163 
I pay attention to good deals 0.744 0.133 -0.152 
I remember prices I’ve paid before   0.741 0.047 0.08 
I compare food prices from different brands 0.639 0.053 0.244 
I do not mind paying more for better quality -0.021 0.875 -0.0008 
I am willing to pay more for organic food 0.255 0.782 -0.032 
Higher prices are associated with higher quality -0.003 0.073 0.653 
Name brand products are more expensive 0.092 -0.11 0.636 
I do not worry about food prices -0.209 0.405 0.605 
% of variance explained 25.5 18 13.2 

Attitudes towards organic food attributes 
 Post-purchase experience Positive image Higher priced Negative image 
No quality difference -0.748 -0.025 -0.049 0.106 
Organic food is more tasty 0.626 0.285 -0.022 -0.01 
They are fashionable products -0.578 -0.132 0.367 0.235 
Good for health 0.201 0.779 0.127 -0.231 
Do not have bad secondary effects -0.07 0.768 0.059 0.236 
Higher quality 0.432 0.715 -0.073 -0.058 
More expensive -0.076 0.126 0.874 -0.125 
They are a fraud -0.228 0.016 -0.13 0.832 
Worse external appearance 0.528 -0.033 0.483 0.538 
% of variance explained 28.1 15.1 12.4 11.4 

 



 30 

Table 6. Explanatory variables definitions 
Variable Description 

Income 
Dummy variable which takes the value 1 if the respondent’s per capita 
income is below 900€/month, and 0, otherwise 

Age over 65 
Dummy variable which takes the value 1 if the respondent is older that 65, 
and 0, otherwise 

Education 
Dummy variable which takes the value 1 if the respondent’s level of 
education is primary school, and 0, otherwise 

Children 
Dummy variable which takes the value 1 if there are children under 16 in 
the respondent’s household, and 0, otherwise 

Experience 
Dummy variable which takes the value 1 if the respondent buys organic 
food regularly, and 0, otherwise 

Curiosity 
Dummy variable which takes the value 1 if the respondent has bought 
organic food some time as a curiosity, and 0, otherwise 

Newspapers 
Dummy variable which takes the value 1 if the respondent has information 
on organic food through newspapers, and 0, otherwise 

Friends 
Dummy variable which takes the value 1 if the respondent has information 
on organic food through friend or family, and 0, otherwise  

TV 
Dummy variable which takes the value 1 if the respondent has information 
on organic food through TV, and 0, otherwise 

Leaflet 
Dummy variable which takes the value 1 if a leaflet has been provided to 
the respondent during the auction, and 0, otherwise  

Oral presentation 
Dummy variable which takes the value 1 if an oral presentation has been 
provided to the respondent during the auction, and 0, otherwise 

No information 
Dummy variable which takes the value 1 if no information was provided to 
the respondent during the auction, and 0, otherwise 

Reference prices 
Dummy variable which takes the value 1 if a reference on non-organic 
virgin olive oil prices was provided before the experiment, and 0, otherwise 

Preference for a less 
intensive agriculture 

Continuous variable from factor analysis (see Table 5) 

Demand for more 
“natural” food 

Continuous variable from factor analysis (see Table 5) 

Higher price Continuous variable from factor analysis (see Table 5) 
Demand for food 
safety 

Continuous variable from factor analysis (see Table 5) 

No risk perception on 
food 

Continuous variable from factor analysis (see Table 5) 

Demand for labelled 
product due to health 
concerns 

Continuous variable from factor analysis (see Table 5) 

Nutrition concerns Continuous variable from factor analysis (see Table 5) 
Diet concerns Continuous variable from factor analysis (see Table 5) 
Price sensitivity Continuous variable from factor analysis (see Table 5) 
Price as a sign of 
quality 

Continuous variable from factor analysis (see Table 5) 

Price unawareness Continuous variable from factor analysis (see Table 5) 
Post-purchase 
experience 

Continuous variable from factor analysis (see Table 5) 

Positive image Continuous variable from factor analysis (see Table 5) 
Higher priced Continuous variable from factor analysis (see Table 5) 
Negative image Continuous variable from factor analysis (see Table 5) 
Knowledge A count variable from 1 to 7 correct answers 
 



 31 

Table 7. Estimated parameters  

 Knowledge Willingness to pay 
 

 
To pay or not 

to pay 
How much to 

pay 
Constant 1.65 (26.14) -0.05 (-0.11) 65.83 (1.12) 
Income -0.26 (-3.75) - 18.42 (0.49) 
Age over 65 - - 84.25 (2.6) 
Education -0.318 (-0.75) - - 
Children 0.07 (1.85) - 45.23 (1.43) 
Experience -0.24 (-2.66) - - 
Curiosity - - 43.96 (1.54) 
Newspapers 0.08 (2.02) - - 
Friends 0.09 (1.98) - - 
TV -0.04 (-0.48) - - 
Leaflet 0.07 (1.39) - - 
Oral presentation 0.003 (0.07) - - 
No information - - 89.33 (3.52) 
Reference prices - - 74.02 (3.00) 
Preference for a less intensive agriculture - 0.21 (2.96) - 
Demand for more “natural” food - 0.29 (3.30) - 
Higher price - 0.32 (3.69) 36.27 (2.59) 
Demand for food safety - - - 
No risk perception on food - -0.10 (-1.84) - 
Demand for labelled product due to health 
concerns 

- 0.38 (6.02) - 

Nutrition concerns - 0.14 (2.50) - 
Diet concerns - 0.13 (1.90) - 
Price sensitivity - - -7.99 (-0.70) 
Price as a sign of quality - - - 
Price unawareness - - - 
Post-purchase experience - 0.10 (2.73) - 
Positive image - 0.18 (4.76) - 
Higher priced - - 23.27 (1.85) 
Negative image - - - 
Knowledge - 0.15 (1.90) -11.56 (-1.11) 

iν̂  - 0.35 (6.25) - 

φ ( i
'
iw γ ) - - 176.78 (2.51) 

Log. Likelihood -227.84 -582.54 
N 120 120 88 
Note: t-ratios in parentheses 

 



 32 

Figure 1. Consumer’s willingness to pay for an organic olive oil (average bid in the last four 
rounds after the information is provided) 

 

5,8

2,5

4,2

10

11,8

15,9

10,8

15

14,2

5

5,8

0 4 8 12 16 20

Less than 2.4 Euros

2.4-2.7 Euros

2.7-3.0 Euros

3.0-3.3 Euros

3.3-3.6 Euros

3.6-3.9 Euros

3.9-4.2 Euros

4.2-4.5 Euros

4.5-4.8 Euros

4.8-5.1 Euros

More than 5.1 Euros

% participants



 33 

Figure 2. Evolution of the average group WTP for organic olive oil (Euros) 
 

 

 

2,5

3

3,5

4

4,5

Round 1 Round 2 Round 3 Round 4 Round 5 Round 6 Round 7 Round 8

Group 1 Group 2 Group 3 Group 4 Group 5 Group 6


