












































Microsoft Word - GMXL Frankfurter Sausages Final.docx


1 

The impact of the sensory experience on scale and preference heterogeneity: The GMNL 

model approach applied to pig castration and meat quality case study 

 

Abstract 

The EU is considering a future ban on surgical pig castration by 2018 which may affect 

markets and consumers preferences. This study analysed consumers’ expected preference 

toward a masking strategy obtained from a mixture of spices and smoking of high level boar taint 

frankfurter sausages. In addition, we analysed the impact of the sensory experience on the non-

observed heterogeneity both at the scale and mean preferences. We carried out two Non-

Hypothetical Discrete Choice Experiments by creating a real shopping scenario before and after 

the hedonic sensory test for a sample of 150 consumers from the Metropolitan area of Madrid, 

Spain. Data used in this analysis were obtained from questionnaires completed in a controlled 

environment and estimated by the recently developed Generalised Multinomial Logit Model 

(GMNL). 

Results showed the appropriateness of the proposed masking strategy of boar meat for the 

processed meat industry in Spain. Consumers also declared their willingness to pay a premium 

for this flavours. The sensory experience has had impact on both the scale and preference 

heterogeneity. The degree of randomness and uncertainty of consumers decreased significantly 

in their final choice and the source of unobserved heterogeneity obtained from the scale become 

more independent. 

 

Key Words: Consumers preference, Boar taint, Non-Hypothetical Choice Experiments, Generalized 

Multinomial Logit GMNL. 

   



2 

1. Introduction 

While the piglet castration is regulated by the CE Directive 93/2001 stating that it may only 

be performed using methods that do not involve tearing of the tissue, the EU is considering a 

future ban on surgical pig castration by 1 January 2018 (EC, 2010). This potential prohibition relies 

not only on its negative impact on pig welfare1 (Rault et al., 2011) but also because consumers 

demand lean meat with no off-odours and the production costs associated with entire males 

(Prunier et al., 2006) are lower. In a first pronouncement, from January 2012, in certified organic 

pig production, the surgical castration of piglets, if carried out, should be performed with prolonged 

analgesia and/or anaesthesia (Commission Regulation (EC) Nº 889/2008). In a transition period, 

surgical castration should only be performed with pain relief and efforts should be undertaken to 

facilitate the end of surgical castration (Heid & Hamm, 2013). The European changes in the animal 

welfare regulations and policies, in particular the pig sector, have been the results of an increasing 

societal pressure to seek for more humane production systems (EC, 2005 and EC, 2007). The pig 

welfare is one of the most studied sector as pork is the most produced and consumed meat in the 

EU (FAOSTAT, 2012). In this context, the pig production has received a special attention from the 

European authorities and several regulations have been approved. Recently, the EC directive 

120/2008 banned the use of sow stalls since January 2012. 

Annually, approximately 100 million pigs or about 80% of the total population of male 

piglets are surgically castrated in the EU of which 48.7% are surgically castrated without 

anaesthesia (Fredriksen et al., 2009; Borrisser-Pairó et al., 2014). The practice of castration of 

male piglets is important to avoid boar taint, which is a distinctive and unpleasant odour and flavour 

perceived through a combination of Skatole and Androstenone compounds. In this context, within 

the EU, the Meat Hygiene Regulation 842/2004/EC states that meat manifesting a “pronounced 

sexual odour” is to be declared unfit for human consumption (Whittington et al., 2011). However, 

the castration practice increases the production costs and leads to fatter carcasses (Tuyttens et 

al., 2012). Raising entire male pigs is more profitable for farmers due to leaner carcasses and 

higher protein content (Lundström et al., 2009). In this context, the importance to implement 

alternatives for castration is gaining relevance (Heid & Hamm, 2012; Font-i-Furnols, 2012). 

Many alternatives to castration have been explored: a) genetic selection and gender 

selection for ‘low-taint’ pigs (De Campos et al., 2015), b) different management and rearing 

strategies (Bonneau & Lebret 2010; Wesoly et al., 2015), c) slaughter at a younger age and lower 

weight (Von Borell et al., 2009), d) detection of boar taint at slaughter line (Vestergaard et al., 

                                                 
1 Behavioural changes observed after castration included reduced nursing and walking, and increased pain related 
behaviours suggesting that pigs experience acute pain in response to castration (Sutherland, 2015). 



3 

2006), e) mixing of tainted with untainted meat (Walstra, 1974) and f) masking unpleasant odours 

and flavours with the appropriate masking strategy such as spices, marinades or heat treatment 

(Valeeva et al., 2009; Mörlein et al., 2015) and if the castration is applied, the immunocastration 

is one of the recently most studied alternatives (Gamero-Negrón et al., 2015). 

An overwhelming majority of people are sensitive to the odour of skatole (Weiler et al., 

2000), however less people is sensitive to androstenone (Blanch et al., 2012). In this context, the 

production of meat from entire males may appears to have a promising future (Bonneau & 

Chevillon, 2012) if it is adequately commercialized within the processed pig meat sector (Bonneau, 

1998; Gunn et al., 2004), since the boar tainted meat is better accepted in processed products 

than in retail cuts (Bañón et al., 2003; Valeeva et al., 2009). Thus, an effective and specific strategy 

of masking boar taint in the pork processed products became a worthy aspect to investigate. In 

the Spanish case, there is a need for updated knowledge about processing opportunities for boar 

meat, particularly if the castration is banned in a near future. As commented by Lunde et al. (2008), 

if castration is prohibited, it would be relevant to identify processing methods that could still provide 

quality products by allowing the processing industry to adjust their recipes to minimize such off-

flavour. 

Several studies suggested different strategies to mask boar taint in processed meat. In 

ready-to-eat marinades meat the use of liquid smoke and oregano extracts appeared to be one of 

the strategy used for masking (Lunde et al., 2008). Likewise in fermented sausage the use of 

spices, liquid smoked or starter cultures have been proposed as potential solution to remove the 

perception of boar taint (Malmfors & Lundström, 1983; Stolzenbach et al., 2009). 

However, focusing only on the acceptance or liking of the most effective masking strategy 

gives only a partial view of the consumers’ preferences. Liking or disliking a food product does not 

only depend on physicochemical properties but also on the consumers' expectations and attitudes 

toward extrinsic cues (Lange et al., 1998; Franchi, 2012; Meier-Dinkel et al., 2013; Asioli et al., 

2014). The consumer final choice of a food product, and thus its willingness to pay for it (WTP), is 

a mixture between the sensory experience (measured by the intrinsic cues) and the other 

descriptors of the products (commonly measured by the extrinsic cues) such as the price, the 

brand and the origin. The relevance of the sensory experience in food choices is not new and the 

hedonic experiences have a strong influence on the willingness-to pay (Heid & Hamm, 2013). 

Consumers’ experience modifies product quality perceptions and scoring behaviour, as well as it 

is likely to affect repurchase decisions (Poole et al., 2006). Even more, in some cases it is more 

important than label information (Combris et al., 2009). 



4 

In this context, the objective of this paper is threefold: First, to analyse the consumers’ 

expected preference toward a masking strategy of high level boar taint of frankfurter sausages by 

a flavour developed from different herbs and natural smoking. Second to study the impact of the 

sensory experience of this masking strategy on such preferences through a hedonic test of four 

different frankfurter sausages; flavoured and original taste obtained from castrated pigs and 

boars2. Third, to assess how the non-observed heterogeneity both at the scale and mean 

preferences of the sausage’ attributes are affected by the experience in a real shopping scenario. 

To reach these objectives, we applied two Non-Hypothetical Discrete Choice Experiments 

(DCE) by creating a real shopping scenario before and after the hedonic sensory test for a sample 

of 150 consumers that carried out in Madrid, Spain. The Discrete Choice Experiments aims to 

identify the individual’s indirect utility function associated with attributes of products by examining 

the trade-offs they make when making choice decisions. Thus, several alternatives (products) that 

are described by several attributes with varying levels are presented to respondents in an array 

of choice sets. The respondent is then asked to select its preferred alternative within each choice 

set, thereby revealing his/her preference for certain attributes and levels. Subsequently, the 

relative importance or willingness to pay of the attributes can be indirectly recovered from 

respondents’ choices. To motivate the consumers in the recruitment process, they were rewarded 

by €15. In addition, before the DCE tasks, all participants were unexpectedly rewarded by an 

additional €5 while explaining that a real shopping scenario is to be created at the end of the 

experiment. Individuals who agree to participate were asked to purchase their selected product 

from a randomly chosen choice set obtained from the DCE and to pay its posted price. 

From one hand, at the empirical level, this study is the first paper that analyse consumers 

acceptance toward the proposed masking strategy in the frankfurter sausage obtained from boars 

meat in the Spanish market. On the other hand, at the methodological level, this paper contributes 

to the literature of the Discrete Choice Modelling (DCM) using the recently developed Generalised 

Multinomial Logit Model (GMNL) of Fiebig et al. (2010). In this context to our knowledge, this 

research is the first application, in the literature of boar tainted meat preferences studies that 

analyse the impact of sensory experience on consumers’ preferences and on both the scale and 

the preference heterogeneity. 

  

                                                 
2 The sensory experiment details; how pigs were reared and slaughtered, the meat sampling, the sausage 
preparation, the masking flavour development, acceptance heterogeneity are the objective of another paper 
that is in progress as above commented. 



5 

2. Materials and methods 

2.1. Consumer panel 

The impact of sensory experience on the expected preferences was analysed on a sample 

of 150 consumers selected from the Metropolitan area of Madrid province. Participants represent 

the Spanish consumers over 18 years of age who regularly purchase food and beverages and 

having purchased and consumed frankfurter sausage at least one time in the last month. Data 

used in this analysis were obtained from questionnaires completed in a controlled environment. A 

quota sampling procedure was used to guarantee a representative sample in terms of gender, 

postal districts (67 different districts) and age. Consumers were recruited from a specialized 

consumers study company (Silliker Ibérica, S.A.) and were economically compensated by €15 to 

participate in an experiment of about 1.5 hours. Table 1 summarize the main socio-demographic 

variables of the sample components. 

 

Table 1: Summary of the socio-demographic variable of the sample. 

Socio-
demographic 

variables 
(N) 

Age 
(150) 

(years) 

Gender 
(150) 

% female 

Study level 
(150) 

Family Income (€/month) 
(146) 

Primary Secondary University <1,500 1,500-3,000 >3,000

41.5 48.7 12.0 40.0 48.0 42.5 46.6 11.0 

Employment 
situation 

(150) 

H
o

u
se

w
ife

 

R
e
tire

d
 

S
tu

d
e

n
t 

u
n
e

m
p
lo

ye
d
 

E
m

p
lo

ye
e

 
P

a
rt-tim

e
 

E
m

p
lo

ye
e

 
fu

ll tim
e

 

S
e

lf-
e
m

p
lo

ye
d

 
p
a
rt-tim

e
 

S
e

lf-
e
m

p
lo

ye
d

 
fu

ll-tim
e

5.3% 6.0% 15.3% 28.7% 10.7% 24.0% 2.0% 8.0% 

N 150 

 
2.2. Experiment performance 

We applied a methodological approach that attempts to mimic consumers’ behaviour towards a 

novel product (new masking strategy of frankfurter sausages) based on the Total Food Quality 

Model (TFQM) originally proposed by Grunert et al., (1996). According to the TFQM, before 

purchase, many characteristics of a food product cannot be discovered, and thus in order to make 

a food choice, consumers will develop expectations about its quality (Brunsø et al., 2002). Thus, 

before experiencing a new product, consumers usually rely on its extrinsic attributes to deduce its 

quality (Speed, 1998, Meillon et al., 2010) leading to the formation of hedonic expectations that 

are essential to make a purchase decision (Brunsø et al., 2002). These expectations are based 



6 

on the information available or on previous experience with the same or similar product. After the 

product is tasted, experienced quality can be determined. Finally, expectations and experienced 

quality are integrated (Meillon et al., 2010) allowing to understand the consumer satisfaction. In 

this context, to analyse the relative impact of sensory experience on consumer expected choice, 

the Expectancy-Disconfirmation model (Oliver, 1980) can be applied. This model implies 

comparison between a cognitive state prior to an event and a subsequent cognitive state after the 

event is experienced. The model implies that consumers purchase a product with expectations 

about the anticipated experience. Once the product is consumed, expectations may change. If the 

experience matches the expectation, confirmation occurs which results in satisfaction. If there is 

a mismatch, disconfirmation occurs when experience improves expectations leading to a positive 

satisfaction. It also occurs when experience worsens expectation leading to negative satisfaction 

or dissatisfaction. 

 

The applied methodological approach can be summarized into five main subsequent steps: 

i. First, participants were asked to answer in a short questionnaire their attitudes and 

consumption behaviour towards pork meat and pork frankfurter sausage in particular. 

Socioeconomic and life-style variables were also collected. 

ii. Second, participants were unexpectedly rewarded by an extra €5 and asked to select their 

preferred frankfurter sausage from different choice sets built within the DCE design. 

Consumers were warned that their selection will have a consequence as a real market will be 

created at the end of the experiment to exchange real money and real products. Thus, 

consumers who agree to participate in this market should purchase their selected product. No 

additional information about the products was given, except what appears in each choice set 

label. In this step we aimed to analyse the expected preferences of consumers on the basis 

of their past experiences and available information related to the characteristics of the product 

or to a similar one (Deliza & MacFie, 1996). 

iii. Third, a hedonic evaluation test was carried out to assess the impact of the chosen masking 

strategy for boar taint and to create a current sensory experience of the analysed product. 

Participants tasted four different frankfurter sausages with two different treatments: if the meat 

is obtained from castrated pig or boars and if the flavour is original or flavoured with spices 

and naturally smoked. 

iv. Fourth, consumers were informed about which type of sausages they tasted in order to 

associate their sensory experience with the specific products and characteristics. Then, the 

same DCE was repeated and consumers turned to reselect their preferred products from the 



7 

same choice sets and asked to take into consideration their sensory experience. This phase 

allow to analyse if the sensory experience have resulted in agreement or disagreement with 

what they expected. These changes play an important role in the final acceptance or rejection 

of the product (Font-i-Furnols & Guerrero, 2014) and may affect the final choice decision of 

the consumers. 

v. Fifth, a real market was created to exchange real product and money. Consumers who 

accepted to participate were obliged to purchase their chosen product from a randomly 

selected choice set. 

2.3. Attitude and consumption behaviour towards pork meat 

The survey collected information on the socio-economic backgrounds of the consumers 

along with their attitudes, preferences and opinions regarding pork consumption, especially 

frankfurter sausage. The short survey contains questions regarding the consumption frequency of 

fresh pork meat and frankfurter sausage, the brand they usually purchase and how much they 

usually pay when purchase frankfurter sausage. They were also asked to state if at the moment 

of the survey they have frankfurter sausage at home and if they are planning to purchase in future 

days. These questions were completed by life style questions about if they do sport or any physical 

activities not related to work, the last time they have made a blood test, if they are smoker, if they 

are alcohol drinker and in which frequency. 

 

2.4. The hedonic test 

The inclusion of a natural spices mixture (white pepper, paprika, mustard seed, nutmeg mace, 

coriander, sweet marjoram and small cardamom) combined with smoking process was the strategy 

selected to mask the perceived boar taint in frankfurter sausage. 

For consumer sensory analysis, four different batches of frankfurter sausages were prepared: 

1) sausages with meat and fat from male castrated pig (original flavour), 2) smoked sausages with 

meat and fat from male castrated pig, manufactured including a natural spices mixture (flavoured), 

3) sausages with meat and fat from entire pigs with androstenone concentrations 1.10-2.75 µg/g of 

fat (original flavour) and 4) smoked sausages with meat and fat from entire pigs manufactured 

including a natural spices mixture (flavoured). 

The products were prepared in a pilot plant according to industrial procedures. The basic 

recipe contained lean meat (50%), pork fat (25%), ice/water (25%), potato starch (2.5%), soybean 

protein (2%), sodium chloride (2%), kappa carrageenan (0.5%), sodium polyphosphate (0.3%), 

dextrose (0.25%), pork flavour JBT-200 (0.2%), sodium ascorbate (0.05%) and sodium nitrite (150 



8 

ppm). To manufacture flavoured sausages a natural spices mixture (0.7%) was added to basic 

recipe. All additives and spices were provided by Proanda S.L. (Sevilla, Spain). For each batch of 

sausage, meat, fat, ice, water, and other ingredients were emulsified by using a bowl cutter (CM -

41, Mainca. Barcelona, Spain). The batters obtained were vacuum stuffed (Tecmaq Microwat, 

Barcelona, Spain) into 20 mm collagen casing (NB300, Edicas, Ripoll, Spain), smoked by sawdust 

(in case of flavoured sausages) and cooked to 72º C core temperature (Verinox Junior 1100, Vigolo 

Vattaro, Italy). After cooking, sausages were cooled, vacuum-packaged and kept at 4ºC until the 

day of the analysis. 

All tests were performed in a room equipped with individual tasting booths according to ISO 

8589 (2007). Sensory evaluation was carried out on two consecutive days, starting 7 days after the 

production of the sausages. Seven sensory sessions were conducted with approximately 22 

consumers per session. For each session, samples were prepared shortly before analysis as 

described below. Sausages were heated for 3 min in a pot of boiling water on a ceramic glass cook 

top (TEKA - IR 642). After cooking, the sausages were cut into pieces about 4.5 cm length and 

placed in aluminium soufflé cups with lids, coded with a 3-digit random code. The cups were kept 

warm in an oven (Bosh-HB 22R251E) at 60 ºC for 10 min before being served. Serving temperature 

of the samples was 50 ± 2 °C. Ambient conditions (temperature and relative humidity) in the sensory 

room were 23-25ºC and 40-60% respectively, which were within the range of acceptable conditions.  

Consumers evaluated in a blind condition, the acceptability of the four different frankfurter 

sausage (meat obtained from castrated and boars pig and with original flavour or flavours with 

spices and naturally smoked) under white light in the order printed on the recording sheet, which 

was established to avoid the effect of sample order presentation, first-order or carry-over effects 

(Macfie et al., 1989). Consumers ate unsalted toasted bread and drank mineral water to rinse their 

palate between samples. 

Although castration might affect texture sensory parameters, such as tenderness and 

juiciness, Bañón et al. (2003) reported that these attributes were not related with boar taint when 

the meat is cooked, whereas the aroma and taste were strongly affect. Thus, in this study, each 

consumer rated odour, flavour and overall acceptability as the most important sensory attribute 

(Resurreccion, 2004) using a 9-point category scale (1‘dislike extremely’, 2‘dislike very much’, 

3‘dislike moderately’, 4‘dislike slightly’, 5 ‘neither like nor dislike’ 6‘like slightly’, 7‘like moderately’, 

8‘like very much’, 9‘like extremely’). Finally, the acceptability data of meat were analysed using the 

IBM, SPSS, 21 and mean separation was carried out using the Tukey’s test. 

 

 



9 

2.5. The Discrete Choice Experiment 

2.5.1. Empirical application 

For the empirical application of the DCE, it is highly important to well identity the attributes 

and levels that constitute the main characteristics of the studied product, including those 

descriptors that are of interest of the research. In our case, we identified the main set of attributes 

that consumers take into consideration when purchasing meat and processed meat, in particular 

the frankfurter sausage, including the castration and the flavour as the attributes of interest. 

 Attributes and levels 

In a first step, we analysed different studies that have focused on attitudes and the 

determinants factors affecting the purchasing decision of meat and processed meat products. As a 

results, several attributes are identified as the main extrinsic and intrinsic descriptors of the product 

(Font-i-Furnols & Guerrero, 2014) from which we highlight: The physiological quality cues such as 

the water-binding capacity (Bredahl et al., 1998), the colour, meat appearance and the shelf-life 

(Topel et al., 1976; Glitsch, 2000; Fortomaris et al., 2006; Ngapo et al., 2007), the fat content 

(Verbeke et al., 2005; De Oliveira Faria et al., 2015), the price (Murphy et al. 2015), the food safety 

claims (Finn & Louviere, 1992; Grunert, 2005; Grunert et al., 2015), the meat quality (Verbeke et 

al., 2010; Grunert et al., 2015), the origin (Huang & Fu, 1995; Ehmke et al., 2008), the product 

convenience (Grunert et al., 2004) the traceability (Loureiro et al., 2007), the brand and the label 

information (Roosen et al., 2003; Fenger et al., 2015), the production methods such as organic, 

conventional, free range and hormone free meats (Lusk et al., 2003; Dransfield et al., 2005), the 

health claims (Scollan et al., 2006; Realini et al., 2014), the ethical claims mainly animal welfare 

aspects (Verbeke & Viaene, 2000) and the environmental claims such as the carbon food print 

(Koistinen et al., 2013). 

Due to the impossibility to cope with all the meat preference attributes we selected an array 

of the most important ones, focusing on the attributes that we were interested in. The procedure 

was to consider ceteris paribus some attributes for all the offered alternative products (i.e the 

different sausage products had the same package, the same appearance, the same sausage size, 

the same format, the same shelf life -maximum date allowed-, the same origin and the same 

production method). Thus, in our case study, we focused on if the meat is obtained from castrated 

animal or boars, and if the sausage had an original flavour or enriched with the masking strategy. 

In a second step, we carried out a discussion group comprised by university lecturers and 

researchers in the fields of agro-food marketing and meat science experts to determine the final set 

of attributes that were: Flavour (original and the masking strategy with spices and naturally smoked), 

castration (meat obtained from castrated pigs or boars), brand type (manufacturer and private 



10 

brands) and price (€1.79, €1.39, €0.99, €0.59). The price vector was not determined by the actual 

prices of the product, but rather by the unobserved demand curves and thus, was based on prior 

knowledge concerning the maximum willingness to pay for such product (Mørkbak et al., 2010). 

Finally, a pilot questionnaire was applied to a small sample of respondents to test for the complete 

understanding of the attributes. 

All attributes, were coded with effect coding as discrete variables in order to avoid the base 

levels being confounded with the intercept (no purchase option), we use effects coding (Bech & 

Gyrd-Hansen, 2005). The base level of each attribute was castrated pig, manufacturer brand and 

original flavour, the price was coded as continuous variable to allow for the willingness to pay 

calculation. Finally, all models were estimated by using 500 Halton draws. 

 

 Choice set construction 

We followed the Dual Response design in the construction of choice sets (Brazell et al., 

2006; Kallas et al., 2012). According to this design, respondents are allowed to face a “purchase/ 

no-purchase” decision response mode, which better mimic the circumstances under which actual 

choices are made while replicating market situations (Ryan & Skatum, 2004). To construct the 

choice sets, we first determined the number of alternatives to be included (m). We considered 4 

alternatives by choice set as it showed the highest D-efficiency (100%) and to be consistent with 

the four samples of the frankfurter sausage presented in the hedonic test. In a further phase, we 

followed a full factorial design using the total number of attributes and levels which led to a total 

of 32 (23x41) hypothetical products. Thus, for each choice set there is a potential of (23x41)4 

possible combinations. As it is impossible to use of the combination created, we followed an 

orthogonal fractional factorial design to estimate all main effects of the attributes enabling us to 

reduce the number of choice sets from all the initial possible combinations in the full design to only 

8 choice sets. Figure 1 shows one of these choice sets. 

 



11 

 

Figure 1: Example of a choice set. 

 

The 8 standard choice set generated from the efficient fractional factorial and orthogonal 

design represent the main choice task where consumers should select their preferred product 

among 4 alternative sausages and decide if they purchase it or not. Participants were also asked 

to perform an additional task (hold-out task) to conduct validity tests (Ding et al., 2005). This task 

5 consisted of a single-choice set with eight different sausages to those provided in the main task 

and obtained from the original full fractional design (Figure 2). At last, several follow up question 

were offered regarding attributes non-attendance and choice uncertainty among other aspects 

that will not be included in this paper as this is beyond the scope of this work. 

 



12 

 

Figure 2: The choice set of the hold task. 

Finally, as commented before, the real market of frankfurter sausages was created (Figure 

3) by randomly selecting one choice set from the eight choice sets (main task) and the single-choice 

set (hold out task). We first randomly select between two numbers to decide which task is used as 

a real market (one in the case of the main task and two for the hold out task). If one is selected, we 

further randomly select a number between 1 and 8 (the total number of choice sets) to determine 

with which choice set we construct the real market. Individuals should then purchase the product 

that they had chosen and pay the corresponding posted price, unless they picked do not purchase 

option. If the hold-out task was selected, then they should purchase the product they had chosen in 

this task. 

 



13 

 

Figure 3: the real market created after the experiment with a real exchange of product and money. 

 

2.5.2. Theoretical foundation of the Discrete Choice Experiment 

DCE rely on Lancaster’s Theory of Value (Lancaster, 1966) which proposes that utility of a 

product is decomposed into separable utilities for their characteristics or attributes. It is also based 

on the Random Utility Theory (RUT) laid out by Thurstone (1927). This theory proposes that subjects 

choose among alternatives according to a utility function with two main components: a systematic 

(observable) component and a random error term (non-observable): 

( , )jn jn j n jnU V X S          (1) 

where jnU  is the utility of alternative j  to subject n , jnV  is the systematic component of the utility, 

jX  is the vector of attributes of alternative j , nS  is the vector of socio-economic characteristics of 

the subject n  and jn  is the random term. 

To predict the subjects’ preferences for attributes (k), we need to define the “probability of 

choice” that an individual n chooses the alternative i rather than the alternative j  (for any i  and j  

within choice sets, T ). McFadden (1974) developed an econometric model that formalized 

respondents’ decision making process. This model is often referred to as the multinomial logit (MNL) 

model, which is considered the base model for DCE. 

 



14 

 The Multinomial Logit Model (MNL) 

According to MNL model the utility to person n from choosing alternative j on choice scenario 

t is given by: 

1,  ,   1,  ,   1,  ,  njt njt njt n n N j J tU x T            (2) 

Where, njtx is a K-vector of observed attributes of alternative j,   is a vector of mean attribute utilities 

(utility weights) and njt is the “idiosyncratic” error term called “residual” heterogeneity and motivated 

as consumer heterogeneity in tastes (preferences) for unobserved (latent, intangible) product 

attributes (Fiebig et al., 2010) that follows independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) Type 1 

extreme value distribution with scale parameter n . 

The probability ( )j ntP X  that an individual n will choose alternative j  among other alternative 

of an array of choice set T  is formulated as follows: 

1

exp( )
( )

exp( )

njt
j nt J

njt
j

x
P X

x









  j T      (3) 

Where ntX is the vector of attributes of all alternatives 1,  ,   j J  . In the case of estimating a 

MNL, the scale parameter n is normalized to one for identification. 

In this context, the MNL has an asymmetric heterogeneity structure: it can estimate 

heterogeneous preferences for the unobserved attributes (Scale_MNL). However, it imposes 

homogeneity in preferences for observed attribute. Thus, only average attributes’ utilities are 

estimated which is often unrealistic as consumers’ preferences are, by nature, heterogeneous. 

While the heterogeneity analysis is an important issue, especially for the New Product Development 

(NPD) such as the case of the enriched beef meat, estimating only the average preferences may 

lead one to miss that a product with particular attributes would have great appeal for a subset of the 

population (Fiebig et al., 2010). Thus, the failure in understanding the preference heterogeneity may 

lead to a failure to optimally target potential adopters of the new product. Therefore, the mixed or 

heterogeneous logit models (MIXL) have been introduced to investigate such heterogeneity. 

 

 The Mixed Logit Model (MIXL) 

The Mixed or heterogeneous logit models (MIXL) (also in the literature is referred to as 

Random Parameter Logit model, RPL) are currently quite popular. They extend the MNL introducing 

for unobserved heterogeneity by allowing random coefficients on attributes (Ben-Akiva et al., 1997).  



15 

In MIXL the utility to person n from choosing alternative j in choice set t is given by:  

1,  ,    1,  ,    1,  ,  njt n njt njt n N j J tU x n T            (4) 

Where, n n     and where ( )n is the vector of person n specific deviations from the 

mean value of the  s. The n  is described by an underlying continuous distribution for the attributes 

defined by the researcher. In most applications the multivariate normal distribution is the most used, 

MVN (0,). In this case, n  is also assumed to be one for identification. 

For the MIXL model, the choice probability is: 

1

exp[( ) ]
( )

exp[( ) ]

n njt
j nt J

n njt
j

x
P X

x

 

 






  j T       (5) 

Recently Louviere & Mayer (2007), Louviere et al. (2008) argued that much of the preference 

heterogeneity captured by random parameters in MIXL can be better captured by the scale term; 

and thus known as “scale heterogeneity”. Besides, they stated that the normal distributions of the 

random attributed in the MIXL do not appear to be very close to it, as followed in almost MIXL 

applications. The MIXL turns to be likely a poor approximation to stated data if scale heterogeneity 

is not accounted for (Fiebig et al., 2010). 

The scale heterogeneity is the variation of the degree of randomness in the decision-making 

process over respondents and hence is the degree of individuals’ certainty. It is based on the 

differences of the variance of the error term ( )  across individual. In this context, the analysis of 

the scale heterogeneity is important, especially for the stated preference studies (i.e. based on 

questionnaire). In this type of studies, consumers may interpret and process choice tasks and 

situations differently. They may have varying levels of attention paid to the task they are presented, 

as well as the level of certainty in their choice (Train & Weeks, 2005). Thus, it would be expected 

that the scale of the error term could be greater for some consumers than for others. 

 

 The Generalized Multinomial Logit Model (GMNL) 

On the basis of Keane (2006), Feibig et al. (2010) developed the Generalized Multinomial 

Logit model (GMNL). Within this approach, the n  is no longer set to be one, and a particular 

specification of this term is assumed. In this case, multiplying equation (4) through by n , Feibig et 

al. (2010) identified that the utility to person n from choosing alternative j on choice set t is given by: 

[ γ (1 γ) ]njt n n n n njt njtU X                 (6) 



16 

where γ  is a parameter between 0 and 1. n  is a scaling factor that proportionately scales 

the   up or down for each individual n. To impose that  γ 0,1  in estimation, Fiebeig et al., (2010) 

used a logistic transform 
* *γ exp(γ ) [1 exp( γ )]  and estimate *γ . Thus γ  is a mixing parameter, 

and its value determines the level of mixing or interaction between the scale heterogeneity 

coefficient n  and the parameter heterogeneity coefficient n . 

Since the scale heterogeneity factor n  represents the person-specific scale of the 

idiosyncratic error, it should be positive. Fiebig et al. (2010) proposed that n  follows a log-normal 

distribution with mean 1 and standard deviation  , 2LN (1, )n  , with the estimated  capturing 

the scale heterogeneity across consumers. Thus, to ensure is positive, Feibig et al. (2010) an 

exponential transformation of exp( )n n     where N(0,1)n . 

Because n  only enters the model as a product of n   (equation 6), some normalization 

on n  is required to identify  . Fiebig et al. (2010) recommend setting the mean of n  to 1 so   

is the mean of the utility weights. Because the mean of the log-normally distributed n  is 

exp( )n n     and the 
2E( ) exp( 2)n    , thus to ensure E( ) 1n  , we need to set 

2( 2)   . 

Let njty  be ‘1’ if respondent n choose alternative j in choice set t, and ‘0’ otherwise. The 

probability that consumer n chooses alternative j in choice set t is: 

1

exp([ (1 ) ] )
( )

exp([ (1 ) ] )

n n n n njt
j nt J

n n n n njt
j

X
P X

X

    

    


  


  

γ γ

γ γ
   j T    (7) 

Finally, regarding the Alternative Specific constant (ASC) which usually measure intangible 

aspects (not gathered by the attributes’ utilities) that some consumers like and others dislike. Fiebig 

et al. (2010) indicated that including it within the general GMNL specification may produce special 

estimation problems. Greene & Hensher (2010) proposed three possible strategies to deal with 

ASC: 

1. Consider the ASC 0( )j  as fixed parameters, assuming homogenous preference for ASCs. 

In this case the equation (6) is specified as follows: 

0( ) [ γ (1 γ) ]njt j n n n n njt njtU X             



17 

2. Make them a part of the general specification of the GMNL model (i.e. to behave like the 

attributes), then the utility of the ASCs 0( )j  is scaled and considered to be random. The 

ASCs are considered as the  s components. In this case equation (6) is specified as 

follows: 

0 0 0[ ( ) γ( ) (1 γ) ( )]njt n j nj n n nj n njt njtU X                 

It is worth mentioning that Feibig et al. (2010) observed that this may cause estimator to fail. 

3. Consider the ASC only as random parameter and force no special scaling for this variable, 

so the scaling parameter 1n   and γ=0 . In this case, equation (6) is: 

0 0( ) [ γ (1 γ) ]njt j nj n n n n njt njtU X               

where 0 0( )j nj   are the heterogeneous intercepts (which do not have scale 

heterogeneity), with 0  being the mean vector and the 0n  being the stochastic component. 

The GMNL model is specified by default to consider the n  as uncorrelated. That is mean the 

covariance matrix of n is constrained to be a diagonal matrix (a matrix in which all values above 

and to the right of the diagonal are equal to zero), thus, there are only variances estimated, no 

covariances. However, the GMNL can be specified to allow for correlated parameters. The presence 

of multiple observations on stated-choice responses for each sampled individual means that the 

potential for correlated responses across observations can be the product of many sources including 

the sequencing of offered choice situations that results in mixtures of learning and inertia effects, 

among other possible influences on choice response (Hensher et al., 2005). Thus, discrete choice 

data with repeated choice situations containing the same attributes and levels may have unobserved 

effects that are correlated among alternatives in a given choice situation. One way to recognize this 

is to permit correlation of random parameters of attributes that are common across alternatives 

observation (Hensher et al., 2005). 

In the case of correlated random parameters, the set of random parameters has a full 

covariance matrix with estimated variances and covariances. Thus, when we have more than one 

random parameter the estimated standard deviation n  are no longer independent. To assess this, 

we have to decompose the estimated standard deviation parameters into their attribute specific and 

attributes-correlations standard deviations. The decomposition procedure is done following the 

Cholesky decomposition method. This method decouples the contribution to each standard 

deviation parameter made through correlation with other random parameter estimates and the 

actual contribution made solely through heterogeneity around the mean of each random parameter 



18 

estimate (Hensher et al., 2005). The correlated parameters GMNL model reports both the 

“confounding” standard deviation and its Cholesky decomposing matrix. The diagonal value of the 

Cholesky matrix represents the true standard deviation for each random parameter once the cross-

correlated parameter terms have been unconfounded. The below–diagonal elements in Cholesky 

decomposition matrix are the covariances (cross-correlation) among the random parameter 

estimates. 

From the abovementioned aspects of the GMNL model, in this case study, we used a GMNL 

model with correlated random parameters n  and considering the ASC 0( )j  as fixed parameters. 

This decision is because it showed to have the best goodness of fit compared to other specification 

in terms of Pseudo-R2, AIC and improvement in the Likelihood functions. We used the GMXLOGIT 

procedure in NLOGIT 5. 

Once parameters are estimated, they represent the marginal utility of attributes and its 

contribution to the total utility function. Thus, the Marginal Rate of Substitution (MRS) between 

attributes can be obtained. As one of the attributes is expressed in monetary term (i.e. the price), it 

is possible to determine its “implicit price” (IP) or part-worth as follows: 

Product_attribute
Product _ attribute

monetary_attribute

IP



 
   

 
     (8) 

As the attributes are codified with coding effect in order to avoid the base level to be 

confounded with the Alternative specific constant of the no–option, the implicit price to move from 

the base level of each attribute to the analysed level should be multiplied by 2. 

 

4. Results and discussion 

4.1. Liking scores for the different meat tasted 

Before analysing the impact of the sensory experience on expected preferences, results of 

consumers’ acceptability for the different sausage types are first reported. Sensory parameters 

scores for sausages with and without the masking strategy from castrated pigs and boars are shown 

in Table 2. 

 

 

 



19 

Table 2. Least squares means and standard error (SE) of sensory parameters evaluated in 
frankfurter sausages from castrated pigs and boars. 

Type of pork meat Odour Flavour 
Overall 

acceptability

Original sausage from boar meat 5.40c (1.43) 5.62c (1.56) 5.46c (1.61) 

Flavoured1 sausage from boar meat 6.51a (1.27) 6.36b (1.26) 6.42a (1.18) 

Original sausage from castrated meat 5.69b (1.19) 6.20b (1.33) 5.91b (1.30) 

Flavoured1 sausage from castrated meat 6.62ª (1.16) 6.69a (1.18) 6.62a (1.29) 
a, b, c, Statistical differences among types of frankfurter sausage for all consumers at 95 %. 
1with spices and naturally smoked. 
 

Comparing the overall acceptability of the four types of sausage, results showed significant 

differences. The flavoured sausage obtained from castrated and boar meat had the highest 

acceptability scores than the remaining type of sausage. This confirms that the applied masking 

strategy had a positive effect on frankfurter sausage acceptance (Lunde et al., 2008; Stolzenbach 

et al., 2009). In this context, the original sausage from boar meat had received the lowest valuation 

in all the attributes analysed which is clearly showing the negative impact of boar taint on acceptance 

(Bañon et al., 2003). Focusing on the flavour attribute, flavoured sausage obtained from boar meat 

exhibit a similar acceptance with the original sausage obtained from castrated meat. Finally, 

regarding the odour attribute, the masking strategy clearly show the non-significant difference 

between sausages obtained from boar and castrated meat which confirm the positive impact of the 

proposed ingredients. These results may represent the starting point of the processed pork meat 

for masking boar taint especially in sausages. 

 

4.2. Impact of sensory evaluation on expected preferences 

Table 3 reports the marginal utilities of the attributes resulting from the G-MNL models with 

correlated random parameters for the pre and post sensory experiment. Both models showed the 

highest improvement in the likelihood and the best information criteria (AIC, BIC) over the MNL and 

MIXL models in line of the results of Fiebig et al. (2010), Greene & Hensher (2010) and Pancras & 

Dey (2011). As can be seen, at a 99% confidence level, we can reject the null hypothesis that all 

coefficients are jointly equal to zero with a Log-Likelihood ratio test highly significant. The goodness 

of fit is assessed through the McFadden’s pseudo-R2 (0.20 and 0.26 for pre and post sensory 

respectively) which is within the acceptable range for the discrete choice models. 

 

  



20 

Table 3: Results from model estimations for consumer data with and without information. 

 
Expectation 

(Before liking test)
Satisfaction 

(After liking test)
 Random Parameters in utility functions () 

Boar animal 0.28**a -0.01b 
Private Brand -0.21***a -0.26***a 

Flavoured1 -0.47**b 0.50**a 
Non-Random Parameters in utility functions () 

Price -1.69***a -1.51***b 
Opt-Out -0.40***b 0.02a 

Diagonal values in Cholesky matrix 
Non-castrated animal 1.20*** 1.04*** 

Private brand 0.04 0.46** 
Flavoured 0.28 0.70*** 

 Covariances of the Random parameters 
Private Brand : Non-castrated animal -0.11 -0.01 

Flavoured : Non-castrated animal -0.20 -0.07 
Flavoured : Private brand 0.07 -0.48* 

scale parameters 
Variance parameter tau in scale 

parameter
1.10*** 0.01 

Weighting parameter Gamma 0.41*** 0.72*** 
 Standard deviations of parameters distribution

Std. Dev. Non-castrated animal 1.20*** 1.04*** 
Std. Dev. Private brand 0.10 0.47*** 

Std. Dev. Other Spanish origin 1.19*** 1.25*** 
Log-Likelihood (θ) -1,529.54 -1,418.39 
Log-Likelihood (0) -1,931.32 -1,931.32 

LL ratio test 803.55 (0.000) 1,025.87 (0.000)
Pseudo R2 0.208 0.265 

AIC/N 2.576 2.391 
Significance levels: *** p<0.01; **p<0.05; * p< 0.10. 
Attributes with different superscript letters in columns (a, b) differ (P < 0.05). 
1 with spices and naturally smoked. 

 

The positive/negative sign of the coefficient implies higher/lower levels of utility associated 

with these attributes’ levels. In this context, the model estimates showed that all attribute coefficients 

are statistically significant except the boar animal level in the post sensory. This result revealed that 

before the hedonic valuation experience, consumers exhibit a preference for meat obtained from 

pigs reared in natural condition of life without any modification (i.e. castration) as a potential 

preference for a positive pig welfare. Previous studies have shown that Spanish consumers are not 

aware if castration is related to meat quality (Kallas et al., 2013). However, after testing the different 

sausage products, consumers were aware of the importance of castration on meat quality mainly 



21 

on the odour off the product. Thus, the utility of meat obtained from boars pigs decreased 

significantly from 0.28 to -0.01). 

For the brand attribute preference, consumers showed a rejection of private brands with non-

significant differences between the expected preferences and satisfaction. This result is confirmed 

by the descriptive results obtained from participants regarding their consumption behaviours of 

Frankfurter sausage. Almost a 70% of participants usually purchase manufacturers brand over the 

private one. Focusing on the flavour attribute, results showed an interesting pattern. While 

consumers showed a negative expected preference for the flavoured sausage with spices and 

naturally smoked, after testing the product, their utility become positive with highly significant 

difference. A fact commented by Bredahl et al. (1998) who affirmed that the quality expectations 

and quality experience diverge widely. These results are in accordance to what commented also by 

Flores (1997) and Leistner (1995) that smoked meat products are not appealing to consumers in 

the Mediterranean. In addition, the results highlight the appropriateness of this masking strategy 

against boar taint as an effective masking strategy. 

In this line, as expected, the negative sign of the price implies that an increase in the levels 

of the price attribute, will decrease the utility of the alternatives presented to consumers. Comparing 

values before and after the experiments results showed slight significant differences. The utility of 

the price slightly decreased, showing that after eating experience some consumer shifted their 

election towards alternatives with higher prices that contains specific patterns of the other preferred 

levels such as flavoured, non-castrated and manufacturers’ brands. In this line, there is a clear 

indication against the no-choice option in both experiments, with highly significance and negative 

value in the pre sensory test. On average, consumers have a clear preference for the offered 

products. 

Interpreting the tau parameter ( ) which is the key parameter that captures the scale 

heterogeneity, results showed a substantial scale heterogeneity in the data with a highly significant 

value of 1.10 in the pre sensory test and a non-significant value of 0.01 in the post experiment. As 

the parameter tau increases, the degree of scale heterogeneity increases. This result shows that 

when consumers taste the different sausage products accompanied by a posterior information about 

what they eat, the variation of the degree of randomness in their final decision and hence their 

degree of uncertainty decreased significantly. 

Regarding the unobserved taste (preference) heterogeneity (usually captured by the 

diagonal values in Cholesky matrix, but no more valid in the case of correlated parameters) is 

captured by the standard deviation of the random parameters (bottom of Table 2) as detailed in the 

methodology section. The estimated models showed statistically significant results with the 



22 

exception of the private brand in the pre sensory. Thus, as mentioned by Lenk (2011), when the 

estimated standard deviation of parameters distribution are close to zero, then the unobserved 

heterogeneity is mostly due to heterogeneity in the scale parameter and not taste. In our results the 

values are far from zero (i. e. 1.20 and 1.19 in the pre experiment and 0.47, 1.04 and 1.25 in the 

post experiment) and thus there is a mixture between both sources of heterogeneities. This can be 

verified analysing the gamma estimate. 

The main motivation of the G-MNL model is to separate the estimation of scale heterogeneity 

from taste heterogeneity (Lenk, 2011) which might be identified by the gamma parameter. The 

estimate of the gamma in both model are relatively far from zero. This implies that preference 

heterogeneity is invariant to scale heterogeneity and thus both heterogeneity are independent. This 

independence is emphasized in the post experiment. Gamma parameter increased from 0.41 to 

0.72 and thus both types of heterogeneity becomes more independently identified. 

Finally, the estimates of the covariance matrix of the random parameters showed non-

significant values between attributes in both the pre and post experiment with the exception of the 

flavoured and private brand levels in the post experiment with a highly negative correlation (-0.82)3. 

In this context, consumers seem to negatively associate the new and well accepted flavour of 

sausage with spices and naturally smoked with the private label. 

For the economic interpretation, the implicit price of the attributes levels was calculated 

following equation 8. Since these estimates are stochastic, it is usual to calculate their confidence 

intervals. In this study we employ the method proposed by Krinsky & Robb (1986) through 1,000 

random repetitions. Analysing preferences before and after the sensory test, results show significant 

modifications in the implicit prices of the levels as shown in Table 4. The obtained results, confirms 

the previously explained results about levels utilities in Table 3. To avoid any misinterpretation, 

results must be considered as the willingness to pay (€/product) to shift preference from the base 

level of the attribute to the evaluated one. In this line, in contrast to the castrated animal claim, 

consumers in the pre sensory were willingness to pay for the non-castrated animal (0.340€/product) 

while after the sensory experience this aspect was not statistically significant. Moreover, compared 

to the manufacturer brand, the private brands were not valued with a negative implicit price in the 

pre and post sensory experience. This results showed that consumers ask for a price discount to 

accept the private brand of about 0.252€/product and 0.342€/product in the pre and post sensory 

test respectively. Finally, the willingness to pay for the proposed flavour was negatively valuated 

before testing asking for about 0.558 discount by product and showing a significant change of 

                                                 
3 The correlation matrix estimated in both models was not reported in the paper due to their non-statistical significance 
(except the flavoured and private brand in the post experiment). 



23 

preferences after testing the product, revealing a willingness to pay of 0.66€ for the masking 

strategy. 

 
Table 4: The willingness to pay from the GMNL Model. 

 
Expectation 

(Before liking test)
Satisfaction 

(After liking test) 

Non-castrated animal 
0.340**a 

(0.06; 0.62) 
-0.022b 

(-0.12; 0.08) 

Private Brand 
-0.252***a 

(-0.38; -0.1) 
-0.342**a 

(-0.62; -0.060) 

Flavoured1 
-0.558**b 

(-0.99; -0.12) 
0.660**a 

(0.12; 1.18) 
Significance levels: *** p<0.01; **p<0.05; * p< 0.10. 
a,b: Differences between preferences (pre sensory and post sensory) within each 
group at 95%. 
1 with spices and naturally smoked. 
 

5. Conclusion 

Our evidence suggests the appropriateness of the proposed mixture of spices and smoking 

as a valid masking strategy of boar tainted meat to be used as a raw material for the production 

of frankfurter sausages. The results proves that this strategy was able to masking boar taint odour 

and flavour and does not diminish the consumer acceptability in these type of products. In addition, 

consumers showed their willingness to pay a premium for this type of flavours. In this context, this 

strategy may represent the starting point for the processed meat industry to adapt their receipt 

that allows including the boar tainted meat for the production of frankfurter sausages. However, 

more research is needed to study other meat products and new cooking strategies. 

The sensory experience for the different frankfurter sausages with the main identified 

strategy of masking boar taint, have had impact on both the scale and preference heterogeneity 

by affecting the tau and the gamma mixing parameter. The hedonic test decreased the degree of 

randomness and uncertainty of consumers in their final election and the source of unobserved 

heterogeneity obtained from the scale become more independent than the taste preference. 

These results may highlight the importance of the direct promotion of these types of product in the 

retail point by giving potential consumers the opportunity to test the product. These advertising 

activities in the point of sales may represent a valid way to promote consumers to purchase the 

product by decreasing their level of uncertainty. In this context, more studies are needed to be 

done, especially to analyse the impact of sensory experience on the attributes non-attendance 

and on the internal and external validity of choices. These topics are proposed for future research. 



24 

REFERENCES 

Asioli, D., Canavari, M., Pignatti, E., Obermowe, T.,  Sidali, K.  L., Vogt, C., &  Spiller, A.  (2014).  Sensory 
experiences and expectations of Italian and German organic consumers. Journal of International Food 
& Agribusiness Marketing, 26(1), 13‐27. 

Bañón, S., Costa, E., Gil, M. D., & Garrido, M. D. (2003). A comparative study of boar taint in cooked and 
dry‐cured meat. Meat Science, 63(3), 381‐388. 

Bech, M., & Gyrd‐Hansen, D.  (2005). Effects coding  in discrete  choice experiments. Health economics, 
14(10), 1079‐1083. 

Ben‐Akiva, M., D. McFadden, M. Abe, U. Böckenholt, D. Bolduc, D. Gopinath, T. Morikawa et al. 1997. 
Modelling methods for discrete choice analysis. Marketing Letter, 8(3) 273–286. 

Blanch, M.; Panella‐Riera, N.; Chevillon, P.; Font i Furnols, M.; Gil; M.; Gil, J.M.; Kallas, Z. and Oliver, M.A. 
(2012) Impact of consumer’s sensitivity to androstenone on acceptability of meat from entire males in 
three European countries: France, Spain and United Kingdom. Meat science, 90(3), 572–578. 

Bonneau, M. (1998). Use of entire males for pig meat in the European Union. Meat Science, 49, S257‐S272. 
Bonneau, M., & Chevillon, P. (2012). Acceptability of entire male pork with various levels of androstenone 

and skatole by consumers according to their sensitivity to androstenone. Meat science, 90(2), 330‐337. 
Bonneau, M., &  Lebret, B.  (2010).  Production  systems  and  influence on  eating quality of  pork. Meat 

science, 84(2), 293‐300. 
Borrisser‐Pairó, F., Kallas, Z., Panella‐Riera, N., Avena, M., Ibáñez, M., Olivares, A. (2014). Analysis of the 

stakeholders’ attitudes  for banning of castration of male pigs  in Europe:  focus group methodology. 
Paper presented at the 60 th International Congress of Meat Science and Technology, Punta Del Este, 
Uruguay. 

Brazell, J., Diener, C., Karniouchina, E., Moore, W., Séverin, V. & Uldry, P. (2006). The no‐choice option and 
dual response choice designs. Marketing Letters, 17(4), 255‐268. 

Bredahl, L., Grunert, K.G., & Fertin, C. (1998). Relating consumer perceptions of pork quality to physical 
product characteristics. Food Quality and Preference, 9(4), 273‐281. 

Brunsø K., Ahle, F.T., Grunert, K.G. (2002) Consumers' food choice and quality perception. Aarhus School 
of Business, MAPP‐Centre for Research on Customer Relations in the Food Sector, Denmark. Available 
at http://pure.au.dk/portal/files/32302886/wp77.pdf. 

Combris, P., Bazoche, P., Giraud‐Héraud, E., & Issanchou, S. (2009). Food choices: What do we learn from 
combining sensory and economic experiments? Food Quality and Preference, 20(8), 550–557. 

De Campos, C. F., Lopes, M. S., e Silva, F. F., Veroneze, R., Knol, E. F., Lopes, P. S., & Guimarães, S. E. (2015). 
Genomic  selection  for  boar  taint  compounds  and  carcass  traits  in  a  commercial  pig  population. 
Livestock Science. 174, 10‐17. 

De Oliveira Faria, M., Cipriano, T. M., da Cruz, A. G., dos Santos, B. A., Pollonio, M. A. R., & Campagnol, P. 
C.  B.  (2015).  Properties  of  bologna‐type  sausages with  pork  back‐fat  replaced with  pork  skin  and 
amorphous cellulose. Meat Science, in Press. 

De Oliveira Faria, M., Cipriano, T. M., da Cruz, A. G., dos Santos, B. A., Pollonio, M. A. R., & Campagnol, P. 
C.  B.  (2015).  Properties  of  bologna‐type  sausages with  pork  back‐fat  replaced with  pork  skin  and 
amorphous cellulose. Meat Science. 

Deliza, R. & MacFie, H.J. (1996). The generation of sensory expectation by external cues and its effect on 
sensory perception and hedonic ratings: a review. Journal of Sensory Studies, 11(2), 103‐128. 

Ding, M.,  Grewal,  R.,  &  Liechty,  J.  (2005).  Incentive‐aligned  conjoint  analysis.  Journal  of Marketing 
Research, 42(1), 67‐82. 

Dransfield, E., Ngapo, T. M., Nielsen, N. A., Bredahl, L., Sjödén, P. O., Magnusson, M., Campo, M. & Nute, 
G. R. (2005). Consumer choice and suggested price for pork as influenced by its appearance, taste and 
information concerning country of origin and organic pig production. Meat Science,69(1), 61‐70. 



25 

EC (2010) European declaration on alternatives to surgical castration of pigs. http://ec.europa.eu/food/ 
animal/welfare/farm/docs/castration_pigs_declaration_en.pdf. Accessed 19 June 2012 

EC, (2005). Attitudes of consumers towards the welfare of farmed animals, Special Eurobarometer 229 / 
Wave 63.2 – TNS Opinion & Social, Directorate General Health and Consumer Protection. 

EC, (2007). Attitudes of EU citizens towards Animal Welfare, Special Eurobarometer 270 / Wave 66.1 – TNS 
Opinion & Social, Directorate‐ General Health and Consumer Protection. 

Ehmke, M.D., Lusk, J.L. & Tyner, W. (2008). Measuring the relative importance of preferences for country 
of origin in China, France, Niger, and the United States. Agricultural Economics, 38(3), 277‐285. 

Fenger, M. H., Aschemann‐Witzel, J., Hansen, F., & Grunert, K. G. (2015). Delicious words–Assessing the 
impact of short storytelling messages on consumer preferences for variations of a new processed meat 
product. Food Quality and Preference, 41, 237‐244. 

Fiebig, D. G.,  Keane, M.  P.,  Louviere,  J., & Wasi, N.  (2010).  The  generalized multinomial  logit model: 
accounting for scale and coefficient heterogeneity. Marketing Science, 29(3), 393‐421. 

Finn, A. & Louviere, J.J. (1992). Determining the appropriate response to evidence of public concern: the 
case of food safety. Journal of Public Policy and Marketing, 11, 12‐25. 

Flores, J. (1997). Mediterranean vs northern European meat products. Processing technologies and main 
differences. Food Chemistry, 59(4), 505‐510. 

Font‐i‐Furnols, M. (2012). Consumer studies on sensory acceptability of boar taint: A review. Meat science, 
92(4), 319‐329. 

Font‐i‐Furnols, M., & Guerrero, L. (2014). Consumer preference, behavior and perception about meat and 
meat products: An overview. Meat Science, 98(3), 361‐371. 

Fortomaris, P., Arsenos, G., Georgiadis, M., Banos, G., Stamataris, C., & Zygoyiannis, D. (2006). Effect of 
meat appearance on consumer preferences for pork chops in Greece and Cyprus. Meat science, 72(4), 
688‐696. 

Franchi, M. (2012). Food choice: beyond the chemical content. International Journal of Food Sciences and 
Nutrition, 63(S1), 17‐28. 

Fredriksen, B., Font i Furnols, M., Lündstrom, K., Migdal, W., Prunier, A., Tuyttens, F.A.M., Bonneau, M., 
(2009). Practice on castration of piglets in Europe. Animal, 3 (11), 1480‐87. 

Gamero‐Negrón, R., del Pulgar, J. S., Ventanas, J., & García, C. (2015). Immune‐spaying as an alternative to 
surgical spaying  in  Iberian× Duroc females: Effect on carcass traits and meat quality characteristics. 
Meat science, 99, 99‐103. 

Glitsch, K. (2000). Consumer perceptions of fresh meat quality: cross‐national comparison. British Food 
Journal, 102(3), 177‐194. 

Greene, W. H., & Hensher, D. A. (2010). Does scale heterogeneity across individuals matter? An empirical 
assessment of alternative logit models. Transportation, 37(3), 413‐428. 

Grunert, K. G. (2005). Food quality and safety: consumer perception and demand. European Review of 
Agricultural Economics, 32(3), 369‐391. 

Grunert, K. G., Bredahl, L., & Brunsø, K. (2004). Consumer perception of meat quality and implications for 
product development in the meat sector—a review. Meat Science, 66(2), 259‐272. 

Grunert, K. G., Hartvig Larsen, H., Madsen, T. K. & Baadsgaard, A. (1996). Market Orientation in Food and 
Agriculture. Norwell, MA: Kluwer. 

Grunert, K. G., Loose, S. M., Zhou, Y., & Tinggaard, S. (2015). Extrinsic and intrinsic quality cues in Chinese 
consumers’  purchase  of  pork  ribs.  Food  Quality  and  Preference,  in  press, 
doi:10.1016/j.foodqual.2015.01.001 

Gunn, M., Allen, P., Bonneau, M., Byrne, D. V., Cinotti, S., & Fredriksen, B. (2004). Welfare aspects of the 
castration of piglets. Scientific report on the scientific panel for animal health and welfare on a request 
from  the Commission  related  to welfare aspects of  the castration of piglets  (Question No. EFSA‐Q‐
2003‐091). EFSA Journal, 91. 



26 

Heid, A., & Hamm, U. (2012). Consumer attitudes towards alternatives to piglet castration without pain 
relief in organic farming: qualitative results from Germany. Journal of agricultural and environmental 
ethics, 25(5), 687‐706. 

Heid, A., & Hamm, U. (2013). Organic consumers’ willingness‐to‐pay for boar meat products before and 
after tasting product samples. Organic agriculture, 3(2), 83‐93. 

Hensher, D., Rose, J. & Greene, W. (2005) Applied choice analysis: A primer. Cambridge University Press: 
Cambridge. 

Huang, C. L., & Fu, J. (1995). Conjoint analysis of consumer preferences and evaluations of a processed 
meat. Journal of International Food & Agribusiness Marketing, 7(1), 35‐53. 

ISO 8589 (2007) Sensory analysis. General guidance for the design of tests rooms.  
Kallas Z.; Gil J.M.; Panella‐Riera N.; Blanch M.; Font‐i‐Furnols M.; Chevillon P.; Tacken G., De Roest, K. & 

Oliver M.A. (2013) effect of tasting and information on consumer opinion about pig castration. Meat 
Science, 95(2), 242–249. 

Kallas, Z. & Gil,  J.M.  (2012). A dual  response  choice experiments  (DRCE) design  to assess  rabbit meat 
preference  in Catalonia A heteroscedastic extreme‐value model. British  Food  Journal, 114  (10‐11), 
1394‐1413. 

Keane, M. 2006. The generalized  logit model: Preliminary  ideas on a  research program. Presentation, 
Motorola‐CenSoC Hong Kong Meeting, October 22, Motorola, Hung Hom, Kowloon, Hong Kong. 

Koistinen, L., Pouta, E., Heikkilä, J., Forsman‐Hugg, S., Kotro, J., Mäkelä, J., & Niva, M. (2013). The impact 
of  fat content, production methods and carbon  footprint  information on consumer preferences  for 
minced meat. Food Quality and Preference, 29(2), 126‐136. 

Krinsky,  I. & Robb,  L.  (1986). On approximating  the  statistical properties of elasticities, The Review of 
Economics and Statistics, 68(4), 715‐719. 

Lancaster, K. (1966) A new approach to consumer theory. Journal of Political Economy, 74, 132‐57. 
Lange,  C.,  Rousseau,  F.  &  Issanchou,  S.  (1998).  Expectation,  liking  and  purchase  behaviour  under 

economical constraint, Food Quality and Preference, 10(1), 31–39 
Leistner, l. (1995) Fermented meats, Stable and safe fermented sausages world‐wide. In Campbell‐Platt, 

G. and Cook, P.E. (Eds.), Vol. 1, Blackie Academic & Professional, Chapman & Hall, UK. 
Lenk, P.  (2011). A comparison of generalized multinomial  logit  (GMNL) and  latent class approaches  to 

studying consumer heterogeneity with some extensions of the GMNL model by Peter J. Lenk. Applied 
Stochastic Models in Business and Industry, 27(6), 580‐583. 

Loureiro, M.  L., & Umberger, W.  J.  (2007). A  choice  experiment model  for  beef: What US  consumer 
responses tell us about relative preferences for food safety, country‐of‐origin labeling and traceability. 
Food policy, 32(4), 496‐514. 

Louviere,  J.  J., D. Street,  L. Burgess, N. Wasi, T.  Islam, A. A.  J. Marley. 2008. Modelling  the choices of 
individuals decision makers by combining efficient choice experiment designs with extra preference 
information. Journal of Choice Model. 1(1) 128–163. 

Louviere, J. J., R. J. Meyer. 2007. Formal choice models of informal choices: What choice modeling research 
can (and can’t) learn from behavioral theory. N. K. Malhotra, ed. Review of Marketing Research. M. E. 
Sharpe, New York, 3–32. 

Lunde, K., Egelandsdal, B., Choinski, J., Mielnik, M., Flåtten, A., & Kubberød, E.  (2008). Marinating as a 
technology  to shift sensory  thresholds  in  ready‐to‐eat entire male pork meat. Meat  science, 80(4), 
1264‐1272. 

Lundström, K., Matthews, R. & Haugen, E. (2009). Pig meat quality from entire males. Animal, 3, 1497‐
1507. 

Lusk, J.L., Roosen, J. & Fox, J.A. (2003). Demand for beef from cattle administered growth hormones or fed 
genetically modified corn: A comparison of consumers in France, Germany, the United Kingdom and 
the United States. American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 85(1), 16–29. 



27 

Malmfors, B., & Lundström, K. (1983). Consumer reactions to boar meat‐a review. Livestock Production 
Science, 10(2), 187‐196. 

McFadden,  D.  (1974)  Conditional  logit  analysis  of  qualitative  choice  behavior.  In  P.  Zarembka,  (Ed) 
Frontiers in econometrics. New York: Academic Press. 

Meier‐Dinkel,  L.,  Trautmann,  J.,  Frieden,  L.,  Tholen,  E.,  Knorr,  C.,  Sharifi, A.  R., & Mörlein, D.  (2013). 
Consumer perception of boar meat as affected by labelling information, malodorous compounds and 
sensitivity to androstenone. Meat science, 93(2), 248‐256. 

Meillon, S., Urbano, C., Guillot, G., & Schlich, P.  (2010). Acceptability of partially dealcoholized wines–
Measuring the impact of sensory and information cues on overall liking in real‐life settings. Food quality 
and preference, 21(7), 763‐773. 

Mørkbak, M.R.,  Christensen,  T.  &  Gyrd‐Hansen,  D.  (2010).  Choke  Price  Bias  in  Choice  Experiments. 
Environmental Resource Economics, 45(4), 537–551 

Mörlein, D., Schiermann, C., Meier‐Dinkel, L., Trautmann, J., Wigger, R., Buttinger, G., & Wicke, M. (2015). 
Effects  of  context  and  repeated  exposure  on  food  liking:  The  case  of  boar  taint.  Food  Research 
International, 67, 390‐399. 

Murphy, R., Howard, S., Woerner, D., Pendell, D., Dixon, C., Desimone, T., Green, M.,Igo, J.,Tatum, J. & 
Belk, K. (2015). Definition, willingness‐to‐pay, and ranking of quality attributes of US pork as defined 
by importers in Asia and Mexico. Journal of animal science, 93(1), 433‐441. 

Ngapo, T. M., Martin,  J.  F., & Dransfield, E.  (2007).  International preferences  for pork appearance:  II. 
Factors influencing consumer choice. Food Quality and Preference, 18(1), 139‐151. 

Oliver. R. L. (1980). A Cognitive Model of the Antecedents of Satisfaction Decisions, Journal of Marketing 
Research, 17, 46‐49. 

Pancras, J., & Dey, D. K. (2011). A comparison of generalized multinomial logit and latent class approaches 
to studying consumer heterogeneity with some extensions of the generalized multinomial logit model. 
Applied Stochastic Models in Business and Industry, 27(6), 567‐578. 

Poole, N., Martínez‐Carrasco, L., & Giménez, F. (2006). Quality perceptions under envolving information 
conditions: Implications for diet, health and consumer satisfaction. Food Policy, 175‐188. 

Prunier, A., Bonneau, M., Von Borell, E., Cinotti, S., Gunn, M., Fredriksen, B., Giersing, M., Morton, D., 
Tuyttens, F.  & Velarde, A. (2006). A review of the welfare consequences of surgical castration in piglets 
and the evaluation of non‐surgical methods. Animal Welfare, 15(3), 277. 

Rault, J. L., Lay, D. C., & Marchant‐Forde, J. N. (2011). Castration induced pain in pigs and other livestock. 
Applied Animal Behaviour Science, 135(3), 214‐225. 

Realini C.E., Kallas, Z., Pérez‐Juan, M., Gómez, I., Olleta, J.L., Berian, M.J.; Albertí, P. & Sañudo, C. (2014) 
Relative  importance  of  cues  underlying  Spanish  consumers’  beef  choice  and  segmentation,  and 
consumer liking of beef enriched with n‐3 and CLA fatty acids. Food Quality and Preference, 33, 74–85. 

Resurreccion, A. (2004). Sensory aspects of consumer choices for meat and meat products. Meat Science, 
66(1), 11‐20. 

Roosen,  J.,  Lusk,  J.L., &  Fox,  J.A.  (2003). Consumer demand  for and attitudes  toward alternative beef 
labeling strategies in France, Germany, and the UK. Agribusiness, 19(1), 77‐90. 

Ryan, M. & Skatum, D. (2004), Modelling non‐demanders in choice experiments. Health Economics, 13(4), 
397‐402. 

Scollan,  N.,  Hocquette,  J.  F.,  Nuernberg,  K.,  Dannenberger,  D.,  Richardson,  I.  & Moloney,  A.  (2006). 
Innovations in beef production systems that enhance the nutritional and health value of beef lipids and 
their relationship with meat quality. Meat Science, 74 (1), 17‐33. 

Speed, R. (1998). Choosing between  line extensions and second brands: The case of the Australian and 
New Zealand wine industries. Journal of Product and Brand Management, 7(6), 519–536. 

Stolzenbach, S., Lindahl, G., Lundström, K., Chen, G., & Byrne, D. (2009). Perceptual masking of boar taint 
in Swedish fermented sausages. Meat science, 81(4), 580‐588. 



28 

Sutherland,  M.  (2015).  Welfare  implications  of  invasive  piglet  husbandry  procedures,  methods  of 
alleviation and alternatives: a review. New Zealand veterinary journal, 63(1), 52‐57. 

Thurstone, L. (1927) A law of comparative judgement. Psychological Review, 34, 273‐286. 
Topel, D. G., Miller, J. A., Berger, P. L., Rust, R. E., Parrish, F. C., Jr. and Ono, K. (1976) Palability and visual 

acceptance of dark, normal and pale coloured porcine m. longissimus. Journal of Food Science 41, 628‐
630. 

Train, K. and Weeks, M. (2005). Discrete choice models in preference space and willingness‐to‐pay space. 
In Alberini, A. and Scarpa, R. (eds), Applications of Simulation Methods in Environmental and Resource 
Economics. Boston/Dordrecht/London: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1–16. 

Tuyttens, F. A., Vanhonacker, F., Verhille, B., De Brabander, D., & Verbeke, W. (2012). Pig producer attitude 
towards surgical castration of piglets without anaesthesia versus alternative strategies. Research  in 
Veterinary Science, 92(3), 524‐530. 

Valeeva, N.  I., Backus, G. B. C., & Baltussen, W. H. M. (2009). Moving towards boar taint‐free meat: an 
overview of alternatives to surgical castration from a chain perspective. In Agriculture: Food, Fiber and 
Energy for the Future–Proceedings of the 17th International Farm Management Congress. 

Verbeke, W.  A.,  &  Viaene,  J.  (2000).  Ethical  challenges  for  livestock  production: Meeting  consumer 
concerns  about meat  safety  and  animal welfare.  Journal of Agricultural  and  Environmental  Ethics, 
12(2), 141‐151. 

Verbeke, W., De Smet, S., Vackier, I., Van Oeckel, M. J., Warnants, N., & Van Kenhove, P. (2005). Role of 
intrinsic  search  cues  in  the  formation  of  consumer  preferences  and  choice  for  pork  chops. Meat 
Science, 69(2), 343‐354. 

Verbeke, W., Pérez‐Cueto, F. J., Barcellos, M. D. D., Krystallis, A. & Grunert, K. G. (2010). European citizen 
and consumer attitudes and preferences regarding beef and pork. Meat Science, 84(2), 284‐292. 

Vestergaard, J. S., Haugen, J. E., & Byrne, D. V. (2006). Application of an electronic nose for measurements 
of boar taint in entire male pigs. Meat Science, 74(3), 564‐577. 

Von Borell, E., Baumgartner, J., Giersing, M., Jäggin, N., Prunier, A., Tuyttens, F. A. M., & Edwards, S. A. 
(2009). Animal welfare  implications of surgical castration and  its alternatives  in pigs. Animal, 3(11), 
1488‐1496.  

Walstra, P.  (1974). Fattening of young boars: quantification of negative and positive aspects. Livestock 
Production Science, 1(2), 187‐196. 

Wesoly, R., Jungbluth, I., Stefanski, V., & Weiler, U. (2015). Pre‐slaughter conditions influence skatole and 
androstenone in adipose tissue of boars. Meat science, 99, 60‐67. 

Whittington, F. M., Zammerini, D., Nute, G. R., Baker, A., Hughes, S. I., & Wood, J. D. (2011). Comparison 
of heating methods and the use of different tissues for sensory assessment of abnormal odours (boar 
taint) in pig meat. Meat science, 88(2), 249‐255. 

 


