





















































Revista Española de Estudios Agrosociales y Pesqueros;NIPO 280-12-046-X;ISSN 1575-1198


33
Revista Española de Estudios Agrosociales y Pesqueros, n.º 235, 2013

Potential and constraints of employing
agricultural biotechnology as a

development tool: GMo cultivation
and small-holder farmers in 
dharmapuri district, India

ELEnA PoLI (*)

TEREsA sERRA dEVEsA (**)

JosÉ MARÍA GIL RoIG (***)

1. InTRoduCTIon

Agricultural biotechnologies (1) have increasingly been regarded by deve-
loping countries’ policymakers as a significant tool for developing their rural
areas and eventually benefit resource-poor farmers. yet, it has become ap-
parent that for these benefits to be realised, a range of technical obstacles
need to be overcome, as well as institutional and socio-economic contexts
to be taken into account, even when the technology is technically feasible. 

In the case of India, in light of the central role Indian governmental agen-
cies attribute to biotechnology to burst rural development, this paper will
examine the actual determinants of access to this technology, as well as
the consequential variety in timing of adoption and benefit distribution
between different categories of farmers. These factors determine how/if

(*) doctoranda en sostenibilidad en el CREdA-uPC-IRTA (Centre de Recerca en economía i desenvolupa-
ment Agroalimentari).

(**) IRTA Researcher CREdA.
(***) director del CREdA-uPC-IRTA.
(1) biotechnology is a very broad term. In this paper, it will be used exclusively referring to the application of

genetic engineering in agricultural biotechnology. 

- Revista Española de Estudios Agrosociales y Pesqueros, n.º 235, 2013 (33-59).
Recibido enero 2013. Revisión final aceptada agosto 2013.



Revista Española de Estudios Agrosociales y Pesqueros, n.º 235, 2013

34

biotechnology can be used as a rural development tool in each specific
location and should therefore be carefully considered at the time of for-
mulating a biotechnology project/policy.

A number of important determinants of the benefits of biotechnology
adoption by small-holders relate to the suitability of the technology for the
needs of the farmers, as well as to issues of access to complementary re-
sources (for example land rights, access to credit and input/output markets)
needed for adoption. In the context of India, suitability of transgenic vari-
eties for small-holder agriculture could be questioned, firstly, in terms of
the appropriateness of the technology to small-holders’ agronomic con-
straints. Thus, the proposed solutions should aim towards assuring biotech-
nology is shaped to tackle their priorities: mainly low-input use, robustness
and capacity to resist abiotic stresses (FAo, 2004; Lipton, 2007). secondly,
concerns can be directed to the possible negative impact the traits embod-
ied in these varieties (mainly referring to pest and herbicide-resistant vari-
eties) can produce on the labour market (de Janvry and sadoulet, 2002). 

Impacts are direct and indirect; while farmers are impacted through changes
in productivity and price, farm-workers are impacted through changes in
wage-rate and employment. In developing countries where land is mostly
unequally distributed and farmers tend to be mostly labourers, biotechnol-
ogy can be designed to benefit both landless workers and land-owner farm-
ers who supplement their incomes by working as labourers on larger farms
(de Janvry and sadoulet, 2000). This can be achieved by focusing research
on the expansion of crop production on previously unusable lands or on
crop production in seasons when it was previously not possible. However,
for this to happen, research needs to target yield increasing traits in labour
intensive and un-mechanised crops. These characteristics should be specif-
ically targeted in research, since much of the biotechnology devices used in
developing countries were initially developed to suit rich country conditions
and constraints – primarily the high labour cost.

Thus far, the problem has been conceived as the suitability of the tech-
nology to tackle poor farmers’ constraints and the solution to assure tech-
nology is developed to meet their needs. However, this is only part of the
picture. As access to complementary resources affects adoption (Feder et
al., 1985), understanding the constrictions farmers face in accessing those

Elena Poli, Teresa serra devesa y José María Gil Roig



35
Revista Española de Estudios Agrosociales y Pesqueros, n.º 235, 2013

resources is crucial in determining adoption and benefit derived from the
technology. When access to input markets is constrained by inefficient
infrastructures and marketing system, seeds cannot get to the farmers in
marginal and remote areas (Acharya, 2006). Moreover, when transgenic
seeds are costly, lack of credit may disallow farmers from adopting this
technology innovation (Qaim and de Janvry, 2003; Ameden et al., 2005;
Giné and klonner, 2006). In addition, there may be comprehension and
learning constraints to deal with the new system (stone, 2007), as the qual-
ity and source of information is proved to be a critical factor in influencing
farmers’ adoption and benefit from this technology (Tripp and Pal, 2000;
Marra et al., 2001; Tripp, 2001; stone, 2011). Eventually, on access to
input and output markets, depends whether or not farmers will be able
to access the new technology and benefit from increases in production
(shilpi and umali-deininger, 2008).

Moreover, the different timing of adoption can also impact on the distri-
bution of the benefits of this technology (burton et al., 1999). If adoption
of the improved varieties depends on particular resources and if large
holders/better off farmers tend to have better access to these inputs than
small-holders (because of their wealth or social-cultural reasons), then in
that context, the technology will produce different timing of adoption,
which, in turn will impact on the distribution of the benefits of the tech-
nology (2) (Giné and klonner, 2006; severn-Walsh, 2006). As described
in Lipton (2007) relative to the increased production derived from bt cot-
ton, the risk is that once local production rises (due to richer farmers
being early-adopters), prices and income may result depressed. Thus the
late-comers would lose from price falls when others adopted bt varieties,
but would also benefit less when they eventually adopt bt seeds (Lipton,
2007). This process produces consequences over local inequalities. Evi-
dence is provided by Morse et al. (2007) who show that adopting bt cotton
reduced inequality among growers but increased inequality for non-
adopters (Morse et al., 2007). 

Potential and constraints of employing agricultural biotechnology as a development tool: GMo cultivation and small-holder...

(2) In this regard, wealth is proved to overcome supply constraints and give enhanced access to the new techno-
logy. Giné and klonner (2006) identify determinants of the timing of technology adoption as well as resulting in-
come and inequality dynamics during this process. Moreover, severn-Walsh (2006) analyzes the factors affecting
the adoption of transgenic bt cotton by smallholder farmers in Tamil nadu. The author finds farmers with larger
farms and greater overall wealth to be more likely to adopt, and benefit, from bt cotton relative to farmers with
smaller farms or less wealth.



Revista Española de Estudios Agrosociales y Pesqueros, n.º 235, 2013

36

Therefore, if differences in adoption depend on unequal access to comple-
mentary inputs, then this finding has important policy implications and in-
dicates that assuring a more equitable adoption of biotechnologies may not
exclusively depend upon a shift in the research approach, but also on the
establishment of measures that ensure better access for the small-holders
to these complementary inputs. using field survey data from bt cotton farm-
ers in Tamil nadu, we attempt to identify what are the constraints that farm-
ers face in accessing this technology and reaping benefits from it. These
answers will spread light on the chances and the constraints for agricultural
biotechnology to serve the purpose of agricultural and rural development. 

The paper has four sections. section I presents the case of India, one of
the first among the developing countries to identify biotechnology as a
major tool for the development of its rural areas. Firstly, the institutional
framework set by India’s central state is considered. secondly, the analysis
narrows its focus on the biotechnology policies defined at the state level
– taking the case of Tamil nadu into consideration. section II presents
the empirical setting of the paper, wherein a brief note on the study area
as well as the sampling design is presented. section III proposes a cate-
gorisation of the socio-economic constraints encountered by farmers in
accessing and benefiting from biotechnology. These considerations allow
drawing some conclusions regarding the impact of biotechnology appli-
cations on the rural structure and specifically on the smallholders.

From this categorization it will be concluded that to be used as develop-
ment tools, biotechnology projects and policies need to be integrated with
socio-economic considerations. However, this task could prove to be not
only time-consuming and resource-expensive, but indeed a difficult and
complex challenge. The concluding section (section IV) will tackle this
question and eventually propose a number of pointers for policy. 

2. bIoTECHnoLoGy As A dEVELoPMEnT TooL

2.1. Institutional framework at the national level: the case of India

As an active contributor to an international dispute over the potentialities
and the risks of agricultural biotechnology, India adds its own specific is-
sues to this debate. Concerns over the efficacy of the technology, the con-

Elena Poli, Teresa serra devesa y José María Gil Roig



37
Revista Española de Estudios Agrosociales y Pesqueros, n.º 235, 2013

trol of agriculture by multinational companies, farmers’ rights, as well as
the role of the state and public research, explain the endurance and fer-
vour of the controversy (for a more detailed discussion see bharathan,
2000; Gupta and Chandak, 2005 and scoones, 2003). Ahead of this de-
bate, stands high political support. The recent biotechnology policies of
the Indian government demonstrate the eagerness with which politicians
and prominent members of the elite scientific establishment are exploring
the potential for transgenic technology to bring economic growth and
meet food security needs.

India has been one of the first among the developing countries to have
attributed a major role to biotechnology as a tool for the advancement of
the agricultural sector as early as the 1980s (Chaturvedi, 2005). This recog-
nition, sided by a significant increase in government spending to promote
this sector, was formalized by the establishment of a fully-fledged govern-
ment department, the department of biotechnology.

The objective of the department is stated as: “attaining new heights in
biotechnology research, shaping biotechnology into a premier precision
tool of the future for creation of wealth and ensuring social justice – espe-
cially for the welfare of the poor” (dbT, 2001). In the discourse of the
national government, with regards to the national biotechnology devel-
opment strategy, the attainment of “new heights” in biotechnology re-
search is explicitly related to agricultural development, with a specific
focus on the poor (dbT, 2007).

Moreover, with biotechnology being seen as a key “new economy” indus-
try following India’s information technology (IT) success, the promotion
of biotechnology in policy making is increasingly being regarded as a key
aspect for future economic growth. This is true not only at the level of
the central government but also at state level.

As the states of Andhra Pradesh, karnataka, Maharashtra, Gujarat, kerala
and Tamil nadu draw up their own sub-national biotechnology policies,
the “enthusiasm with which Chief Ministers and state policy-makers have
latched onto the “IT to bT” hype” (seshia and scoones, 2003) has be-
come evident. In order to attract the biotechnology industry to their re-
spective states, they promised fiscal and infrastructural support measures

Potential and constraints of employing agricultural biotechnology as a development tool: GMo cultivation and small-holder...



Revista Española de Estudios Agrosociales y Pesqueros, n.º 235, 2013

38

similar to the ones already available to the IT sector, such as tax conces-
sions, capital subsidies, the creation of industrial infrastructure, special
economic zones, technology incubators, and so on (Chaturvedi, 2005;
konde, 2008).

The next section highlights this process through the case of Tamil nadu;
the state’s specific policies on biotechnology regulation and promotion
are analyzed. This analysis serves to characterize the institutional frame-
work of our case study of dharmapuri district.

2.2. Institutional framework at the state level: Tamil nadu

“Tamil nadu has emerged as a front ranking state in attracting invest-
ments. The growth in knowledge-based industries in the state in recent
years has been phenomenal. In order to consolidate these gains and carry
the state forward in the path of economic development, the Government
of Tamil nadu has decided to focus on another knowledge-based indus-
try, i.e., biotechnology” Tn Government, biotechnology Policy 2000-01.

Tamil nadu was the first Indian state to develop its own biotechnology
policy, doing so under the guidance of M.s. swaminathan. The influence
of swaminathan, whose efforts in biotechnology are explicitly related to
poverty-uplifting strategies, is clearly visible throughout government policy. 

The institutional approach of Tamil nadu is analyzed by scoones (2006)
as “part of a familiar policy discourse in which state governments, in part-
nership with the centre and (somewhat more vaguely) the private sector,
committed themselves to a public enterprise aimed at the broad develop-
mental goals of tackling poverty and encouraging economic uplift”
(scoones, 2006: 209). According to this framework, the government fo-
cused on two main strategies in order to exploit the potential of biotech-
nology for the benefit of the farmers and the agricultural sector as a whole:
strengthening the coverage of extension services and their competence in
new technologies and encouraging a public-private partnership in spread-
ing biotechnology through the promotion of contract/corporate farming
(TnAd, 2007-08). both these propositions are part of a bigger strategy
initiated nationwide in India.

Elena Poli, Teresa serra devesa y José María Gil Roig



39
Revista Española de Estudios Agrosociales y Pesqueros, n.º 235, 2013

on one side, a nationwide reform of public extension aimed at transform-
ing this service into a demand-driven, broad-based and holistic system
(birner and Anderson, 2007). (3) In line with this reform, Tamil nadu
proposed the replacement of the “top-down approach” with the “bottom-
up approach” at village level; specifically promoting the “group approach”
to replace the traditional “training and visit approach” (TnAd, 2007-
2008: 25). Moreover, in setting its policy to reform extension services, the
Government called for the need of specific attention to provide women
farmers with appropriate technology, training, and information. 

on the other side, the government’s policy aimed at encouraging public-
private partnership in promoting biotechnology uptake in the rural areas
through contract/corporate farming arrangements. As expressed in the
Policy note “to link farmers with the assured marketing and to protect
the interest of both the farmer and the industry, contract farming is pro-
moted by the state Government through department of Agriculture”
(TnAd, 2007-2008: 15). Although among the public institutional sphere
this arrangement appeared to be a priority for rural development, its mer-
its and demerits are still subject to strong disagreement (see Erappa, 2006). 

This institutional framework helps characterizing the area being studied
in this research article: the dharmapuri district in the state of Tamil
nadu.

3. EMPIRICAL sETTInG

dharmapuri district is located in the north Western part of Tamil nadu.
It is the second most populated district of the state, as well as one of the
poorest and least ranked in terms of the Human development Index
(Government of Tn, 2003). The economy of dharmapuri is mainly agrar-
ian in nature. Almost seventy percent of the workforce is dependent on
agriculture and allied activities. In the arid and semi-arid harsh environ-
mental conditions of the district (the region receives only 400 to 500 mil-
limetres of rainfall annually and less than 10 percent of farmland is

Potential and constraints of employing agricultural biotechnology as a development tool: GMo cultivation and small-holder...

(3) For more details on the strategies adopted nationwide to strengthen agricultural extension systems see sulai-
man (2003) on the implemented innovations; sulaiman and Hall (2002) on the challenges encountered during the
reform and Raabe (2008) for a review of what eventually worked where and why.



irrigated) crops like paddy, millets, pulses and cotton account for the
major area under cultivation (CARds, 2008; smale et al., 2009). 

As in the rest of the state, in dharmapuri the uptake of genetically engi-
neered crops has been very rapid. Traditionally belonging to the cotton
belt, the release and promotion of genetically modified (GM) cotton has
produced a visible change on the district’s agricultural production and dis-
tribution structure, as well as on the labour market.

Revista Española de Estudios Agrosociales y Pesqueros, n.º 235, 2013

40

Elena Poli, Teresa serra devesa y José María Gil Roig

Figure 1

MAP oF IndIA And dHARMAPuRI dIsTRICT, TAMIL nAdu



41
Revista Española de Estudios Agrosociales y Pesqueros, n.º 235, 2013

our exploratory study of dharmapuri district aims at analysing these
changes in the life of the cotton small-holder farmers. For this purpose,
five cotton-growing villages were randomly selected (Mukkanur, kuppur,
settikarai, Adagappadi and bolanahalli) to conduct a survey. Information
was collected from a sample of 100 farm managers (out of which 24 per-
cent were women) who had cultivated bt cotton crop during kharif season
2007. 41 % of our sample farms owned less than 5 acres of land and 59
% owned 5 to 10 acres, reflecting the district’s landholding distribution.
Given the difficulties of obtaining an official census of cotton farmers in
each village, the purposive sampling method was applied to select bt cot-
ton farmers. official farmer records were available only for bt cotton
farmers under contract, whose particular characteristics (generally more
educated and equipped with irrigation facilities) did not represent the ac-
tual situation of the farmers in this area. 

data were gathered on farmers’ socio-economic characteristics, input-out-
put quantities and management practices; moreover information on farm-
ers’ access to extension information and institutional support was
gathered. The following Table 1 summarises the results of the main qual-
itative socio-economic data collected.

Potential and constraints of employing agricultural biotechnology as a development tool: GMo cultivation and small-holder...

Table 1

dEFInITIon And suMMARy sTATIsTICs oF QuALITATIVE soCIo-EConoMIC dATA
Variable Description Percentage

GENDER
1. Male
2. Female

76%
24%

EDUCATION

1. Illiterate
2. Functionally literate
3. Primary schooling
4. Middle schooling
5. Secondary schooling
6. Above secondary schooling

12%
28%
38%
16%
6%
0%

YEARS OF BT COTTON CULTIVATION

1. First Year
2. Second Year
3. Third Year
4. More than three years

10%
18%
56%
16%

SOURCES OF INCOME
1. Only agricultural
2. Other sources

86%
14%

MEMBERSHIP OF FARMING

ORGANIZATIONS

1. No memberships
2. Yes of Self-Help-Group
3. Yes of Farmers ‘club
4. Yes of Cooperative

85%
12%
3%
0%



Revista Española de Estudios Agrosociales y Pesqueros, n.º 235, 2013

42

Quantitative survey results can be summarised as follows: sample farms
cultivate, on average, 6.6 acres of land (usually owned by farms) that yield
7,8 quintals of cotton per acre. The large majority of plots are rain-fed,
whereas the main form of irrigation is through bore-dug wells. The aver-
age income obtained per quintal is slightly below 3,500 rupees. Among
production costs, hired labor is the most relevant, followed by fertilizer,
pesticides and seeds. The low cost of seeds is due to government inter-
vention, which in 2006 set maximum retail prices for bt seeds at Rs 750
per packet, which was less than half the price previously charged by seed
companies. The average per quintal net income is around 1,250 rupees.
Farm income represents almost 86% of the income obtained by sample
households. sample farms rarely own farm machinery, being the tenure
of a bullock more common (around 44% of sample farms). Around 92%
of sample farms sell their produce to the state’s Co-operative spinning
Mills Federation, being the rest sold to private agents. 

4. REsuLTs And dIsCussIon

Extensive reviews of technology adoption studies in developing countries
can be find in the academic literature (starting from the reference works
of Feder et al., 1985 and Feder and umali, 1993). There are number of
factors that have been found to influence the extent of adoption of tech-
nology such as its characteristics or attributes; the profile of the adopter,
the change agent (extension worker, or the retail companies promoting the
technology, etc.); and the socio-economic and physical environment in
which the technology is introduced. The socio-cultural traits of the farmers
are also important. His/her age, education, income, family size, tenure sta-
tus, credit access, social status and beliefs also influence adoption. The
personal characteristics of extension workers (or the seed company/seed
shop/fellow farmers etc. which are sponsoring the technology) such as trust-
worthiness, good relationship with farmers, ability to communicate with
farmers and previous experience, are important at the time of technology
acceptance. The biophysical environment also plays a role. The conditions
of the farm, which include its location, availability of resources and other
facilities such as roads, markets, transportation, irrigation facilities, soil type,
and electricity matter as well. Least, but not last, the price of the outcome
product is taken into account by farmers at the time of adopting. 

Elena Poli, Teresa serra devesa y José María Gil Roig



43
Revista Española de Estudios Agrosociales y Pesqueros, n.º 235, 2013

In our study of dharmapuri district, we attempt to identify the actual
complementary inputs which affect the capacity of small-holder farmers
to adopt and benefit from adoption of bt cotton. For this purpose, sample
farmers were enquired on the three main factors considered as priorities
for improving their quality of farming and farm management. Farmers
were asked to rank priorities out of four factors/options given to them
based on preliminary qualitative interviews: “Insurance against crop fail-
ure”, “Credit provision”, “Input/output market access” and
“Extension/Technical information”. The results revealed three high pri-
orities, as shown in Figure 2, identified as “Credit” “Extension informa-
tion” and “Market Access”. A more in-depth analysis of these three factors
is presented below.

Potential and constraints of employing agricultural biotechnology as a development tool: GMo cultivation and small-holder...

Figure 2

PRIoRITIEs EXPREssEd by sAMPLE FARMERs To IMPRoVE THEIR QuALITy oF FARMInG



Revista Española de Estudios Agrosociales y Pesqueros, n.º 235, 2013

44

Access to credit

For biotechnology to spread over rural areas, smallholder cotton growers
need to acquire the necessary production inputs. In many instances, credit
is the major constraint. The type of credit available often plays a large role
in determining what inputs are available to farmers, and indirectly, it af-
fects the risk behaviour of the famers, thereby affecting technology choice
and adoption (Ameden et al., 1995; Qaim and de Janvry, 2003; Giné and
klonner, 2006 and komicha and Öhlmer, 2006). 

In the case of India, most rural families have inadequate savings to finance
farming activities which, coupled with the seasonality of agricultural in-
come, makes credit availability a fundamental precondition for the adop-
tion of biotechnology. The case of bt cotton adds new facets to this
situation. With the emergence of bt cotton, local input markets became
highly integrated with the seed, pesticide as well as fertiliser companies.
As a result, farmers have been mostly compelled to buy the seed, insecti-
cides and fertilisers from the same shop (Viswanathan and Lalitha, 2009).
Though sales of seeds are not on credit, sales of insecticides and fertilisers
can be on credit. buying inputs on credit would be helpful if small-holders
could rely on a sound system of formal agricultural credit. However, the
Indian agricultural credit sector has not yet been able to respond to the
existing high demand for agricultural loans (4); restriction that has pushed
certain categories of farmers to depend on seed shops and moneylenders
for their credit needs. 

The difficulties to access formal sources of credit are even higher when
farmers own low quality and rain-fed lands. These farmers find themselves
excluded from accessing loans, firstly because land is usually retained as
collateral and credit institutions consider the actual size of landholding
and the quality of land as an important indicator of the creditworthiness
of the borrower. secondly, apart from land, other valuable assets– partic-
ularly agricultural machineries and equipment – and the proportion of

Elena Poli, Teresa serra devesa y José María Gil Roig

(4) Explanations for the inner causes of this malfunction are many as described in Harris (1980), basu (1997)
and reviewed recently by Giné and klonner (2006).

(5) A further issue is that of social discrimination. Credit-disbursing officials may discriminate against lower caste
and tribal farmers: first, because this stratum of the society retains less political leverage; and second, because of
the predominance of higher caste decision-makers in credit institutions (sahu et al., 2004; kalpana, 2008).



45
Revista Española de Estudios Agrosociales y Pesqueros, n.º 235, 2013

non-farm income are also used as creditworthiness indicators. Thirdly,
an assured source of irrigation and crop insurance are perceived by banks
as adding to the reliability of crop production and therefore to the cred-
itworthiness of the farmer (5) (as detailed in sahu et al., 2004). Given the
large proportion of farmers lacking these requirements, it is not surprising
that at present there is considerable unmet demand for rural credit
(Acharya, 2006; Golait, 2007; sidhu et al., 2008; Chaudhuri and Cherical,
2012), which mainly affects marginal and low-income farmers.

This situation is reflected in the results of our study of dharmapuri, as
detailed in Figure 3, which summarises the responses of sample farmers
on access to agricultural credit and its sources. 

Potential and constraints of employing agricultural biotechnology as a development tool: GMo cultivation and small-holder...

Figure 3

sAMPLE FARMERs’ ACCEss To AGRICuLTuRAL CREdIT And ITs dIFFEREnT souRCEs



Revista Española de Estudios Agrosociales y Pesqueros, n.º 235, 2013

46

Access to credit not only affects the inputs available to cotton farmers, but
also the income they can get out of bt technology. depending on their
credit access and its terms, farmers are able to afford different timing of
sales to the open market, which in turns affects the price obtained for the
produce. since small farmers need cash more urgently, they are forced
to sell their produce immediately after the harvest, when prices are
generally low. on the contrary, wealth and/or access to capital enable large
farmers to withhold their produce and sell when prices rise, during
periods of scarcity (sahu et al., 2004).

nevertheless, if small-holders were affiliated to a strong producer associ-
ation, they may gain better access to various sources of credit and thus to
the expensive inputs related to bt technology. However, to run such or-
ganizations and assure their long-term sustainability is not an easy task, as
appeared in our exploratory study of dharmapuri. There, cases of small-
holder farmers participating in any kind of producer associations were
very rare. none of the bt cotton farmers interviewed was part of a coop-
erative and a small percentage of them were part of a farmers’ club or
self-help group, with no more than ten members.

All over India, however, many different new options to promote farmer
organizations have been conceived and new institutional channels for
credit are being undertaken: financial self-help organisations, landless
credit and savings groups as well as partnership of these new institutions
with formal financial ones such as the sHG-bank Linkage (basu, 1997;
Acharya, 2006; Golait, 2007). The challenge is now to determine which
agency could be best suited for the provision of credit to farmers to adopt
and benefit from biotechnology applications; and how the complementary
measures could best be integrated with the provision of such credit. 

Access to information and extension services

Although for centuries farmers’ observation and experimentation have
been responsible for the diffusion of many new varieties, in the case of
biotechnology it has become much harder for farmers to distinguish
among options, particularly if they embody cryptic qualities. It is the case
for varieties which have been nutritionally enhanced or made resistant to

Elena Poli, Teresa serra devesa y José María Gil Roig



47
Revista Española de Estudios Agrosociales y Pesqueros, n.º 235, 2013

particular diseases but that without adequate information are hard to dis-
tinguish from conventional ones. This is also the case of bt cotton. 

since its introduction to the Indian market, this technology has been char-
acterized by a wave of contradictory advertising, campaigning, and lobby-
ing aimed at farmers, with misleading information being spread by its
supporters and opponents alike (see stone, 2011 and Glover, 2010 for
an in-depth analysis). This load of misleading information has been sided
by the proliferation of many new bt cotton varieties introduced in the
market every year. This process has generated a complex scenario for
farmers to experience with bt cotton either through environmental or so-
cial learning, eventually slowing down the build-up of their own knowledge
based on direct experience. 

Problems of miss-information on new agricultural technologies are wide-
spread all over India (birner and Anderson, 2007). our exploratory study
identifies the sources of information available to cotton farmers in
dharmapuri district and acknowledges the potential repercussions of a
lack of adequate information provision on bt cotton farmers. After en-
quiring about their access to extension services and its sources, farmers
were asked to select the category of information provider on which they
would rely first when seeking technical information on seeds and crop
production. Farmers could choose between “seed dealers”, “private crop
consultants”, “government extension officials”, “other farmers”, “scien-
tists”, “farmers’ associations” “press/tv/radio” and “other.” The responses
indicated “seed dealers” as the first choice for the large majority of farm-
ers, followed by “other farmers” and “press/tv/radio”. details of the re-
sponses are reported in Figure 4. 

Given this general lack of public extension support (6), based on prelimi-
nary qualitative interviews, sample farmers were asked to explain the char-
acteristics they attributed to bt cotton seeds prior to planting, given the
information received. A number of features were in some cases wrongly at-

Potential and constraints of employing agricultural biotechnology as a development tool: GMo cultivation and small-holder...

(6) Governmental extension services were criticised by the farmers interviewed on various grounds: insufficient
coverage, technical weakness and gender biases. However, behind this malfunctioning there are causes which are
beyond the control of extension workers. It is the case of outdated pre-service education, inadequate in-service
training, low salaries and status, and the need to cover a large number of farmers without having a sufficient ope-
rational budget and transportation facilities (Glendenning et al., 2010).



Revista Española de Estudios Agrosociales y Pesqueros, n.º 235, 2013

48

tributed to and, thus, expected from bt seeds (for example resistance to
abiotic stresses and yield increase) which showed misconceptions about the
actual purpose of this technology. Figure 5 summarises farmers’ responses.

The implications of this miss-information were evident in the case of com-
pliance with specific farming management practices related to bt cultiva-
tion, namely refugia. none of the farmers interviewed planted refugia and
none of them was aware of its purpose. 

The flood of misleading information produced along the spread of this
new technology, coupled with the existence of a largely unregulated seed
market, calls for the need of providing farmers with specific information
support (Tripp, 2001). If this information is lacking, the effectiveness of
the technology could be undermined and the technology be indeed harm-

Elena Poli, Teresa serra devesa y José María Gil Roig

Figure 4

sAMPLE FARMERs’ ACCEss To EXTEnsIon sERVICEs And TECHnICAL InFoRMATIon



49
Revista Española de Estudios Agrosociales y Pesqueros, n.º 235, 2013

ful to farmers. For instance, as for the case of pest controlling varieties, if
farmers are unaware of the actual properties of bt cotton, one can hardly
expect that they will reduce their level of pesticide use. This was con-
firmed by a survey of bt cotton farmers in Gujarat and Maharashtra con-
ducted by shetty (2004) who found that farmers followed an unnecessary
high spraying schedule, which led to the development of resistance in the
bollworm, hence the increase of pest infestation, lowering the yield of bt
cotton in the region (7). It follows that absence of extension support and
a lack of farmers’ knowledge can considerably limit the potential eco-
nomic, environmental and health benefits of biotechnology application
(Glover, 2010).

Availability of market information is another essential aspect of informa-
tion for farmers to benefit from biotechnology. Market information allows
the process of price discovery and transmission of price signals, thereby
allowing farmers to acquire the benefits of increased production.

Potential and constraints of employing agricultural biotechnology as a development tool: GMo cultivation and small-holder...

(7) similar results are presented in Viswanathan and Lalitha (2009). In other significant studies on farmers’ mi-
sinformation and over-use of pesticides against bt cotton pests, market and institutional failure are found to be the
main causes (yang et al., 2005; Pemsl and Waibel, 2005).

Figure 5

CHARACTERIsTICs ATTRIbuTEd by sAMPLE FARMERs To bT CoTTon sEEds PRIoR
To PLAnTInG



Revista Española de Estudios Agrosociales y Pesqueros, n.º 235, 2013

50

nonetheless, this is a widely lamented issue all over India, where there is
no adequate agency to disseminate information relating to markets such
as prices, demand, government policies, and so forth (Choubey et al.,
2005; Glendenning et al., 2012). stone (2011) provides a fruitful discus-
sion of the new ways proposed by the Indian government to supply mar-
ket information to cotton farmers, although the problem is still far from
being resolved. 

In the light of these constraints, the challenge is to understand what kind
of information would allow farmers to take advantage of such technology
and how to deliver it best. This implies examining farmers’ own informa-
tion management capacity as individuals as well as farmer organisation;
pondering on the options of providing information through public and/or
private extension and under what circumstances; and examining the per-
formance of the seed industry in providing inputs and information to the
resource-poor farmers (Glenndening et al., 2012).

Access to input and output markets

The Indian agricultural marketing system suffers from a number of struc-
tural weaknesses related to the large inadequacy of transportation facilities,
the non–availability of market information, and the high market volatility
(Acharya, 2006). This situation is mirrored in Tamil nadu, where agri-
cultural markets, generally small in size and heavily congested, offer only
few facilities and limited infrastructure (shilpi and umali-deininger,
2008).

A project aiming at improving the livelihood of small farmers through
biotechnology should take these deficiencies into account. And it should
for a number of reasons. Firstly, farmers’ need to buy fresh seeds for every
new crop season calls for the strengthening of physical seed market infra-
structure. Without adequate input markets, biotech varieties that would
benefit certain particular areas, either because of social or environmental
characteristics, are unlikely to reach farmers. Equally, the absence of ad-
equate output market functioning may offset the benefit provided by in-
creased production (Qaim, 1999 and smith, 2007). A significant increase
in production could lead to flooded local markets and reduced local

Elena Poli, Teresa serra devesa y José María Gil Roig



51
Revista Española de Estudios Agrosociales y Pesqueros, n.º 235, 2013

prices. This means the benefit capture of biotechnology-driven increase
in production depends on access to markets. 

It is thus important to consider how different capacities to access input
and output markets impact on different categories of farmers and what
the distributional implications of this process are. A number of studies
have shown how wealth confers benefits in accessing market facilities.
shilpi and umali-deininger (2008) observe that wealthy farmers in Tamil
nadu are able to capture a disproportionate share of the benefits from
the facilities available at congested markets. This is consistent with the
benefit conferred by wealth to the early adopters as discussed in serra et
al. (2008). As Acharya (2004) noted in the context of Indian markets, this
may happen either because wealthy farmers are able to afford better trans-
portation facilities or because their wider social network ensures lesser
waiting time in accessing facilities at the market place. 

Therefore, on one hand, there is a dire need of additional investments in
market facilities to benefit poorer farmers. on the other, if small-holders
were affiliated to a strong association, advantages would be felt also at the
time of selling their produce. In the case of dharmapuri, all of the farmers
interviewed lamented the high volatility of cotton prices and that no farm-
ers’ association would support them at the market place. Given the im-
perfection of the cotton marketing system which often forces farmers to
sell their cotton as ungraded, being member of a producer organization
would substantially improve their bargaining power vis-a-vis companies
and market functionaries (Choubey et al., 2005). These organisations
could in fact arrange to collect products from small farms, manage the
grading, storing and transportation either to private companies or at the
open market (Choubey et al. 2005). These are important challenges which
have great implications for the viability of bt technology and sustainability
of the bt production system.

5. ConCLusIons

A sustainable future for Indian agriculture with the presence of GM tech-
nology in general and bt technology in particular, would essentially call for
many reforms, development strategies and institutional and policy inter-

Potential and constraints of employing agricultural biotechnology as a development tool: GMo cultivation and small-holder...



Revista Española de Estudios Agrosociales y Pesqueros, n.º 235, 2013

52

ventions embracing a wide spectrum of activities such as the restructuring
of both input and output markets. Ahead of this, realising how the desired
changes we expect from the introduction of biotechnology applications are
intertwined with the socio-cultural and economic dimension, calls for a re-
flection of how the interaction between these factors should be taken into
account and what are the advantages and disadvantages of so doing.

Taking into account the socio-economic dimension of biotechnology not
only demands for a complex set of technical considerations in determin-
ing the impact of every new trait introduced, but also for an evaluation of
every crop in its own social and economic context (stone, 2007). Hence,
integrating these perspectives into crop biotechnology research and cre-
ating policies that can correspond to the new realities associated with this
technology are crucial challenges the agricultural policy makers in the de-
veloping world are facing. The main challenge is that every variety which
is introduced and promoted, although with a pro-poor purpose, will pro-
duce both winners and losers in the rural society. Moreover, the devel-
opmental impact of technically successful varieties can be heavily limited
by non-technical issues (such as difficulties in marketing the increased
production). Thus, it appears how necessary are both farmers’ participa-
tion and long-term interaction with the scientific establishment; firstly at
the moment of designing the technology and then progressively in fine-
tuning the technology to suit farmers’ needs as the socio-economic envi-
ronment changes. 

However, to date, very few participatory exercises with resource poor
farmers have led to the implementation of biotechnology research projects
(FAo, 2004). This is because involving farmers is not easy, as they tend
to lose interest if results take a long time, which is often the case in re-
search. Moreover, participatory research in biotechnology faces the limi-
tations that are common to the programmes using a participatory
bottom-up approach: the time lag between project identification, the de-
velopment of the technology and its availability to farmers. These are the
disadvantages that create reluctance in actually including socio-economic
considerations when designing biotechnology projects. In fact, when the
method applied for formulating projects’ activities becomes more time-
consuming, more complex and resource-expensive, donors and imple-

Elena Poli, Teresa serra devesa y José María Gil Roig



53
Revista Española de Estudios Agrosociales y Pesqueros, n.º 235, 2013

menting organisations may wonder whether such process is necessary. In
other words, the advantage of conducting costly socio-economic studies
involving farmers should be considered (8). nevertheless, a number of
biotechnology projects structured with an interactive participatory process
have proved how participation can be valuable in this case (Van de Fliert
and braun, 2002; Laxmi et al., 2007). Whether the approach to biotech-
nology transfer be participatory, partnership-based or science led (Hall et
al., 2001), the matter of whether or not to take into account social ele-
ments becomes not only a question of making the implementation of the
project more time-consuming or resource intensive; it becomes further-
more a question of choosing until what point specific groups’ current so-
cial and economic characteristics should impact on the upholding project.
This is a question which is faced at every step of the process from tech-
nology design to its delivery to the field. It could be taken as an example
the delivery of biotechnology-related information to the rural areas.

This task presupposes a prior choice of “how to train” and “who to train”:
whether to train a number of trainers or to train farmers directly could be
the first question. If the second option is chosen, it could be questioned
whether training should be targeted directly towards the resource-poor
farmers or, alternatively, towards the better-off ones and then expect tech-
nology to spread to other layers of the farming community. Furthermore,
a choice would be needed regarding training women and/or men farmers
and on which subjects respectively. 

These questions are still open but shed light on how biotechnology re-
search could be directed to address particular needs and societal aims
without regarding socio-economic frames as something rigid and everlast-
ing. otherwise one would be missing out how the social and economic
environment is continuously changing and how it adapts to new condi-
tions. However, such balance is not easy to achieve, and also it is complex
to work out the dilemma of how to bring a change without provoking an
alteration of the system. This is why farmer’s participation becomes so
important in this process.

Potential and constraints of employing agricultural biotechnology as a development tool: GMo cultivation and small-holder...

(8) broerse and bunders, (2000) and Thro and spillane (2000) suggest several reasons as to why participatory
research related to biotechnology is needed and which are its drawbacks.



Revista Española de Estudios Agrosociales y Pesqueros, n.º 235, 2013

54

Integrating these perspectives into crop biotechnology research is a chal-
lenge that developing countries’ agricultural policy makers need to con-
front. While it is clear that the private sector will pursue its own interest
in developing specific aims in research and commercialisation of biotech-
nological traits, public research has the potential and duty to tackle the
question. developing countries with strong research capacity in biotech-
nology can (re)design this technology according to their specific socio-
economic aims. Here, one may understand that as any other technology,
biotechnology also has a social dimension besides technical dimensions.
Likewise, biotechnology can hold specific socio-economic aims. As it has
been previously shown, certain biotechnological developments within a
specific socio-economic context will benefit certain categories of farmers
while there will be other categories which will be negatively affected. At
this point, the challenge facing the agricultural policy makers in the de-
veloping world is to settle a social negotiating process involving farmers
and the public scientific establishment in order to discuss further devel-
opments of this technology. This way, the technological change intro-
duced by biotechnology can be directed to respond to clear societal targets
and aims.

REFEREnCEs

ACHARyA, s.s. (2006). Agricultural Marketing and Rural Credit for strengthe-
ning India Agriculture. InMR Policy brief . Asian development bank.

ACHARyA, s.s. (2004). Agricultural Marketing in India, Part of the Millennium
study of Indian Farmers, Report 17, Academic Foundation Publishers, new
delhi.

AMEdEn, H., QAIM, M., and zILbERMAn, d. (2005). Adoption of agricultural
biotechnology in developing countries. In J. Cooper, L. Lipper, and d.zil-
berman (Eds.), Agricultural biodiversity and biotechnology: Economic issues
and framework for analysis (p. 329–358). boston: springer Publishing.

bAsu, s. (1997). Why Institutional Credit Agencies are Reluctant to Lend to
the Rural Poor: p. A Theoretical Analysis of the Indian Rural Credit Market.
World development, 25 (2): p. 267-280. 

bHARATHAn, G. (2000). bt-Cotton in India: anatomy of a controversy. Current
science, 79 (8): p. 1067-1075.

Elena Poli, Teresa serra devesa y José María Gil Roig



55
Revista Española de Estudios Agrosociales y Pesqueros, n.º 235, 2013

bIRnER, R., and AndERson, J. (2007). How to make agricultural extension de-
mand-driven? The case of India’s agricultural extension policy. discussion
Paper 00729. Washington d.C.: p. International Food Policy Research In-
stitute.

buRTon, M., RIGby, d. and younG, T. (1999). Analysis of the determinants
of adoption of organic horticultural techniques in the uk. Journal of Agri-
cultural Economics, 50 (1): p. 47-63.

bRoERsE, J.E.W. and bundERs, J.F.G. (2000). Requirements for biotechnology
development: the necessity for an interactive and participatory innovation
process. International Journal of biotechnology, 2 (4) p. 275-296. 

CEnTRE FoR AGRICuLTuRAL And RuRAL dEVELoPMEnT sTudIEs (CARds).
(2008). district Agriculture Plan dharmapuri district. Tamil nadu Agricul-
tural university, Coimbatore, India.

CHATuRVEdI, s. (2005). dynamics of biotechnology Research and Industry in
India: statistics, Perspectives and key Policy Issues. oECd science, Tech-
nology and Industry Working Papers, 2005/6, oECd Publishing.

CHAudHuRI, k. and CHERICAL, M.M. (2012). Credit rationing in rural credit
markets of India. Applied Economics, 44 (7): p. 803-812

CHoubEy, s., PEndsE, n.G., and sHukLA, n. (2005). Economic reforms in
India: need, effects and suggestions. sarup and sons, new delhi, India.

dE JAnVRy, A., and sAdouLET, E. (2000). Rural Poverty in Latin America: de-
terminants and Exit Paths. Food Policy, 25 (4): p. 389-409.

dE JAnVRy, A., and sAdouLET, E. (2002). World poverty and the role of agri-
cultural technology: direct and indirect effects. Journal of development stud-
ies, 38 (4): p. 1-26. 

dEPARTMEnT oF bIoTECHnoLoGy, (2001). biotechnology: a ten year perspec-
tive vision document, Ministry of science and Technology, Government of
India. Available at http://www.dbtindia.nic.in

dEPARTMEnT oF bIoTECHnoLoGy, (2007). national biotechnology develop-
ment strategy: key elements, Ministry of science and Technology, Govern-
ment of India. 

ERAPPA, s. (2006). Contract farming in karnataka: A boon or a bane?. Research
Report 9/AdRT 113. banagalore: Agricultural development and Rural
Transformation Centre, Institute for social and Economic Change.

FEdER, G. and uMALI, d., (1993). The adoption of agricultural innovations. A
review. Technological Forecasting and social Change, 43: p. 215-239. 

FEdER, G., JusT, R. and zilberman, d. (1985). Adoption of agricultural inno-
vations in developing countries: a survey. Econom. develop. Cultural
Change, 33 (2): p. 255-298.

Potential and constraints of employing agricultural biotechnology as a development tool: GMo cultivation and small-holder...



Revista Española de Estudios Agrosociales y Pesqueros, n.º 235, 2013

56

Food And AGRICuLTuRE oRGAnIzATIon, (2004). The state of Food and Agri-
culture 2003–2004: Agricultural biotechnology-Meeting the needs of the
Poor?; FAo Agriculture series no.35; FAo: Rome, 2004

GInE, X., and kLonnER, s. (2006). Credit Constraints as a barrier to Technol-
ogy Adoption by the Poor: Lessons from south-Indian small-scale Fishery,
Working Papers RP2006/104, World Institute for development Economic
Research (unu-WIdER).

GLEndEnnInG, C. J., bAbu, s. C. and AsEnso-okyERE, k. (2012). Information
search behaviors of Indian Farmers: Implications for Extension services.
Journal of Agricultural Education and Extension, 18 (5): p. 493-507.

GLEndEnnInG, C. J., bAbu, s. C. and AsEnso-okyERE, k. (2010). Review of
Agricultural Extension in India: Are Farmers’ Information needs being
Met? IFPRI discussion Paper 01048. Addis Ababa.

GLoVER, d. (2010). Exploring the Resilience of bt Cotton’s “Pro-Poor success
story”. development and change. 41 (6): p. 955-982

GoLAIT, R. (2007). Current Issues in Agriculture Credit in India: An Assess-
ment. Reserve bank of India occasional Papers, 28 (1) summer 2007

GoVERnMEnT oF TAMIL nAdu (2003). Tamil nadu Human development Re-
port (HdR) social science Press, delhi.

GuPTA, A. k. and CHAndAk, V. (2005). Agricultural biotechnology in India:
ethics, business and politics. International Journal of biotechnology, 7 (1):p.
212-217. 

HALL, A., boCkETT, G., TAyLoR, s., sIVAMoHAn, M.V.k. and Clark, n.
(2001). Why research partnership really matter: innovation theory, institu-
tional arrangements and implications for developing new technology for the
poor. World development, 29 (5): p. 783-797. 

HARRIss, b. (1980). Inaction, Interaction and Action: Regulated Agricultural
Markets in Tamil nadu. social scientist, special number on India, 9 (4): p.
96-137.

kALPAnA, k. (2008). The Vulnerability of self-Help: Women and Microfinance
in south India. Ids Working Paper 303, brighton: Institute of development
studies.

koMICHA, H.H. and ÖHLMER, b. (2006). Effect of Credit Constraint on Pro-
duction Efficiency of Farm Households In southeastern Ethiopia. Ethiopian
Journal of Economics, 15 (1): p. 1-34.

kondE, V. (2008). biotechnology in India: Public-private partnerships. Journal
of Commercial biotechnology, 14 (1):p. 43-55.

LAXMI, T., kRIsHnA, P.s. and REddy, G.P. (2007). Changing paradigms in agri-
cultural research: significance of end-user involvement. outlook on Agricul-
ture, 36 (2): p. 119–125.

Elena Poli, Teresa serra devesa y José María Gil Roig



57
Revista Española de Estudios Agrosociales y Pesqueros, n.º 235, 2013

LIPTon, M. (2007). Plant breeding and poverty: can transgenic seeds replicate
the ‘green revolution’ as a source of grains for the poor?. Journal of devel-
opment studies, 43 (1): p. 31-62.

MARRA, M.C., HubbELL b. and CARLson, G.A. (2001). Information quality,
technology depreciation and bt cotton adoption in the southeastern. Journal
of Agricultural and Resource Economics, 26(1): p. 158-175.

MoRsE, s., bEnnETT, R. and IsMAEL, y. (2007). Inequality and GM crops: A
case-study of bt cotton in India. AgbioForum, 10(1): p. 44-50.

PEMsL, d. and WAIbEL, H. (2005). Why do some bt-cotton farmers in China
continue to use high levels of pesticides?. International Journal of Agricultural
sustainability, 3(1): p. 44-56.

QAIM, M. (1999). Assessing the Impact of banana biotechnology in kenya.
IsAAA briefs no. 10. IsAAA: Ithaca, ny

QAIM, M. and dE JAnVRy, A. (2003). Genetically modified crops, corporate
pricing strategies, and farmers’ adoption: The case of bt cotton in Argentina.
American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 85 (4): p. 814-28. 

RAAbE, k. (2008). Reforming the agricultural extension system in India: What
do we know about what works where and why?. IFPRI discussion papers
775, International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI).

sAHu, G.b., MAdHEsWARAn, s. and RAJAsEkHAR, d. (2004). Credit Constraints
and distress sales in Rural India: Evidence from kalahandi district, orissa.
The Journal of Peasant studies, 31 (2): p. 210–241.

sEsHIA, s. and sCoonEs, I. (2003). Tracing Policy Connections: The Politics
of knowledge in the Green Revolution and biotechnology Eras in India,
Ids Working Paper 188, Institute of development studies, England.

sCoonEs, I. (2003). Regulatory manoeuvres: the bt cotton controversy in India,
Ids Working Paper 197 Institute of development studies, England.

sCoonEs, I. (2006). science, Agriculture and the Politics of Policy: The Case
of biotechnology. new delhi: orient Longman.

sERRA, T., zILbERMAn, d. and GIL, J.M. (2008). differential uncertainties and
risk attitudes between conventional and organic producers: the case of span-
ish arable crop farmers. Agricultural Economics, 39 (2): p. 219–229.

sEVERn-WALsH, M. b. (2006). Adoption Patterns of Transgenic Cotton in
Tamil nadu, India. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Rural so-
ciological society, seelbach Hilton Hotel. 

sHETTy, P.k. (2004). socio-ecological implications of pesticide use in India.
Economic and Political Weekly, 39 (49): p. 5261-5267.

sHILPI, F. and uMALI-dEInInGER, d. (2008). Market Facilities and Agricultural
Marketing: Evidence from Tamil nadu, India. Agricultural Economics,
39(3): p. 281–94.

Potential and constraints of employing agricultural biotechnology as a development tool: GMo cultivation and small-holder...



Revista Española de Estudios Agrosociales y Pesqueros, n.º 235, 2013

58

sIdHu, R.s., VATTA k. and kAuR, A. (2008). dynamics of Institutional Agri-
cultural Credit and Growth in Punjab: Contribution and demand-supply
Gap. Agricultural Economics Research Review, 21: p. 407-414.

sMALE, M., CoHEn, M. J. and nAGARAJAn, L. (2009). Local markets, local va-
rieties Rising Food Prices and small Farmers’ Access to seed. IFPRI Issue
brief 59. IFPRI.

sMITH, J. (2007). Culturing development: bananas, Petri dishes and ‘Mad sci-
ence’. Journal of Eastern African studies, 1(2): p. 212‐233.

sTonE, G.d. (2007). Agricultural deskilling and the spread of Genetically Mod-
ified Cotton in Warangal. Current Anthropology, 48 (1): p. 67-103.

sTonE, G.d. (2011). Contradictions in the last mile: suicide, culture, and E-
Agriculture in rural India. science Technology & Human Values, 36(3), in
press.

suLAIMAn, V.R. and HALL, A. (2002). beyond technology dissemination: rein-
venting agricultural extension. outlook on Agriculture, 31 (4):p. 225-233.

suLAIMAn, R.V. (2003). Innovations in agricultural extension in India. sd di-
mensions. Rome: sustainable development department (sd), Food and
Agriculture organization (FAo). 

TAMIL nAdu AGRICuLTuRE dEPARTMEnT PoLICy noTE (TnAd Policy note)
2007-08. Available at: http://www.tn.gov.in/policynotes/archives/policy2007-
08/pdf/agriculture.pdf

THRo, A.M. and sPILLAnE, C. (2000). biotechnology-assisted participatory plant
breeding: complement or contradiction?. Working document n° 4, April
2000, CGIAR.

TRIPP, R. (2001). Can biotechnology reach the poor? The adequacy of infor-
mation and seed delivery. Food Policy, 26 (3): p. 249–264.

TRIPP, R. and Pal, s. (2000). Information and agricultural input markets: pearl
millet seed in Rajasthan, Journal of International development, 12 (1): p.
133-144.

VAn dE FLIERt, E. and bRAun, R.A. (2002). Conceptualizing integrative, farmer
participatory research for sustainable agriculture: From opportunities to im-
pact. Agriculture and Human Values, 19 (1) p. 25-38.

VIsWAnATHAn and LALITHA, (2009). GM technology and sustainable agricul-
ture future: Empirical evidences from bt cotton farmers in Maharashtra and
Gujarat in India, Journal of development and Agricultural Economics 2(1):
p. 07-17.

yAnG, P., ILEs, M., yAn, s. and JoLLIFFE, F. (2005). Farmers’ knowledge, per-
ceptions and practices in transgenic bt cotton in small producer systems in
northern China. Crop Protection, 24 (3): p. 229-239.

Elena Poli, Teresa serra devesa y José María Gil Roig



AbsTRACT

Potential and constraints of employing agricultural biotechnology as a development tool: GMo
cultivation and small-holder farmers in dharmapuri district, India

drawing on the case of dharmapuri district, south India, the article aims to investigate the
potential and the constraints by which agricultural biotechnologies can be employed to serve
the purpose of agricultural and rural development. The analysis follows two main routes:
on one side it evaluates the suitability of biotechnology (specifically bt cotton) to the needs
of farmers, while, on the other, it examines access to resources (technical information, access
to credit and input/output markets) necessary for the adoption of this technology. using
field survey data from bt cotton farmers in dharmapuri district, Tamil nadu, the paper at-
tempts to identify what are the constraints that small-holder farmers face in accessing this
technology and reaping benefits from it. From this analysis it will be concluded that to be
used as development tool, biotechnology need to be integrated with socio-economic consi-
derations. Considering the many challenges involved, the paper will propose a number of
pointers for policymakers to (re)design biotechnology projects and policies to respond to
clear societal targets and aims.

kEyWoRds: Agricultural biotechnology, India, small-holder farmers, socio-economic
constraints.

JEL CodEs: o2 Q1 o13.

REsuMEn

Potencial y condicionantes para implementar la biotecnología agrícola como instrumento de
desarrollo: cultivo de oGM y pequeños agricultores en el distrito de dharmapuri, India

El principal objetivo de este estudio ha sido investigar el potencial y los condicionantes para
utilizar la biotecnología agrícola como herramienta de desarrollo rural en el contexto del
distrito de dharmapuri, en el sur de la India. El análisis ha tenido dos rutas: por un lado
se ha evaluado la idoneidad de la biotecnología (especificadamente el algodón bt) para las
necesidades de los agricultores; y por el otro, se ha examinado el acceso a los recursos com-
plementarios  (acceso a la información técnica, acceso al crédito y a los mercados de inputs
y outputs) necesarios para la adopción de esta tecnología por parte de los agricultores. uti-
lizando los datos de una encuesta de campo a agricultores de algodón bt en el distrito de
dharmapuri, Tamil nadu, el artículo trata de identificar cuáles son las limitaciones con que
los pequeños agricultores se enfrentan en el acceso a esta tecnología y en obtener beneficios
de ella. de este análisis se concluye que, para ser utilizada como herramienta de desarrollo,
la biotecnología debe integrarse con las consideraciones socio-económicas. Teniendo en
cuenta todos los desafíos que esto implica, el artículo  traza una serie de proposiciones  para
las autoridades y organismos de desarrollo, para (re)diseñar políticas y proyectos biotecno-
lógicos de desarrollo rural, respondiendo a metas y objetivos sociales claros.

PALAbRAs CLAVE: biotecnología agrícola, India, pequeños agricultores, limitaciones
socio-económicas.

CLAsIFICACIÓn JEL: o2 Q1 o13.

59
Revista Española de Estudios Agrosociales y Pesqueros, n.º 235, 2013

Potential and constraints of employing agricultural biotechnology as a development tool: GMo cultivation and small-holder...


