












































Microsoft Word - Baba et al huevo milan 2015.docx


 

 

	
	
	
 

 

A multi-criteria stated method to analyze consumers’ preference and sensory 

evaluation towards omega-3 enriched eggs: The Analytical Hierarchy Process (AHP) 

 

Abstract  

The appropriateness of the Analytical Hierarchy Process (AHP) technique to analyze 

consumers’ acceptance of eggs was assessed for the first time and compared with the 

traditional 9-point hedonic scale. In addition, the relative importance of egg 

attributes (egg type: regular, free-range, enriched with omega-3; egg size: small, 

medium, large; origin: local, regional, other Spanish origin; and price) on consumer 

purchasing decisions was evaluated in the Catalan market. Data were obtained from 

a face-to-face questionnaire (n=122) in a controlled environment. Subsequently, 

consumers conducted a hedonic test of three types of commercialized eggs (regular, 

free-range and enriched with n-3) using the AHP technique and a 9-point scale. The 

AHP approach seems to be a reliable tool to evaluate consumer hedonic preferences 

as well for purchasing decision study as contrasted with the traditional 9-point 

category scale. However, further testing of the technique applied to other food 

products using larger sample sizes is needed. 

 

Keywords: Analytical Hierarchy Process, consumers’ acceptance, eggs, omega-3 

JEL codes: C00, C18, Q13. 

 

 
 
	



 

1 

1. Introduction 

Nowadays, factors affecting human health are gaining prominence in purchasing food products and 

thus, they are becoming one of the most relevant predictors for food consumption (Bayarri et al., 

2010; Lusk et al., 2003; Roininen et al., 1999). Different strategies are available for food marketers 

for the production of healthier food products. Thus, a broad range of products are offered in the 

market such as low sugar, low salt, low fat content and fat-free products (i.e. light products 

portfolio) or the enrichment of food products with polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA). 

 

Foods with reduced levels of total fat and increased levels of unsaturated fatty acids have gained 

market shares (Sloan 2008; Bower, et al., 2003). In Spain, the consumption of low-fat products 

such as the partially skimmed milk has increased from 1.8 l/capita in 2004 to 20.72 l/capita in 2012 

(MAGRAMA, 2013), and the consumption of milk enriched with omega-3 (n-3) and other health 

additives have increased from 0.86 l/capita in 2004 to 5.73 l/capita in 2012 (MAGRAMA, 2013). 

Moreover, due to the perceived high content of cholesterol in eggs, its consumption in Spain has 

decreased from 155.64 eggs per capita in 2004 to 132.11 eggs per capita in 2012 even though the 

egg price decreased in the last years1. In contrast to the high penetration in Spanish households of 

enriched dairy products, the penetration is still limited in other food sectors, specifically, for poultry 

products. 

 

Omega-3 fatty acids (n-3) play a major role in human health and are involved in the development of 

brain and retinal tissues and in the progression and prevention of human diseases, including heart 

disease (Connor 2000; Simopoulos 1999). In addition to the effects on cardiovascular health, n-3 

fatty acids have been shown to prevent the development of dementia, reduce systemic inflammatory 

diseases, prevent prostate cancer, and possibly have a role in the treatment of depression and bipolar 

disorder (Fares et al., 2014). Nutritional recommendations suggest that the polyunsaturated 

/saturated fatty acid ratio for the diet as a whole should be 0.40 or higher, while the n-6/n-3 ratio 

should be 4.0 or lower (Department of Health 1994). Thus, modifying the type of fat in eggs 

through modifications in the animal diet, would offer the consumer a fatty acid profile closer to the 

current nutritional recommendations for a healthy diet and would improve the nutritional image of 

eggs. Consequently, animal feeding strategies have been successfully used to significantly increase 

polyunsaturated fatty acids in eggs (Lawlor et al., 2010; Parpinello et al., 2006). The usual practice 

of producing n-3 fatty acid-modified eggs is basically achieved by feeding flax seeds and  marine 

                                                            
1
The deflated egg price has decrease from 0.11€/egg (2004) to 0.09€/egg (2012) (MAGRAMA, 2013). 



2 

oils (fish oil, fish meal) to laying hens (Lawlor et al., 2010). Antioxidants are also added in order to 

minimize lipid oxidation (Qi and Sim, 1998). 

 

Analyzing consumers’ acceptance towards n-3 enriched eggs is not new and has been assessed 

decades ago (Adams, et al., 1989; Caston et al., 1994; Scheideler et al., 1997; Parpinello et al., 

2006 and Lawlor et al., 2010 among others). In carrying out sensory analysis for food products in 

particular, the 9-point hedonic scale is widely used in measuring consumers’ acceptance. 

Nevertheless, among the different sensory evaluation techniques, the comparative methods are also 

relevant (Meilgaard et al., 2006). In this context, the main objective of this research was twofold: 

First to verify the appropriateness of the Analytical Hierarchy Process (AHP) technique as a valid 

tool in the assessment of consumer acceptance of eggs by contrasting its results with the 

traditionally used 9-point hedonic scale. Second, to evaluate the relative importance of egg 

attributes including its enrichment with n-3 fatty acids on consumer purchasing decisions in the 

Catalan market. 

 

2. Materials and methods 

In a first step, a pre-sensory questionnaire was applied to assess the factors that affect 

consumers’ decisions when purchasing eggs using the Analytical Hierarchy Process (AHP) 

technique. Consumers were asked to make pairwise comparisons between attributes and levels that 

usually take into consideration in their decision to purchase eggs. The relative importance of the 

attributes and levels was then estimated following a hierarchy structure. In a second step, 

consumers’ acceptance towards three commercial types of egg (regular, free-range and enriched 

with n-3) in the Catalan market was analyzed. Two different approaches were carried out for the 

sensory evaluation. On one side, the AHP technique was used by pairwise comparisons of the three 

products for each relevant sensory egg attribute. On the other side, a 9-point hedonic scale was also 

used to assess the sensory attributes among the three types of eggs. Results were contrasted between 

the AHP technique and the traditional 9-point hedonic scale. A summary of the methodological 

approach is presented in Figure 1. 

 

2.1. Theoretical background: the Analytical Hierarchy Process 

The Analytical Hierarchy Process (AHP) is a multi-criteria decision-supporting method that 

relies on mathematics and psychology and aims to organize and analyze complex decisions (Saaty, 

1977; 1980). It helps decision makers (consumers) find a decision (purchase and consumption) that 



3 

best suits their goal (preferences) and their understanding of the problem (the best product). In this 

context, the AHP is based on decomposing the problem (best product) into a hierarchy of smaller 

constituent sub-problems (best attributes). Determining the individually most preferred product, 

from a set of them, is a decision problem where the hierarchy top level represents the final 

consumer decision. To reach this goal, the problem is decomposed into a predefined number of 

attributes on a second level and their corresponding levels on a third level as can be seen in Figure 

1.  

 

AHP allows to analyze individuals’ preference for the attributes and their levels by eliciting 

the relative importance ( ) (known also as priority) through pairwise comparison. In a survey, 

participants are asked to carry out all possible one way pairwise comparisons (the arrows in Figure 

2) between attributes and between levels obtaining their weights ( , 
.

 respectively) where; 

m (1, ... , m) is the number of attributes and n (=1, ... , n) is the number of levels of each attribute. In 

the pairwise comparison process, respondents have to indicate which of the two compared elements 

(attributes and levels) they prefer (Table 1), where the 9 points scale (Saaty scale) is used to 

measure the strength of the preference by means of verbal judgements as can be seen in Table 2. 

 

After constructing the hierarchy of attributes and levels preferences, respondents are asked to 

make a pairwise comparison between the available products to assess their relative importance in 

describing each attribute and level as shown in Table 3. Then, the best product that better satisfies 

consumers’ preferences is identified. From the answers provided, a matrix with the following 

structure is generated for each individual k (1, ... , K) known as Saaty matrix: 





















NNkkiki

ijk

jkkk

jkkk

k

aaa

a

aaa

aaa

S

...

.........

...

...

21

22221

11211

   (1) 

 

where aijk (known as judgement) represents the value obtained from the pairwise comparison 

between attribute/level/product i (iM / iN / iS) and attribute/level/product j; (jM / jN / iS) 

for each individual k. The fundamental properties of this comparison matrix are: a) reciprocal 

comparison: if aijk=x then ajik=1/x); b) homogeneity: if the element i and j are judged, they have an 

equal relative importance, thus, aijk = ajik = 1; and c) all the elements of its main diagonal take a 

value of one (aiik=1  i). 

 



4 

If respondents are consistent, then any two judgements obtained from any two pairwise 

comparisons that have a common element to be compared will automatically allow to obtain the 

third judgement. This means it should hold that aihk  ahjk = aijk for all i, j and h (i, j, hM / i, j, hN 

/ i, j, hS). This condition implies that values given for pairwise comparisons represent the relative 

importance (known also as weights or priorities) given to each element by a perfectly rational 

decision-maker aijk= wik/wjk for all i and j. Therefore, in perfect consistency the previous matrix can 

also be expressed in weight terms as follows: 































Nk

Nk

k

Nk

k

Nk

jk

ik

Nk

k

k

k

k

k

Nk

k

k

k

k

k

k

w

w

w

w

w

w
w

w
w

w

w

w

w

w
w

w

w

w

w

w

S

...

.........

...

...

21

2

2

2

1

2

1

2

1

1

1

   (2) 

 

Under such circumstances, K weights (wMk) for each attribute, for each level (wNk) and for 

each product (wSk) can be easily determined from the M×(M-1)/2, N×(N-1)/2 and S×(S-1)/2 values 

for aijk, respectively. Therefore, in the case of perfect consistency it should hold the verification 

that: Sk × W= M × W (for attributes), Sk × W= N × W (for levels) and Sk × W=S × W (for 

products), where W is a column vector in each case (w = [w1,…, wm/n/s]). However, some degree of 

inconsistency exists in carrying out consumers’ stated preferences through survey, since the 

personal subjectivity plays an important role in the pairwise comparison. Therefore, the original 

verification can be redefined to: Sk × W=max × W, where max is the maximum eigenvalue of 

matrix Sk that is determined by max ijk ik
i j

a w     where the quantity max – M (attribute), max – N 

(levels) and max – S (product) is an indicator about the degree of inconsistency within the Sk. In this 

context, the Consistency Index (CI) can be defined as  (for attributes),  

(for levels) and  (for products). 

 

The Consistency Ratio (CR) then is defined (Saaty, 1980) as CR=CI/RI where RI is a 

Random Index which denotes the consistence index for a randomly generated Sk matrix as can be 

seen in Table 4. Values of CR ≤ 0.1 are acceptable. For higher values, respondents are asked to 

revise their pairwise comparison to restrict for inconsistency. 

 



5 

The Row Geometric Mean (RGM) prioritization method (Saaty 1980 and 2003) is applied as 

valid procedure to estimate the real weights. Using this approach, weights assigned by the subject to 

each attribute and level are obtained using the following expression: 

PN PNi

i ijkik
aw ,

,

1



    i, k  (3) 

 

From the individual weights (wik) we need to aggregate the values across subjects to obtain a 

synthesis for each attribute and level (wi) for the whole sample. The aggregation process is carried 

out following Forman and Peniwati (1998), who consider that the most suitable method for 

aggregating individual weights (wik) in a social collective decision-making context is that of the 

geometric mean: 

K
Kk

k iki
ww 






1
   i  (4) 

 

Once the weights are estimated, the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test is applied to test for normality 

of the distribution. If the normality do not held, the Wilcoxon non-parametric test is used to test for 

differences between weights, otherwise the ANOVA test is applied. 

 

2.2. Data collection 

Data used in this analysis were obtained from a face-to-face questionnaire completed in a 

controlled environment followed by a sensory test. The sample consisted of 122 consumers over 18 

years of age who purchase food and beverages regularly and having purchased eggs in the last 

month. Participants were recruited through the Centre for Agro-food Economy and Development 

(CREDA). Consumers were seated in individual booths of the test lab of the Agriculture 

Engineering School of Barcelona (ESAB) according to the UNE-ISO 8589: 2010. 

 

After 20 minutes of the pre-sensory questionnaire (first step), seven sensory sessions were 

conducted with approximately 15-20 consumers per session (second step). Consumers evaluated in 

a blind condition, the acceptability of the three egg samples (regular, free-range and n-3) under 

white light in the order printed on the recording sheet, which was established to avoid the sample 

order effect (Macfie et al., 1989). Consumers were presented with one plate of 3 samples coded 

with different 3-digit code in a balanced randomized order and asked to make a pairwise 

comparison of the three samples following the AHP approach. Unsalted crackers and room 

temperature filtered water were presented to each consumer to rinse their palate between samples. 



6 

In order to minimize the gap between the stated preferences (i.e. what consumers state in 

hypothetical scenario in questionnaires) and the revealed preferences (i.e. what consumers really did 

in markets), that is mainly associated with consumers motivation and the incentive compatibility of 

the questions used, a standard “cheap talk” procedure was used in our survey as proposed by 

Carlsson et al., (2005) and Bosworth and Taylor (2012). Thus, before starting the experiment the 

following paragraph was mentioned to the participants: 

 

“Previous studies indicate that individuals in general respond to surveys differently from the 

way they act in real life. It is quite common to find that individuals say they are willing to pay 

higher prices than those that they are really willing to pay or to select the product that are 

environmental friendly or committed with animal welfare. We believe that this is due to the 

difficulty in calculating the exact impact of these higher expenses on the household economy or 

because we would prefer to be more committed with environment but we do not do it. It is easy to be 

generous when in reality one does not need to pay more”. 

 

2.3. The analysis of the purchasing preferences using the AHP 

 

 Attributes and levels for purchasing eggs 

The process of purchasing food products is in general a complex process which lies on a 

various number of cues that characterize the different products. Such complexity generates some 

difficulties when trying to determine the key factors that intervene in the consumer’s decision 

making. To tackle this issue, in the case of the determinants factors for egg purchase we used results 

from previous literature. We identified various attributes that were subsequently discussed in a 

focus group involving university lecturers in the field of agro-food marketing as well as 

representatives from consumer associations in Catalonia. 

 

Gracia et al. (2013) analysing the Spanish consumers’ preferences when purchasing eggs, 

they used, the price as a commonly used determinants factors, the origin and the method of the 

production as the most relevant attributes. Mesías et al., (2011) in another Spanish case study used 

the following attributes: feed given to chickens, if enhanced or not with n-3, rearing conditions, egg 

size and price. Ness and Gerhardy (1994) focused on the freshness and quality as a determinants 

factor for purchasing eggs. They used the production method, origin, freshness information and 

price. Norwood and Lusk (2011), focused on the hen welfare such as barn space per hen, beak 

trimming as a potential attributes to infer animal welfare importance in the eggs purchasing 



7 

decision. Finally, the attributes and levels included in our experiment were: egg type (regular, free-

range and enhanced with n-3), egg size (small, medium, large), origin (local, Catalonia and other 

Spanish region) and the price. These identified descriptors of the eggs were pairwise compared and 

their relative importance was estimated by the AHP procedure. 

 

2.4. The sensory test 

 

 Egg collection and sample preparation 

Regular, free-range and enriched with n-3 eggs laid in the same day were collected from the 

same farm. The eggs were purchased within two days of the sensory study and kept under 

refrigerated storage (4°C) for the duration of the experiment. We followed Parpinello et al. (2006) 

for the preparation of the different types of egg samples. Eggs were cooked in separate pots in 

boiling water for 8 minutes, using six eggs per treatment, and later cooled using running water to an 

external temperature of about 40ºC. Next, they were shelled and divided longitudinally into 4 

portions that contained approximately a similar content of yolk. A plate containing three samples 

corresponding to each egg type was presented to each consumer. Samples were prepared without 

salt addition and the portions were covered by aluminum foil to preserve odour compounds. 

 Attributes and levels for valuing egg acceptance 

The first step in measuring the acceptance is to clearly define the main sensory attributes of 

eggs. We first relied on prior research to identify the most used attributes in egg sensory studies. On 

the basis of the most used attributes in the literature (Sheideler et al., 1997; Parpinello et al., 2006; 

Sedoski et al., 2012; Caston et al., 1994; Lawlor et al., 2010) to evaluate the sensory characteristics 

of eggs, we selected: odour, colour and flavour in our study. These attributes, were used to evaluate 

consumer acceptance of the different types of eggs using the AHP method and also the traditional 9-

point hedonic scale. Hedonic scales were defined for the egg odour (1: non-typical egg odour to 9 

typical egg odour), for the yolk colour of the eggs (1: non-typical egg colour to 9 typical egg 

colour), for egg flavour (1: non-typical egg flavour to 9 typical egg flavour), and for global 

acceptance of eggs (1: dislike extremely to 9 like extremely). 

To mitigate the order effect, we followed a design based on ordering change between 

techniques (i.e. between sensory AHP and sensory hedonic scale) as advised by Charzan (1994). 

We split our sample into two sub-samples, generating two versions of the survey differentiated by 

different orders between methods. Thus, for the consumers’ acceptance test, we used a quota 

sampling procedure by allocating 50% of the samples to start with the AHP questions and the other 



8 

half with the hedonic scale. In all other aspects, such as wording of questionnaire, the two versions 

were identical. 

3. Results and discussions 

3.1. Relative importance of egg attributes in purchasing decisions 

The relative importance of the attributes when purchasing eggs is shown in Figure 3. Results 

showed that the egg type and the price had similar and higher importance than the origin which had 

higher importance than the egg size in purchasing decisions. The Wilcoxon non-parametric test 

indicated that the egg type and the price did not differ between them, while the origin and size of 

eggs differed from the other attributes.  

 

Focusing on the levels of the attributes, for the egg type, consumers showed a preference for 

the free-range type followed by the enriched with n-3 and regular eggs. As in the case of the 

attributes, the Wilcoxon test showed that the differences were statistically significant between the 

free-range and the other types of eggs, being the most preferred egg type. However, revealed data in 

Spain have shown that consumers purchase regular eggs most frequently. To better understand these 

results, it is relevant to take into account the price importance in the purchasing decision. The 

divergence between the stated and revealed preferences in this case is likely to be associated with 

price effect between both types of eggs. Statistical data regarding food price in Spain showed that 

on average the free-range eggs are at least two times more expensive than the regular ones 

(MAGRAMA 2009, Mesías et al, 2011), bringing consumers to choose the regular eggs over other 

types of eggs. 

 

Regarding the preferences for egg size, results confirmed what we expected. Consumers 

prefer medium and big egg sizes compared to the small size. The Wilcoxon test showed statistical 

difference between the small size and the other egg sizes. These results are in accordance to the 

results obtained by Mesías et al., (2011) where the highest utility (most preferred) of the attributes 

was for the extra-large size egg (>73 g) against the standard size (53–73 g). Finally, analysing the 

origin attribute and levels, results agreed with literature data showing a preference for the local 

origin of eggs for Spanish consumers (Gracia et al., 2013). Thus, consumers preferred the local 

origin followed by the regional origin and finally the other Spanish regions. This preference pattern 

is especially pronounced in Catalonia where the feeling of belonging and the value of locality is 

rooted in the society in general. 

 



9 

3.2. Hedonic evaluation of egg attributes: AHP and 9-point scale results 

 

The results of comparing the three egg types according to the selected sensory attributes using 

AHP are shown in Figure 4. For the typical egg odour, results showed that the regular eggs received 

the highest weight, which means that it had the best score on this attribute than the other egg types. 

However, the statistical Wilcoxon test showed no odour differences between the regular and the 

free-range eggs, which had higher odour scores than the n-3 enriched eggs. These results reflect 

consumers’ unfamiliarity with the odour of the n-3 enriched eggs, which is probably associated to 

its low frequency of consumption as well as the possible oxidation and subsequent development of 

off-odours and off-flavours as previously reported in this type of eggs. Parpinello et al. (2006) 

indicated that the off-flavours that are usually present in this type of enriched eggs are considered to 

be a major undesirable side-effect when incorporating high n-3 levels in diets fed to hens. 

 

Regarding the colour attribute, results showed that the regular eggs had the most typical 

colour score followed by the free-range and enriched with n-3. Results showed statistical 

differences between regular eggs and both free-range and enriched eggs which were not 

significantly different. These results reflect consumers’ habits towards the familiar colour they face 

when consuming regular eggs. Finally, for the flavour attribute, results indicated that the regular 

and the free-range eggs had similar and higher scores than the n-3 enriched eggs. Flavour scores 

were significantly lower for the enriched eggs with n-3 than the other egg types in agreement with 

results reported in literature. Karahadian and Lindsay (1989) indicated that the enrichment with n-3 

may cause off-flavours in eggs, mainly due to the oxidative damage of yolk lipids which may affect 

the sensorial quality of eggs (Caston et al., 1994). 

 

Results of the sensory egg valuation using the 9-point hedonic scale are shown in Table 5. 

Analysing the odour attribute, results show that regular eggs had higher typical odour score than 

free-range and n-3 enriched eggs, however, non-significant differences were found among the three 

types of eggs for the odour attribute. In contrast, results from the AHP approach (Figure 4) showed 

significant differences between regular and free-range eggs and the n-3 enriched eggs. This 

discrepancy may show the capacity of the AHP, and thus the comparative technique, to better detect 

differences in the odour attribute between the different egg types in the hedonic evaluation in 

comparison to the 9-point hedonic scale in our exploratory study. 

 



10 

Regarding the colour attribute, significant differences were found among the different egg 

types. As expected, the yolk of the regular eggs was perceived as a more typical egg colour, 

followed by the n-3 enriched eggs and finally the free-range eggs. Colour results are associated to 

the different feeding regimes, as it is well known that the free-range hens have in general the 

opportunity to eat more pigmented foods and the pigment is then transferred to the yolk, conferring 

its more orange colour. This tendency was also found in the n-3 enriched eggs but with a relatively 

lower incidence. This is due to some ingredients used for the egg enrichment with n-3, which are 

natural sources of carotenoids and thus the yolk shows greater pigmentation (Barbosa et al., 2011). 

Comparing these results with those obtained from the sensory AHP regarding the colour attribute, 

both methods founded higher scores for the regular eggs compared with the free-range and the n-3 

enriched eggs, showing the capacity of the AHP approach to detect major differences in the odour 

attribute obtained from hedonic valuation. However, results obtained using the 9-point scale showed 

significant differences in egg odour between the free-range and n-3 enriched eggs, while the AHP 

technique did not show significant differences between these egg types. 

 

For the flavour attribute, results (Table 5) showed that the free-range and the regular eggs 

received higher values with more typical egg flavour than the n-3 enriched eggs. These hedonic 

results using the 9-point scale are in agreement with those obtained using the AHP technique that 

also found significant differences between the flavour of the regular and the free-range eggs and the 

flavour of the n-3 enriched eggs. Finally, In line with literature data regarding the sensory valuation 

of enriched eggs with n-3 (Lawlor et al., 2010), results showed that there are still some potential 

adverse effects on the sensory attributes of enriched eggs that are currently being commercialized in 

the Catalan market. The global acceptance scores assigned by consumers using the 9-point scale 

also indicates that the n-3 enriched eggs have a lower sensory rating than the regular and the free-

range eggs. Recommendations should be offered to egg producers to revise their feeding mixture 

for laying hens to minimize the negative impact that the enrichment may have on sensory properties 

of eggs, including the use of antioxidants among other approaches. 

 

4. Conclusions 

The most important cue driving the majority of consumers’ egg purchase decisions were the 

type and the egg price followed by the origin and finally the egg size. For the egg type, consumers 

showed a preference for the free-range egg followed by the enriched with n-3 and regular eggs. 

Regarding the preferences for egg size, consumers preferred medium and big egg sizes compared 



11 

with the small size. Finally, for Catalan consumers analysing the origin attribute and levels, results 

showed preference for the local origin of eggs followed by the regional origin and lastly other 

Spanish origin. 

 

Regarding consumers’ hedonic evaluation, results showed agreement between the AHP 

technique and the 9-point scale showing that n-3 enriched eggs had lower flavour acceptance, 

regular eggs had higher colour acceptance, and regular and the free-range eggs had similar and 

higher odour acceptance than the other egg types. In addition, the AHP technique detected odour 

differences between the n-3 enriched eggs and the other 2 types of eggs, while the 9-point scale 

detected colour differences between the n-3 enriched eggs and the free-range eggs. 

 

The AHP approach seems to be a reliable tool to evaluate consumer hedonic preferences as 

contrasted with the traditional 9-point category scale. In addition, this approach shows its ability to 

analyse consumers preference. However, further testing of the technique applied to other food 

products using larger sample sizes is needed to validate the AHP as a comparative method adapted 

to sensory analysis and to be compared woth other staed prefernece approaches. 

 

References 

Adams, R.L., Pratt, D.L., Lin, J.H., & Stadel-man, W.J. 1989. Introduction of omega-3 

polyunsaturated fatty acids into eggs. Poultry science, 68, 16. 

Barbosa, V., Gaspar, A., Calixto, L., & Agostinho, T. 2011. Stability of the pigmentation of egg 

yolks enriched with omega-3 and carophyll stored at room temperature and under refrigeration. 

Revista Brasileira de Zootecnia, 40(7), 1540-1544. 

Bayarri, S., Carbonell, I., Barrios, E.X., & Costell, E. 2010. Acceptability of yogurt and yogurt like 

products: influence of product information and consumer characteristics and preferences. 

Journal of Sensory Studies, 25, 171-189. 

Betti, M., Schneider, B.L., Wismer, W.V., Carney, V.L., Zuidhof, M.J., & Renema, R.A. 2009. 

Omega-3-enriched broiler meat: 2. Functional properties, oxidative stability, and consumer 

acceptance. Poultry Science, 88(5), 1085-95. 

Bosworth, R., & Taylor, L.O. 2012. Hypothetical Bias in Choice Experiments: Is Cheap Talk 

Effective at Eliminating Bias on the Intensive and Extensive Margins of Choice?. Journal of 

Economic Analysis & Policy, 12(1), 1-28. 



12 

Bower, J.A., Saadat, M.A., & Whitten, C. 2003. Effect of liking, information and consumer  

characteristics on purchase intention and willingness to pay more for a fat spread with a proven 

health benefit. Food Quality and Preference, 14(1), 65-74. 

Carlsson, F., Frykblom, P., & Lagerkvist, C.J. 2005. Using cheap talk as a test of validity in choice 

experiments. Economics Letters, 89, 147–152. 

Caston L.J., Squires, E.J., & Leeson, S. 1994. Hen performance, egg quality and the sensory 

evaluation of eggs from SCWL hens fed flax. Canadian Journal of Animal Science, 74, 347-353. 

Charzan, K. (1994). Three kinds of orders effects in choice-based conjoint analysis. Marketing 

Letters, 5(2), 165-172 

Connor, W.E. 2000. Importance of n-3 fatty acids in health and disease. American Journal of 

Clinical Nutrition, 71(1), 171S-175S. 

Department of Health 1994. Nutritional aspects of cardiovascular disease. Report on Health and 

social subjects, 46, London: Her Majesty’s Stationery Office. 

Fares, H., Lavie, C., DiNicolantonio, J., O’Keefe, J., & Milani, R. 2014. Omega-3 Fatty Acids: A 

Growing Ocean of Choices. Current Atherosclerosis Reports, 16, 389.  

Gracia, A., Barreiro‐Hurlé, J., & Galán, B.L. 2013. Are Local and Organic Claims Complements or 

Substitutes? A Consumer Preferences Study for Eggs. Journal of Agricultural Economics, 65(1), 

49-67. 

Karahadian, C., & Lindsay, R.C. 1989. Evaluation of compounds contributing characterizing fishy 

flavours in fish oils. Journal of the American Oil Chemists' Society, 66, 953-960. 

Lawlor, J.B., Gaudette, N., Dickson,T., House, J.D. 2010. Fatty acid profile and sensory 

characteristics of table eggs from laying hens fed diets containing microencapsulated fish oil. 

Animal Feed Science and Technology, 156(3-4), 97-103. 

Lusk, J.L., Roosen, J., & Fox, J.A. 2003. Demand for beef from cattle administered growth 

hormones or fed genetically modified corn: A comparison of consumers in France, Germany, the 

United Kingdom and the United States. American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 85(1), 16–

29. 

Macfie, H.J., Bratchell, N., Greenhoff, K., & Vallis, L.V. 1989. Designs to balance the effect of 

order of presentation and first-order carry-over effects in hall tests. Journal of Sensory Studies, 

69, 571-578. 

MAGRAMA, 2013. Ministry of Agriculture, Food and Environment of Spain. Food Consumption 

data base. http://www.magrama.gob.es/es/, accessed by October 2013. 

MAGRAMA 2009. Study of the value chain and price formation of egg. Statistical Data of Food 

price observatory. http://www.magrama.gob.es/es/, accessed by October 2013 



13 

Meilgaard, M.C., Carr, B.T., & Civille, G.V. 2006. Sensory evaluation techniques. CRC press. 

Mesías, F.J., Martínez‐Carrasco, F., Martínez, J.M., & Gaspar, P. 2011. Functional and organic 

eggs as an alternative to conventional production: a conjoint analysis of consumers' preferences. 

Journal of the Science of Food and Agriculture, 91(3), 532-538. 

Ness, M.R., & Gerhardy, H. 1994. Consumer preferences for quality and freshness attributes of 

eggs. British Food Journal, 96(3), 26-34. 

Norwood, F.B., & Lusk, J.L. 2011. A calibrated auction-conjoint valuation method: valuing pork 

and eggs produced under differing animal welfare conditions. Journal of environmental 

Economics and Management, 62(1), 80-94. 

Parpinello, G., Meluzzi, A., Sirri, F., Tallarico, N., & Versari, A. 2006. Sensory evaluation of egg 

products and eggs laid from hens fed diets with different fatty acid composition and 

supplemented with antioxidants. Food Research International, 39(1), 47–52. 

Qi, G.H., & Sim, J.S. 1998. Natural tocopherol enrichment and its effect in n-3 fatty acid modified 

chicken eggs. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, 46, 1920–1926. 

Roininen, K., Lähteenmäki, L.., & Tuorila, H. 1999. Quantification of Consumer Attitudes to 

Health and Hedonic Characteristics of Foods. Appetite, 33(1), 71-88. 

Saaty, T. 1977. A scaling method for priorities in hierarchical structures. Journal of Mathematical 

Psychology, Vol. 15, no 6, pp. 234-281. 

Saaty, T. 1980. The Analytic Hierarchy Process. McGraw-Hill, Nueva York. 

Saaty, T. 2003. Decision-making with the AHP: Why is the principal eigenvector necessary?. 

European Journal of Operational Research, Vol. 145, no 1, pp. 85-91. 

Scheideler, S.E., Froning, G., & Cuppett, S. 1997. Studies of Consumer Acceptance of High 

Omega-3 Fatty Acid-Enriched Eggs. The Journal of Applied Poultry Research, 6(2), 137-146. 

Sedoski, H., Beamer, S., Jaczynski, J., Partington, S., & Matak, K. 2012. Sensory evaluation and 

quality indicators of nutritionally-enhanced egg product with ω-3 rich oils. Food Science and 

Technology, 47(2), 459–464. 

Simopoulos, A.P. 1999. Essential fatty acids in health and chronic disease. American Journal of 

Clinical Nutrition, 70(3), 560S-569S. 

Sloan, A.E. 2008. Consumer Trends-Little Bites, Big Business. Food Technology-Chicago, 62(3), 

19-19. 

UNE-ISO 8589 2007 Sensory analysis. General Guidance for the Design of Test Rooms. 

  



14 

 

Figure 1: Diagram of the methodological approach 

 

 
 
 

 

Figure 2: Hierarchical structure used to value the product, its attributes and their levels. 

  

Egg preferences 

Sensory test to analyse 
consumers' acceptance 

Sensory valuation using  
the AHP technique

Sensory valuation using
a 9 points hedonic scale

Pre-sensory questionnaire to 
asses consumers preference when 

purchasing eggs

Purchasing preferences
using the AHP

Consumer final decision

Attribute 1(A1)

L1.1
Level 1 of 
attribute 1

L1.2
Level 2 of 
attribute 1

L1.n
Level n of 
attribute 1

...

...

...

...

...

...

...

Attribute m (Am)

Lm.1
Level 1 of 
attribute m

Lm.2
Level 2 of 
attribute m

Lm.n
Level n of 
attribute m

…    Product s Product 1 



15 

 

a,b,c: Differences among attributes and levels at 95%. Variances are between brackets. 

Figure 3: Results of the hierarchical structure of the attributes when purchasing eggs. 

 

 

a,b,c: Differences among participants at 95%. Variances are between brackets. 

Figure 4: Results of the hedonic valuation of the different types of eggs using AHP 

  

Relative importance of  the attributes 

when purchasing eggs

Egg type (wA1)

31.8%a

(4.0%)

wL1.1
22.6%b

(3.6%)

wL1.2
52.6%a

(4.9%)

wL1.1: Regular

wL1.2: Free-range

wL1.3: Enriched with Omega-3

wL1.3
24.7%b

(3.1%)

Egg Size (wA2)

16,7%c

(1.6%)

wL2.1
12.9%b

(1.5%)

wL2.2
44.8%a

(4.2%)

wL2.1: Small (S)

wL2.2: Medium (M)

wL2.3: Large (L, XL)

wL2.3
45.5%a

(5.0%)

Origin(wA3)

21,8%b

(4.0%)

wL3.1
50.9%a

(4.5%)

wL3.2
38.3%b

(3.3%)

wL3.1: Local

wL3.2: Catalonia (Regional)

wL3.3: Outside Catalonia (in Spain)

wL3.3
14.2%c

(2.6%)

Price(wA4)

29,7%a

(4.7%)

Consumers' acceptance of the three types of eggs (regular, free-

range and enriched with n-3)

Typical odour 
(WA1)

wL1.1
35.4%a

(6.3%)

wL1.2
33.7%a

(5.4%)

wL1.1: Regular egg

wL1.2: Free-range egg 

wL1.3: Enriched egg with n-3

wL1.3
30.9%b

(5.1%)

Typical colour

(WA2)

wL2.1
39.8%a

(7.0%)

wL2.2
32.4%b

(6.0%)

wL2.1: Regular egg

wL2.2: Free-range egg

wL2.3: Enriched egg with n-3

wL2.3
27.8%b

(6.2%)

Typical flavour 

(WA3)

wL3.1
36.5%a

(6.1%)

wL3.2
36.9%a

(5.8%)

wL3.1: Regular egg

wL3.2: Free-range egg

wL3.3: Enrched egg with n-3

wL3.3
26.6%b

(4.8%)



16 

Table 1: Example of the AHP pairwise comparison for attributes and levels 

Attribute 1 Attribute m 
9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 

Level 1 Level n 
9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 

 

Table 2: The AHP comparison scale 

Degree of 
importance rating 

Definition of the scale 

1 The two elements have the same importance 

2 
The first element has an importance between 1 and 3 against the 

compared element 

3 The preferred element is slightly more important 

4 
The first element has an importance between 3 and 5 against the 

compared element 

5 The preferred element is moderately more important 

6 
The first element has an importance between 5 and 7 against the 

compared element 

7 The preferred element is strongly more important 

8 
The first element has an importance between 7 and 9 against the 

compared element 

9 The preferred element is absolutely more important 

(Saaty, 1980) 

Table 3: Example of the AHP pairwise comparison of the products that better satisfy a specific 
attribute or level 

Which product better satisfies the attribute/level m/l? 
Product 1 Product s 

9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 
 

Table 4: RI values 

n 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 

RI 0,00 0,00 0,58 0,90 1,12 1,24 1,32 1,41 1,45 1,49 

 

 


