












































Microsoft Word - SEM 1.docx


Structural equation modelling of consumer acceptance of organic food in Spain. 

Jessica Avitia, Montserrat Costa-Font *, José M. Gil. 

Universitat Politécnica de Catalunya CREDA 

ABSTRACT 

This paper place together all the relevant variables identified by previous studies 

developing a complex behavioral model on consumers’ organic decision making process. It 

investigates the role of personal, economic and social elements in predicting Spain 

consumers ‘attitudes and purchase intentions toward organic food. A conceptual model is 

developed and tested via structural equation modeling on a sample of 338 consumers. 

Results shown that attitudes toward organic food can be explained by risk perception and 

trust in market agents and institution. Knowledge, as well as environmental and health 

concern partially mediates the effects of trust in market agents and risk perceptions to 

attitudes toward organic food. And finally, attitudes toward organic food, price and 

subjective norms explain purchase intention.  

KEYWORDS: Organic food, consumer behavior, Spain, structural equation modeling, 

purchase intention. 

 

*Centre for Agro-Food Economy and Development (CREDA-UPC-IRTA), Edifici ESAB 

Parc Mediterrani de la Tecnología, Avinguda del Canal Olympic. 

 

 

 

 

 



Structural equation modelling of consumer acceptance of organic food in Spain 
 

2 
 

1. Introduction 

The growing interest of European consumers on the environmental effects of conventional 

agriculture placed sustainable agriculture as an interesting alternative for consumption 

(Chen, 2007, FACUA, 2008). Sustainable agriculture can be defined as a way of production 

that causes less degradation of the agro-ecological system than conventional agriculture 

(Quenum, 2010). This designation encloses organic agriculture. Organic farming has been 

identified as a production system that combines the best environmental practices and the 

application of high-animal welfare standards, as well as prohibiting the use of synthetic 

agrochemicals, drugs and hormones and restricting the use of chemical fertilizers and 

pesticides (Magistris and Gracia, 2008; Michaledou and Hassan, 2009; Miret, 2004). 

Worldwide land devoted to organic farming has experienced and important growth during 

the last decade, with a total of 37.5 million hectares of agricultural land devoted to organic 

production in 2009. From that, only a quarter is devoted to cropped area1 (Lockie, et al., 

2004; Michaledou and Hassan, 2009; Willer and Kilcher, 2010). Oceania, Europe and 

Latino America are the territories with major organic production area, and within Europe 

the country with more hectares dedicated to organic production is Spain with more than 

25,000 producers (FiBL, 2010). For the Spanish case, the organic area represents a 5.26% 

of total agricultural land (about 1,330,000 ha), and its organic production growth has 

exceeded 25% annually (Willer and Yussefi, 2008; Briz and Ward, 2009; Willer and 

Kilcher, 2010).  In addition of the land devoted organic agriculture, the market value for 

organic food and feed has also increased during the last years. Europe domestic sales of 

organic food and feed in 2008 was estimated at 18 billion Euros, also important is the 

domestic market for countries such as Germany (almost 6 billion Euros) U.K. (about 2 

billion Euros), France (more than 3 billion Euros) and Italy (1.5 billion Euros) (Willer, 

2011). The opposite happens in the Spanish case with a value of only 905 million Euros 

(Willer and Yussefi, 2008; Willer and Kilcher, 2011, Michaledou and Hassan, 2009). This 

can be explained because, although devoting a lot of land to organic production, the 

Spanish consumption of organic food is only of 1% of the total food consumption in Spain. 

The rest of organic production is supposed to be redirected to the export market. In fact, 

                                                            
1
 Arable land and permanent crops.  



Structural equation modelling of consumer acceptance of organic food in Spain 
 

3 
 

Italy and Spain concentrate more than the 87% of the European export market for organic 

food and feed, 900 and 315 million Euros respectively (FiBL, 2010).   

The potential development of organic agriculture and food in the Spanish market is still 

very large. Previous studies detected that the current situation that domestic demand growth 

is lower than supply, can be explained, among others, by the existence of very high prices 

of organic food, export orientation of the Spanish producers, lack of availability in 

conventional establishments and low level of knowledge about what exactly are organic 

products, are responsible among other things of the current situation (Tarkiainen and 

Sundqvist; 2006; Fotopoulos and Krystallis, 2002). Therefore, a better understanding of 

consumers’ behavioural process for organic food purchasing as well as consumers’ 

awareness on the subject of organic production is needed. The aim of this research is to 

understand the role of specific factors that conform the behavioral process or mechanism 

that determine consumer attitudes and purchase intention toward organic food. To do that a 

specific survey was developed, and conducted in Barcelona, Catalonia.  

The food choice process is a complex phenomenon to analyze, since it constitutes a 

significant part of individuals’ everyday life. This process is determined by cognitive 

factors, which emphasize the development of mental structures and thought may vary 

among individuals (Magistris and Gracia, 2008; Peter and Olson, 2005). However, 

environment and social factors must also be considered (Bell and Meiselman, 1995; 

Eertmans et al., 2001; Rozin and Tuorila, 1993). An important contribution of this work to 

previous literature is that it puts together both behavioral and social elements such as: the 

influence of knowledge, trust on dealers and retailers, risk perception, price relevance… to 

better understand the formation of consumer attitudes toward organic food and its final 

purchase intention. 

We have structured the paper in five sections. The first section describes the conceptual 

model and the research questions examined based on previous literature. Next, in the 

second section the specification of the research methodology are specified. A third section 

is devoted to the results and finally, the paper ends with a concluding section. 

 

 



Structural equation modelling of consumer acceptance of organic food in Spain 
 

4 
 

2. Theoretical framework and development of hypothesis 

To better understand the behavioural process underlying Spanish organic food consumption 

we have developed a conceptual model that intents to describe the reasoning process that 

supports organic food acceptance (see Fig. 1). Briefly, it attempts to identify the most 

influential constructs in the decision making process concerning to the organic food 

purchasing (health and environmental concern, trust in organic markets agents and 

institution, perceived risk, subjective norms, knowledge, price, attitudes toward organic 

food and purchase intention). This study based on previous literature such as Magistris and 

Gracia (2008), Tarkianen and Sunqvist (2006), Chen (2007), Chen and Li (2007), Costa-

Font and Gil (2009) and Lobb, Mazzochi and Trail (2007). 

Our basic conceptual framework is related to the Theory of Planned Behavior (TPB) 

defined by Ajzen (1991). It maintains that the intention of the behavior (e.g., purchase 

intention) is based primarily on three factors: the attitude a person has to participate in the 

behavior (e.g., purchasing attitude), the social pressure felt by the person with respect to the 

behavior (subjective norm) and the degree of control that the person feels about performing 

the behavior (e.g., perceived behavioral control). These three factors predict the intention 

and subsequent behavior. The first two factors reflect the perceived desirability of 

conducting a behavior, while the third reflects the perception of whether personal behavior 

is controllable or not (Chen, 2007). The TPB provides the analysis by separating beliefs 

and attitudes, and recognizing the gap between intention to act and behavior. The TPB 

allow the relationship between beliefs, attitudes, normative factors, intention and behavior; 

this relationship can also be expressed in mathematical terms (Ajzen, 1991). We next try to 

define the constructs underlying the formation of attitudes toward organic food by means of 

the inclusion of environmental and health concern, perceived risk, trust in organic market 

agents and institution and the subjective norms define the attitudes and the purchase 

intention. Whereas that trust in organic market agents and risk is define for knowledge. 

Finally, the price is another construct for the purchase intention. 

 

- Insert Figure 1 about here – 

 



Structural equation modelling of consumer acceptance of organic food in Spain 
 

5 
 

Magistris and Gracia (2008) noticed that health consciousness and subjective norms 

influence attitudes toward organic foods. In the same way, Tarkianen and Sunqvist (2006) 

observe that healthy diet, balanced life and organic knowledge are elements that influence 

individuals’ attitudes toward organic food. Furthermore, these authors also perceive a 

causal relation between attitudes towards the environments and purchase intention of 

organic food.  In the same way Chen (2007) conclude that not only exists a relation 

between individuals’ organic food choice and individuals’ attitude towards environment 

protection, health, natural content, etc but also that elements such as perception of control 

when purchasing or  the influence of social norms are also important in building the 

intention to purchase organic foods. Other important factor affecting purchase intention has 

been detected by Chen and Li (2007), who states that trust as well as general attitude and 

knowledge have influence in building risk and benefit perceptions and therefore attitudes 

towards food. In the same way Costa-Font and Gil (2009) noticed the relevance of 

perceived risk and benefit as well as trust for the case of GM food acceptance, highlighting 

the importance of certification in the food market.  Moreover, Lobb et al., (2007) states that 

the intention to purchase is determined by subjective norms, perceived behavioural control, 

attitude towards the behavior and trust on institutions. 

2.1 Subjective Knowledge  

The concept of consumer knowledge is defined as the measure of experience and 

understanding that consumer has of a product before occurs an external search (Alba, 1983; 

Brucks, 1985; Rao and Monroe, 1988; Sujan, 1985). It is considered a relevant and 

meaningful construct to the model since it influences how consumers collect and organize 

information (Alba and Hutchinson, 1987). In addition, it affects how and what consumers 

decide to buy. There are three main types of knowledge: subjective knowledge, objective 

knowledge and experience (Dodd et al. 2005). Experience is defined as the sum of the 

activities related to past consumption of a product, including information search for the 

product, use or consumption and the property (Alba and Hutchinson, 1987). On the other 

hand, objective knowledge is defined in terms of real content and organization of 

knowledge that are in memory. The subjective knowledge has been defined as the 

individual perception of consumers about their own knowledge and confidence in 



Structural equation modelling of consumer acceptance of organic food in Spain 
 

6 
 

themselves (Dodd et al. 2005). The objective and subjective knowledge are interrelated 

(Raju et al., 1993), there seem to be a relationship between subjective knowledge and the 

sources of information used in a purchase decision (Dodd et al. 2005).  

Although there is a general awareness about the concept of organic production, the 

literature also suggests that consumers have inconsistent interpretations about what is 

‘organic’. For example, in a survey of consumers in three California counties, Jolly et al. 

(1989) found that respondents associated organic production with no pesticides, no artificial 

fertilizer, no growth regulators, and residue-free products. Similarly, survey respondents in 

the UK perceived ‘organic farming’ to imply absence of chemicals, ‘absence of growth 

hormones’, and ‘not intensively grown’ or ‘products grown naturally’ (Hutchins and 

Greenhalgh, 1997). In a more recent study for the UK, respondents described organically 

produced food as one that is more natural and healthy, compared to conventional food (Hill 

and Lynchehaun, 2002). 

Furthermore, it is important to remake that knowledge about organic products may not 

necessarily translate into direct purchase intention, because of barriers that could limit the 

ability of consumers to transform such knowledge into actual demand. This is partly 

because many potential organic consumers, especially in Western industrialized countries, 

are skeptical about organic labels (Giannakas 2002); stemming from reported cases of 

mislabeling (e.g.,Bonti-Ankoma and Yiridoe, 2006), and misrepresentation of 

conventionally produced food as organic (e.g., Groves, 1998). Recently, Padel and Foster 

(2005) indicate that there is a lack of knowledge about certification and labeling and about 

the guarantee that organic standards really offer to consumers. This implies a lack of 

confidence when it comes to claims made about organic food that ultimately will prevent 

them from buying it.  

Finally, the knowledge that consumers believe they have about the danger is also very 

important in defining consumers percetions and intention towards food (Stefani, et al. 

2008). Siegrist and Cvetkovich (2000) conclude that a relationship exists between 

knowledge about risk, trust in public authorities and the perception of risk. So in the 

absence of knowledge, confidence in public authorities will be increased, while the 

perception of risk will be lower. The Gianluca et al. 2008 model raises the hypothesis that 



Structural equation modelling of consumer acceptance of organic food in Spain 
 

7 
 

risk perception should be affected by the confidence and knowledge of the dangers. The 

result of this investigation shows that a knowledge of the risks makes people more aware of 

the dangers and increase the perception of risk. They also find that risk perception is 

diminished when there is confidence in the distributors.  Consequently the hypothesis are 

the following: 

H1. Consumers that have a higher organic food knowledge, he or she will show more trust 

in organic market agents and institutions.  

H2: As higher is the knowledge on organic the higher is the perception of risk associated to 

food production technologies. 

 

2.2 Trust in Organic Market Agents and Institution 

An important element in defining the attitudes of consumers in relation to food is 

confidence. According to Earle and Cvetkovic (1995) and Trumbo and McComas (2003), 

there are two types of confidence: interpersonal trust and social trust. Interpersonal trust 

refers to the relationship between information source and the target audience (trust in 

sources of information.) By contrast, social trust is a property of the multifaceted social 

processes underlying people's choices and how people or organizations are assigned 

responsibilities for the administration (trust in institutions). According to Siegrist, et al., 

(2000, p. 354), social trust is defined as ''the willingness to trust those who are responsible 

for decisions and actions related to the administration of public health and security''. 

Another issue affecting the purchase of organic food is the level of trust that consumers 

have toward the certification of organic products, because consumers distrust of the 

veracity of the certification (Shaw et. al., 2007). The distribution, certification and labeling 

are related in some way with the level of trust and confidence of consumers when buying 

organic food (Aarset et al., 2004; Canavari et al., 2002; Hamzaoui and Zahaf, 2006). 

Lobb et al. 2007 proposed in their investigation a relationship between trust and purchase 

intention, however their findings suggest a significant relationship between trust and 

attitude towards the consumption of chicken, plus a positive and reciprocal relationship 

between the level of trust and subjective norms. Dierks and Henning (2006) investigated 



Structural equation modelling of consumer acceptance of organic food in Spain 
 

8 
 

the trust as a determining factor in consumer behavior in Germany and concluded that there 

is a significant relationship between trust and attitudes. The results of Yin, et al. (2009) 

show that consumers’ degree of trust for organic food has a positive effect on their 

willingness to purchase. Some researches (Lobb, et al. 2007; Chen and Li, 2007; Stefanni et 

al., 2008; Costa-Font and Gil, 2009) propose the inclusion of a set of causal relationships 

that tries to explain the perceived risk. In particular that risk perception maybe affected by 

trust. The results of these studies conclude that trust is found as a negative impact on 

perceived risk. Therefore the following hypotheses are proposed. 

H3: Consumers that trust on organic market agents and institution have a positive intention 

to purchase organic food. 

H4: Consumers that trust on organic market agents and institutions perceive a fewer risk 

associated to food production. 

H5: Consumers that trust on organic market agents and institutions will have a positive 

attitude toward organic food. 

2.3 Perceived Risk 

In 1960 Bauer was the first to propose the idea that consumer behavior should be 

considered in terms of taking risks (Taylor, 1974). The perceived risk has been analyzed in 

numerous ways and it is applied to different market segments, making it suitable for study 

(Arnold, 2008). Even within the technical-scientific advances or cognitive perspective, risk 

perception could be regarded as a mere result of beliefs (Lupton, 1999). Other approaches 

to highlight are the social and cultural processes that mediate the perception so the risk 

perception is (as in Bredahl, Grunert and Frewer, 1998) treated separately like the 

construction of other results of beliefs (Lupton, 1999). 

The way consumers are coping with the perception of risk can be better understood if the 

risk is not approached as a construction of a dimension, otherwise as a multifaceted 

construction. For example, the perception of risk can be divided into six dimensions: 1) 

personals and physicals, 2) economics, 3) functional and performance dimensions/ risk, 4) 

risk convenience, 5) social risk, 6) psychological risk (Murray, 1991; Yeung and Morris, 

2001). According to Vos Arnold, (2008), often these six dimensions are considered 



Structural equation modelling of consumer acceptance of organic food in Spain 
 

9 
 

independent. Organic food can have all the items mentioned above. They are probably 

related to personal risk, because of the benefits and drawbacks of health; financial risk due 

to the possibility of "premium" prices for organic products; functional risk because people 

are assesing whether a product meets their expectations (taste, texture); the risk of 

convenience that comes from having to search for food in specific places, the social risk 

can occur when the circle of friends and relatives of a person are for or against organic 

food; and finally the psychological risk of buying organic food involves the way in which 

the consumer thinks about himself based on made purchases. In summary, organic food can 

contain all the basic elements of risk perception, so this concept is important and must be 

addressed within the current research (Vos Arnold, 2008). 

Recent research shows that there is a causal relationship between risk perception and 

buying behavior: the first is an important explanatory variable of the latter (Yeung and 

Morris, 2001). For example Huang (1993) reports on an empirical study of waste-free 

products that consumers have a tendency to avoid foods that from their point of view are 

potentially contaminated. In the model proposed by Gianluca et al. 2008, establishes the 

hypothesis of an occasional relationship between the perception of risk attitude and 

purchase intention, and conclude that the attitude is determined by the beliefs and perceived 

risk, indirectly affecting purchase intention. Moreover, Lobb et al. (2007) in their 

investigation of chicken conclude that the perception of risk does not appear to affect 

purchase intention but it does affect attitudes. Therefore the following hypothesis is 

proposed. 

H6: Consumers that perceive more risk associated to agricultural production will have a 

positive attitude toward organic food. 

2.4 Environmental and Health Concern 

Another personal factor that influences in the definition of attitudes is lifestyle. It is 

understood as the result of an ideology derived from a system of values, especially those 

that are related to health and the environment, which affect individual assessments, 

consumer attitudes and behavior (Scheifferstein and Ophiusa, 1998; Cicia et al., 2002). 

Fotopoulos and Krystallis (2002) identified that consumers buy organic food because they 

perceived them as healthier food, more healthful, tasty and as safe as conventional ones. 



Structural equation modelling of consumer acceptance of organic food in Spain 
 

10 
 

Consumers perceive organic food as safer food because they use production systems that 

avoid the use of pesticides, fertilizers, chemicals, preservatives, hormones and antibiotics, 

among others (Jolly, 1991; Scheifferstein and Ophiusa, 1998; Shaw et. al., 2007). Another 

key reason for consumers choosing organic food is health, this is because in recent years 

have seen health problems such as bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE), salmonella 

and those relating to genetically modified foods, which has led certain consumers to buy 

organic food as a protective measure (Makatouni, 2002; Zanoli and Naspetti, 2002; Kotler 

et al., 2005; O'Donnovan, 2002; Ougthon and Ritson, 2007). 

Another relevant element of individuals’ lifestyle is the concern for the environment. A 

positive attitude toward environmental issues is positively related to the purchase of organic 

foods and their frequency (Grunert and Juhl, 1995). After Padel and Foster (2005); 

Chryssohoidis and Krystallis (2005) and Chen (2007) confirm that attitudes towards the 

environment account for the purchase of organic food, although in smaller percentages than 

those related to health. Magistris and Gracia (2008), and Kuhar and Juvanic (2005) 

conducted studies with organic fruit and vegetables reaching the same conclusion about the 

relationship of the environment and the purchase of organic food. Therefore the following 

hypothesis is offered. 

H7: As less different organic food is perceived from conventional food as negative is the 

attitude of individuals towards organic food. 

 

2.5 Subjective norms 

According to the TPB, intention to perform or not a behavior is determined 

by two factors, one personal and one social. In other words, subjective norms are the own 

perception of the social pressure to perform or not perform a target behavior (Francis, J. et 

al., 2004). The subjective norm is estimated by: 1) the normative beliefs about the 

possibility that certain individuals or significant groups expect to play or not on a conduct 

in question, and 2) the individual motivation to satisfy those expectations. Generally, an 

individual perceives social pressure when he believes that most of the relevant social 

referents think he should carry out that behavior (Ajzen, 1980; Chen, 2007; Haugtvedt et 



Structural equation modelling of consumer acceptance of organic food in Spain 
 

11 
 

al., 2008). It means that people try to do something when they believe that it is important to 

others and therefore think that they should do it (León, 2004). 

But not only subjective norms affect behavior, but also affect attitudes, which is why some 

authors have proposed a revision of the TPB. For example Arvola, et al. (2008), Tarkiainen 

(2006), Chang (1998), Shepherd and O'Kefee (1984) have found evidence that there is an 

important causal link between subjective norms and attitudes. Chang (1998), Arvola, et 

al. (2008), Lobb et al. (2007), Tarkiainen (2006) assessed the relationship between 

subjective norms and attitudes towards a behavior, finding a significant relation among 

them. Chang (1998) suggests that the link could be explained as the influence of social 

environment on the formation of individual attitudes and concludes that subjective norms 

positively influence on the purchase intention through attitudes.  

Specifically Lobb et al. (2007) conclude from their research with chicken that there is a 

significant relationship between subjective norms and attitudes, as well as a positive 

relationship between trust and subjective norms. For its part Tarkianen (2006) not only 

noticed that the relationship between subjective norms and attitudes towards buying organic 

food is significant, but also that attitudes towards buying organic food and subjective norms 

are not independent. Their research shows that subjective norms influence attitudes, 

differing from the original theory proposed by Ajzen (1977). Therefore, the following 

hypotheses are proposed. 

H8: There is a positive relation between Subjective Norms and trust on organic market 

agents and institutions. 

H9: Subjective norms have a positive relation with attitudes toward organic food. 

H10: There is a positive relation between subjective norms and intention to purchase 

organic food. 

2.6 Attitudes toward Organic Food 

Intentions are indications of how hard people are willing to try, of how much of an effort 

they are planning to exert, in order to perform the behavior (Ajezen, 1991). The intentions 

are the best individual predictors of planned behavior and are an impartial predictor of an 

action (Bagozzi et al., 1986). According to the TPB proposed by Ajzen and Fishbein 



Structural equation modelling of consumer acceptance of organic food in Spain 
 

12 
 

(1977), the intention of performing or not a behavior is determined by a personal factor. 

TPB theory assumes that each factor has a relative weight to be determined, and that these 

weights depend on the intention that we are studying as well as the person in question 

(León et. al, 2004). 

In relation to personal matters, a key element to highlight is the beliefs held by the person 

about the probability that the realization of a particular behavior is the result of a number of 

specific consequences. Consequently, a favorable attitude is when most of the beliefs about 

own behavior are based on positive consequences, and will be unfavorable when most of 

these beliefs are substantiated in negative aspects (Ajzen, 1977; Ajzen, 1980). In 

conclusion, according to the TPB when individuals’ attitude towards the participation of a 

behavior is positive, is more committed with that behavior. Therefeore, when consumers’ 

attitude towards organic food is positive, consumers have greater intentions to purchase 

organic foods (Chen, 2007). 

H11: Consumer with a positive attitude toward organic food will exhibit a positive 

intention to purchase organic food. 

2.7 Price  

Regarding the importance of prices, in this market the information is scarce and 

partial. However, as a general rule, it is admitted that organic food prices are superior to 

those of conventional products. The difference varies between countries, product types and 

processing degree (Michelsen et al. 1999). Thus, in products such as fruits and vegetables 

the differences may vary between 50% and 100%, sometimes up to 250% (Thompson, 

1999, Glaser and Thompson, 1999), while the surcharges are between 15% and 50%, 

although with large variations in the case of dairy products (Menghi, 1997, Glaser and 

Thompson, 2000). 

The main group of works related to the demand for organic agriculture has focused on 

measuring consumer willingness to pay a premium for a green product and its relationship 

to socioeconomic variables and lifestyle (Byrne et al., 1991, Groff et al., 1991, Collins et al, 

1992, Sánchez et al., 1998a, Sánchez et al. 1998b; Gracia et al., 1998), assuming the 

hypothesis of price consideration as the primary obstacle to the market growth for these 

products. Thus, Misra et al., 1991 found a significant positive relationship between those 



Structural equation modelling of consumer acceptance of organic food in Spain 
 

13 
 

consumers concerned about the health effects caused by the presence of residues in food 

and their willingness to pay more for the product certificate. In the case of a particular 

product such as tomatoes, Weaver et al. (1992) exposed that over 50% of respondents 

would pay at least 10% more for pesticide-free tomatoes. For its part, Blend and Van 

Ravenswaay (1998) found that between 50 and 60% of respondents would buy apple 

certified free of pesticides, if comparing the prices levels of conventional products, the 

price of these would equal to the prices of the certified products. 

Krystallis and Chryssohoidis (2005) concluded in their research that the among the factors 

that affect the willingness to pay for organic foods in Greece are specific factors, such as 

food quality and safety, trust in certification, and, for some products, brand name. 

Familiarity with the concept of organic products is a determining factor at the time to 

consider the consumer’s willingness to pay. In this sense (Underhill and Figueroa, 1996), 

45% of consumers who profess to be familiar with organics products (about 80%) were 

willing to pay more than 10% or even 15% of them would pay more 20%. On the other 

hand, Sanchez et al. (1998a) and Gil et al., (2000) detected a significantly higher 

willingness to pay for a segment of consumers who qualify as regular buyers of these 

products. Govindasamy and Italia (1999) obtained results consistent with the latest. 

Therefore, the following hypothesis is proposed. 

H12: The price has an effect on purchase intention of organic food. 

3. Research methodology  

3.1 The Sample 

The data in this study were collected from a survey conducted in spring 2011 to sample of 

338 adult’s representative of Barcelona population. Respondents were recruited by a 

professional market research company and they had to meet two criteria: a) to be the 

primary food purchaser of its household and b) to be a frequent organic food purchaser. 

3.2 Measures 

The survey instrument was based on prior literature with purchase intention measure 

developed based on Ajzen (2006), Magistris and Gracia, (2008) and Lockie et al. (2004). 

The subjective norms statements were based on Ajzen (2006). The measures of 



Structural equation modelling of consumer acceptance of organic food in Spain 
 

14 
 

environmental and health concern were based on Botonaki (2006) and Magistris and Gracia 

(2008). The measures of price were adapted from measures contained in Botonaki (2006). 

Attitudes toward organic food were based on the items of Magistris and Gracia (2008). The 

items of the variable trust in market agents and institutions were adapted from Chen and Li 

(2007), while the measures of risk were adapted from Lockie et al. (2004). The measures of 

subjective knowledge were based on previous literature on knowledge (Alba, 1983; Rao 

and Monroe, 1988; Alba and Hutchison, 1987 and Dodd et al. 2005) (See Table 1). The 

survey also contained question on socio-demographic characteristics (gender, income, 

education level, age). All question were measured on a 6-level Lickert scale, where “tend to 

agree” responses are codified by ordinal value of 3, “undecided or indifference” by 0 and 

finally, “tend to disagree” by ordinal value -3.  

- Insert table 1 about here – 

 

3.3 Analyses procedures 

Structural equation modeling has been used in this study in order to test the causal links 

specified in the theoretical model, what is not possible via regression analysis. Indeed, the 

structural regression (SR) model has been tested following a two-step modeling approach 

(Anderson and Gerbing, 1988), where we first define an acceptable confirmatory factor 

analysis (CFA) and next an adequate SR model.  

Following Jöreskog and Sörbom (1996), we have specified a Structural Equation Model 

which consists of three main types of relationships. First, a measurement model is 

identified after performing confirmatory factor analysis. The outcome relates, on one hand, 

observed indicator with the exogenous latent variables: 

 Λ    

where , is a q × 1 vector of observed exogenous or independent variables, Λ  is a q × n 

matrix of coefficients of the regression of x on ,  is an n × 1 random vector of latent 

independent variables and  is a q × 1 vector of error in x. 

On the other hand, observed indicators are related with the endogenous constructs: 

 Λ  



Structural equation modelling of consumer acceptance of organic food in Spain 
 

15 
 

where y, is a p × 1 vector of observed endogenous or dependent variables, Λ  is a p × m 

matrix of coefficients of the regression of y on ,  is a m × 1 random vector of latent 

dependent variables and  is a p × 1 vector of measurement errors in y.  

A third equation defines the structural model, which specifies the causal relations that exist 

among the latent variables, describes its causal effects and assigns the explained and 

unexplained variances (Jöreskog and Sörbom, 1996). 

 Γ  

where B is a m × m matrix of coefficients of the  variables in the structural relationship, Γ 

is a m × n matrix of coefficients of the  - variables in the structural relationship, and  is a  

vector of errors.  

This study uses ordinal data, arguably a rudimentary measurement of continuous variables 

where the scale is considered as thresholds of the continuous variables (Jöreskog and 

Sörbom, 1996). Correlations among ordinal variables are called polychoric correlations, 

which are theoretical correlations of continuous versions (Jöreskog and Sörbom, 1996). In 

order to perform the analysis we have used the General Weighted Least-Squares (WLS) 

method instead of Maximum Likelihood (ML) since both the data present a non-normal 

distribution and because ML do not allow us to employ the weight matrix for the analysis, 

which is the inverse of the estimated asymptotic covariance matrix E of the polychoric 

correlations (Kline, 2005). 

 

where  is a vector of the elements in the lower covariance matrix s of order k × k,  is the 

vector of corresponding elements of Σ ,   is the positive definite matrix of order       

u × u where 1 /2. The WLS function is the weighted computation of the 

squares residuals. 

Finally, we will assess the goodness-of-fit of the model by analyzing factor loading which 

relate each indicator with the constructs. Reliability will be measured by means of 

composite reliability and Cronbach’s α. Moreover, the extracted validity for each construct 

will be also measured (Hair, Anderson, Tahtan and Black, 1999). 



Structural equation modelling of consumer acceptance of organic food in Spain 
 

16 
 

Regarding the structural model, we begin with an assessment of the significance of the 

estimated parameters in the structural equations (Hair et al., 1999). We proceed with 

estimating the reliability coefficients of each equation and the associated correlation matrix 

among constructs examined in our model (Barrio and Luque, 2000). Finally, diagnostic 

parameter such as Chi-square ( ); Root Mean Square Error of Approximation (RMSEA); 

Goodness-of-Fit Index (GFI); the Adjusted Goodness of Fit Index (AGFI); the 

Comparative-Fit-Index (CFI); the Normed-Fit-Index (NFI) and the Non-Normed-Fit-Index 

(NNFI) will ne also considered as indicator of the model goodness-of-fit for the CFA and 

SR model. 

4. Results 

4.1 Sample characteristics and Descriptive analysis  

The main socio-demographic characteristics of the sample are shown in Table 2. The 

sample was made up of 225 (67%) women and 113(33%) men. Almost 70% of the 

respondents were between 35 and 65 years old. As expected, the majority of the sample 

(more than 80%) had finished secondary school and had a medium household income level 

(from 1000 to 5000 €/month family). The majority of the sample (70%) has Childs at home 

and almost the 70% bought organic food occasionally. 

 -Insert Table 2 about here- 

Considering survey responses, we can state that Spanish consumers revealed considerable 

confidence in the organic market agents and institutions (see Figure 2). It is notable that 

more than 50% of the sample was concerned for the environment and for their health. 

Nearly 40% of the participants have positive attitudes toward organic food and almost of 

60% did not consider any of the three sets of opinions (familiar, friends or important people 

influence) when deciding on organic food consumption. More than 50% of the sample 

revealed to perceived the risks associated to consume food produced and processed using 

synthetic chemicals, additives or fertilizers.  Finally for the majority of the sample is very 

important the role of the factor price and almost 60% of the respondents affirm that if the 

price of organic food decreases they will purchase organic food. 

- Insert Fig. 2 about here – 



Structural equation modelling of consumer acceptance of organic food in Spain 
 

17 
 

4.2 Measurement model (confirmatory analysis) 

As mentioned in Section 3, the first step of the study has been to carry out a confirmatory 

factor analysis for the whole set of constructs: subjective norm, environmental and health 

concern trust in market agents and institution, perceived risk, subjective knowledge, 

attitudes toward organic food, price and purchase intention assuming all errors to be 

correlated. The confirmatory factor analysis with all indicators results suitable for the 

Multi-Sample Model. The correlation matrix among all variables by country is presented in 

Table 3. All constructs were measured by three or two construct indicators as proposed by 

Kline (2005) among others. 

- Insert Table 3 about here - 

The main parameters to test for the robustness of the constructs, following Hair et al. 

(1999) and Kline (2005) appear to show acceptable results for the Multi-Sample Model as 

shown in Table 4. The parameters that are important for examining the internal consistency 

of the model are composite reliability (which must be >0.7), internal consistency reliability, 

measured by Cronbach’s α (which must be >0.7) and extracted validity (which must be 

>0.5) (Bagozzi and Yi, 1988; Hair et al., 1999).  For every construct, all composite 

reliabilities are greater than 0.7 and all Cronbach’s α are over 0.7 but for C2, C5 and C7 

which is above 0.5, thus we can say that the reliability is acceptable. Regarding the variance 

extracted, it is higher than 0.50 (Table 4). 

The model meets the widely accepted goodness of fit standards for the Multi-Sample 

confirmatory model (unconstrained model) indicating that the conceptual model 

satisfactory fits the data (see Table 4). However, it must be pointed that the Chi-square was 

significant, χ2 /df = 2.25 is smaller than 3, demonstrating a good model fit (Carmines and 

Maclver, 1981). The Root Mean Square Error of Approximation (RMSEA) is 0.061 which 

is in the 0.5-0.8 limit interval offered by Hair el al., (1999) and Kline (2005). The Goodness 

of Fit (GFI) was 0.98, the Normed-Fit Index (NFI) 0.95 and the Non-Normed Fit Index 

(NNFI) 0.95, all were greater than 0.90 as offered by Marcoulides and Schumacker (1996) 

and Chen and Li (2007). 

- Insert Table 4 about here – 

4.3 Structural model  



Structural equation modelling of consumer acceptance of organic food in Spain 
 

18 
 

In testing the model using a Structural Equation Model we find that a satisfactory fit has 

also been obtained, see Table 5. Fig. 3 show the path diagrams obtained.  Of the 

relationships hypothesized across the context 8 hypothesis have been supported. Hypothesis 

1 and 2 are supported with path significant at p=0.05 level. Therefore we can state that 

there is a direct and positive relation between knowledge and both trust in organic agents 

and the perception of risk, being the first important.  

- Insert Table 5 about here – 

- Insert Fig. 3 about here – 

Regarding to Hypothesis 4 is clear that the trust in market agents and institution has a 

negative impact on risk perceptions. Moreover the estimated path is -0.19. The Hypothesis 

3 has not been supported, the estimated path is lower than 0.05 with a p=0.05.  However the 

Hypothesis 5 has been supported with an estimated path coefficient of 0.16. The positive 

relation between perceive risk and attitudes toward organic food is partial supported, the 

estimated path is of 0.09.  

Next, Hypothesis 7 has not been supported the path diagram shows a negative impact in the 

attitudes toward organic food by the environmental and health concern. Also, the 

Hypothesis 8 and 9 has not been supported because exists a negative relation between 

subjective norms and trust with a path diagram coefficient of -0.47.  

The estimated paths coefficients also suggested a confirmatory evidence of the Hypothesis 

10, with a 95 percent of confidence, indicating that the consumers with positive subjective 

norms will exhibit a positive intention to purchase organic food. The positive relation 

between the attitudes toward organic food and the intention to purchase organic food 

(Hypothesis 11) has been supported with a path coefficient of 0.83. Finally, the association 

between the price and intention to purchase has been supported with a p =0.05 and path 

coefficient of 0.82. 

5. Discussion and conclusions 

In this paper, we have tested our claim that consumer intentions towards organic food are 

the result of a complex decision-making process that results from a specific cumulative 

interaction of subjective norms, environmental and health concern, subjective knowledge, 



Structural equation modelling of consumer acceptance of organic food in Spain 
 

19 
 

trust in market agents and perceived risk. Particularly, we have examined the behavioral 

model resulting from the introduction of organic food in Spain. Given that some of the 

underlying choice dimension are simultaneously formed and exhibit interactions among 

constructs, traditional decision making models that assume parameter exogeneity are not 

meaningful. To overcome this methodological problem we taken advantage of structural 

equation modeling which allows for endogeneity.  This study has implied design a suitable 

empirical model to carefully understand the process of attitude formation, which defines 

our structural equation to be tested.  

The structural equation model tested 12 hypothesis, 8 of the 12 hypothesis has been 

supported while the other four have not been supported (See Table 6). Contrary to previous 

research (e.g. Michalidou and Hassan, 2009), health and environmental consciousness does 

not explain the attitude toward organic food but concords with the results of Michalidou 

and Hassan, 2009. However, in this study we found a positive relation between health and 

environmental concern with the perceived risk and trust in organic market agents and 

institutions. This relations means that if consumers have a high concern for environmental 

and health will influence in the perceive risk and trust in market agents. In others studies 

did not consider subjective knowledge, trust or risk as antecedents of the attitudes toward 

organic food. In our study, the three of them shown be significant determinants of 

consumer’s attitudes and intention purchase in the organic context.  

- Insert Table 6 about here- 

Also we found a negative relation between subjective norms and attitudes toward organic 

food contrary to Tarkiainen and Sunqvist, 2005; Tarkianen, 2006, Lobb et al., 2007 and 

others who found a positive relation between subjective norms and attitudes toward organic 

food. But we found a positive relation between subjective norms and intention to purchase. 

It is likely that the subjective knowledge, perceived risk ant trust in market agents in our 

model diminished the direct effect of a more distal construct that of environmental and 

health concern and as the subjective norms. Our finding is in line with Michalideou and 

Hassa, 2009 and Tarkiainen and Sundqvist, 2005 who refute a health and environment 

consciousness as a key driver for shaping attitudes toward organic products. On the other 



Structural equation modelling of consumer acceptance of organic food in Spain 
 

20 
 

hand the positive relation between subjective norms and purchase intention is in line with 

the research of Chen, 2007. 

The relationship between subjective and trust in organic market agents results negative, 

contrary to the research of Lobb et al., 2007. This could be explained for the inclusion of 

the subjective knowledge and environmental and health concern, constructs that shown be 

significant determinants of the consumer’s trust in organic market agents and institutions. 

Our findings suggest that, consistently with previous studies (Chen, 2007; Costa-Font and 

Gil, 2009), perceived risks are an important construct underpinning attitudes toward 

organic food and purchase intention. Consumers perceived that the price affects the 

purchase intention this could be happening because in Spain the prices of the organic food 

is higher than the conventional ones. Finally, our findings are in line with the so-called 

TPB, which state that attitudes toward organic food clearly predict purchase intentions. 

In summary, the aim of this paper is to analyze consumer’s organic decision making 

process for Spanish consumers. As a conclusion it can be stated that this study went a step 

further from previous literature on analyzing individuals’ decision process towards 

purchase organic food. It shows that purchase intention towards organic food is based in 

both personal and social factors. The study has placed together all the relevant variables 

identified by previous studies developing a complex behavioral model on consumers’ 

organic decision making process. Results provide evidence on factors that determine the 

intention to purchase organic food, especially on the role of 1)knowledge about organic 

food production on forming risk perception associated to food production as well as on 

building trust in organic markets and institutions. This means that education and 

information are key elements for a successful development of the organic market. 2) 

subjective norms, 3) price relevance and finally 4) attitude towards organic food.  

  



Structural equation modelling of consumer acceptance of organic food in Spain 
 

21 
 

References  

Aarset, B. B. (2004). The European consumers' understandig and percpetions of "organic" 

food regime: the case of aquaculture. British Food Journal , 93-105. 

Acción, F. -C. (2008). Facua. Retrieved Mayo 06, 2011, from https://www.facua.org 

Ajzen I., F. M. (1977). Attitude-behavior relations: A theorical analysis and review of 

emperical research. Physicological Bulletin , 888-918. 

Ajzen, I. F. (1980). Understanding attitudes and predicting behavior. Englewood Cliffs, 

NJ: Prentice-Hall, Inc. 

Ajzen, I. (1991). The theory of planned behavior. Organizational Behavior and Humand 

Decision Processes , 179-211. 

Alba, J. (1983). The effects of product knowledge on the comprehension, retention, and 

evaluation of product information. Advances in Consumer Research , 577-580. 

Alba, J.W., Hutchinson, J.W. (1987). Dimensions of consumer expertise. Journal of 

Consumer Research , 411-454. 

Anderson, J. C., & Gerbing, D. W. (1988). Structural equation modelling in practice: A 

review and recommended two-step approach. Psychological Bulletin , 411-423. 

Arnold, V. J. (2008). Labeling Organic Food Products: The role of perceived risk, framing 

and prospect theory on purchase decisions. Humboldt: Humboldt State University . 

Arvola A., V. M. (2008). Predicting intentions to purchase organic food: The role of 

affective and moral attitudes in the Theory of Planned Behaviour. Appetite , 443-454. 

Bagozzi, R., Baumgartner, H., Yi, Y. (1986). An investigation into the role of intentions as 

mediators of the attitude–behavior relationship. Journal of Economic Psychology , 35-62. 

Barrio, S. and Luque, T. (2000). Análisis de ecuaciones estructurales. En Técnicas de 

análisis de datos en investigación de mercados. Madrid: Pirámide Ediciones. 

Bell, R., Meiselman, H. (1995). Determining food choice.The role of eating environments 

in. In Food choice and theFood choice and the consumer (pp. 293-310). London: Chapman 

and Hall. 



Structural equation modelling of consumer acceptance of organic food in Spain 
 

22 
 

Blend, J., Van Ravenswaay, E. (1998). Consumer demand for ecolabelled apples: survey 

methods and descriptives results. Staff paper 98-20 Dept. of Agricultural Economics, 

MCichigan St. University . 

Bonti-Ankomah, S., Yiridoe, E. (2006). Organic and Conventional Food: A Literature 

Review of the Economics of Consumer Perceptions and Preferences. Nova Scotia, Canadá: 

Organic Agriculture Centre of Canada. 

Botonaki, A., Polymeros, K, Tsakiridou, E., Mattas, K. (2006). The role of food quality 

certification on consumers' food choices. Brithish Food Journal , 77-90. 

Bredahl, L., Grunert, G., Frewer, L. J. (1998). Consumer attitudes and decision making 

with regard to genetically engineered food products A review of the literature and a 

presentation of models for future research. Journal of Consumer Policy , 251–277. 

Briz a, T. and Ward, R. W. . (2009). Consumer awareness of organic products in Spain: An 

application of multinominal logit models. Food Policy , 295–304. 

Brucks, M. (1985). The effects of product class knowledge on information search behavior. 

Journal of Consumer Research , 1-16. 

Byrne. P, Bacon, R. Toensmeyer, U. (1994). Pesticide residue concerns and shopping 

location likelihood. Agribusiness , 491-501. 

Canavari, M., Bazzani, GM, Spadoni, R., Regazzi, D. (2002). Food Safety and organic fruit 

demand in Italy: a survey. Bristish Food Journal , 187-199. 

Carmines, E. and McIver, J. (1981). Analyzing models with unobserved variables: Analysis 

of covariance structures. Beverly Hills: Sage Publications Inc.. 

Chang, M. (1998). Predicting unethical behavior: a comparison of the theory of reasoned 

action of the thery of planned behavior. Journal of Business Ethics , 1825-33. 

Chen, M. and Hsiao-Lan Li. (2007). The consumer's attitude toward genetically modified 

foods in Taiwan. Food Quality and Preference , 662-674. 

Chen, M. (2007). Consumer attitudes and purchase intentions in relation to organic foods in 

Taiwan: Moderating effects of food-related personality trails. Food Quality and Preference 

, 1008-1021. 



Structural equation modelling of consumer acceptance of organic food in Spain 
 

23 
 

Chryssoidis, G. K. (2005). Organic consumers' personal values research: testing anda 

validating the list of values (LOV) scale and implemeting a value based segmentation task. 

Food Quality and Preference , 585-599. 

Cicia, G., Del Giudice T., Scarpa R. (2002). Consumer's perception of quality in organic 

food: a random utility model under preference hetreogeneity and choice correlation from 

rank-orderings. British Food Journal , 200-213. 

Collins, J. C. (1992). Consumer attitudes on pesticide treatment histories of fresh produce. 

Journal of Economics and Business , 223-235. 

Costa-Font, M. and Gil, J. (2009). Structural equation modelling of consumer acceptance of 

genetically modified (GM) food in the Mediterranean Europe: A cross country study. Food 

Quality and Preference , 339-409. 

Dierks, L., Hanf, C. (2006). Trust as a Determinant of Consumer Behaviour in Food Safety 

Crises. International Association of Agricultural Economists Conference. Australia. 

Dodd, T. L. (2005). Differential Effects of Experience, Subjective Knowledge, and 

Objective Knowledge on Sources of Information used in Consumer Wine Purchasing. 

Journal of Hospitality and Tourism Research , 3-19. 

Earle, T. C. (1995). Social trust towards a cosmopolitan society. Westport, CT: Praeger . 

Eertmans, A., Baeyens, F., Van den Bergh, O. (2001). Food likes and their relative 

importance in human eating behavior: Review and preliminary suggestions for health 

promotion. Health Education Research , 443-456. 

FiBL. (2010). Organic Agriculture Worldwide: The main results of the FiBL–IFOAM 

Survey 2010. Switzerland. 

Fotopoulos C., Krystallis, A. (2002). Purchasing motives and profile of greek consumer a 

countrywide survey. British Food Journal , 730-764. 

Francis, J. et al. (2004). Constructing questionares based on the theory of planned 

behaviour. United Kingdom: Centre for Health Services Research. 



Structural equation modelling of consumer acceptance of organic food in Spain 
 

24 
 

Gianluca, S. A. (2008). Determinants of Intention to Purchase Chicken in Italy: The Role of 

Consumer Risk Perception and Trust In Different Information Sources. Agribusiness , 523-

537. 

Giannakas, K. (2002). Information asymmetries and consumption decisions in organic food 

product markets. Canadian Journal of Agricultural Economics , 35-50. 

Gil, J., Gracia, A., Sánchez. M. (2000). Market segmentation and willingness to pay for 

organic products in Spain. International Food and Agribusiness Management Review , 207-

226. 

Glaser, L. T. (2000). Demand for organic and conventional bevarage milk. Annual Meeting 

de la Western Agricultural Association. E.U. 

Govindasamy, R., Italia, J. (1999). Predicting willingness to pay a premium for organically 

grown fresh produce. Journal of Food Distribution Research , 44-53. 

Gracia, A., Gil, J.M., Sánchez, M. (1998). Potencial de mercado de los productos 

ecológicos en Aragón. Aragón: Gobierno de Aragón. 

Groff, A., Kreider, C., Toensmeyer, U. (1991). Analysis of tge Delaware market for 

organically grown produce. Journal od Food Distribution Research , 118-125. 

Groves, M. (1998). Firm enters plea in false labeling case. Los Angeles Times , 166. 

Grunert, S. C. (1995). Values, environmental attitudes, and buying of organic foods". 

Journal of Econoic Psychology , 39-62. 

Hair, J. A. (1999). Análisis Multivariante. Prentice Hall. 

Hamzaoui, L., Zahaf, M. (2006). Exploring the decision making process of Canadian 

organic food consumers. Working paper, School of Management, University of Ottawa , 31. 

Haugtvedt, C., Herr, M., Kardes, F. (2008). Handbook of Consumer Psychology. New 

York: Routledge. 

Hill, H., Lyncchehauon F. (2002). Organic milk: attitudes and consumption patterns. 

British Food Journal , 526-542. 



Structural equation modelling of consumer acceptance of organic food in Spain 
 

25 
 

Huang, C. (1993). Simultaneous-equation model for estimating consumer risk perceptions, 

attitudes, and willingness-to-pay for residue-free produce. The Journal of Consumer Affairs 

, 377-388. 

Hutchins, R.K., Greenhalgh, L.A. (1997). Organic confusion: Sustaining competitive 

Advantage. British Food Journal , 336-338. 

Jolly, D. (1991). Determinants of organic horticultural products consumption based on a 

sample of California consumers. Acta Horticulture , 41-148. 

Jolly, D.A., Schutz, G.H., Diaz-Knauf, K.V., Johal, J. (1989). Organic foods: Consumer 

attitudes and use. Food Technology , 60-66. 

Jöreskog, K. and Sörbom. (1996). Lisrel 8: User’s reference guide . Scientific Software 

International. 

Kline, R. (2005). Principles and practice of structural equation modelling. New York: The 

Guilford Press. 

Kotler, P., Armstrong, G. and Cunnignghan, P. (2005). Principles of Marketing. Toronto: 

Pearson Prentice-Hall. 

Krystallis, A., Chryssoidis, G. (2005). Consumers' willingness to pay for organic food - 

factors that affect it and variation per organic product type. British Food Journal , 320-343. 

Kuhar, A., Juvancic, L. (2005). Modelling consumer preferences toward organic and 

integrated fruits and vegetables in Slovenia. 97th EAAE. Seminar on The Economics and 

Policy of Diet and Health. 

León, J. M. (2004). Psicología de la salud y de la calidad de vida. Barcelona: UOC.  

Lobb, A. M. (2007). Modelling risk perception and trust in food safety information within 

the theory of planned behaviour. Food Quality and Preference , 384–395. 

Lockie, S., Lyons, K., Lawrence, G., Janet, G. (2004). Choosing organics: a path analysis 

of factors underlying the selection of organic food among Australian consumers. Appetite , 

135-146. 

Lupton, D. (1999). Risk. London, Routledlege . 



Structural equation modelling of consumer acceptance of organic food in Spain 
 

26 
 

Magistris, T., Gracia, A. (2008). The decision to buy organic food products in Southern 

Italy. Brtish Food Journal , 929-947. 

Makatouni, A. (2002). What motivates consumers to buy organic food in the UK? Results 

from a qualitative study, . British Food Journal , 345-352. 

Menghi, A. (1997). Consumer response to ecological milk in Sweden. Dept. of Economic. 

SLU Master Thesis. 

Michaelidou, N. and Hassan, L. (2009). Modeling the factors affecting rural consumer's 

purchase of organic and free-range produce: A case study of consumers' from the Island of 

Arran in Scotland, U.K. Food Policy , 1-10. 

Michelsen, J. Hamm, U., Wynen, E., Roth, E. (1999). The european market for o growth 

and development. Alemania: Vol. 7. 

Miret, F. (2004). Situación actual de la producción integrada en Cataluña y España. 

España: Rubes . 

Misra, S., Huang, Ch., Ott, S. (1991). Consumer willingness to pay for pesticides-free fresh 

produce. Western Journal of Agricultural Economics. , 218-227. 

Murray, K. B. (1991). A test of services marketing theory: Consumer information 

acquisition activities. Journal of Marketing , 10-25. 

O'Donnovan, P. M. (2002 ). Irish consumer preference for organic meat. British Food 

Journal , 353-370. 

Ougthon E., Ritson C. (2007). Food consumers and organic agriculture. In J. N. Cooper, 

Handbook of organic food safety and quality (pp. 74-96). Cambridge: Woodhead 

publishing limited. 

Padel, S. F. (2005). Exploring the gab between attitudes and behaviour. British Food 

Journal , 606-625. 

Peter, J., Olson, J. (2005). Consumer behavior and marketing strategy. Boston: Irwin Mc 

Graw Hill. 



Structural equation modelling of consumer acceptance of organic food in Spain 
 

27 
 

Quenum, L. (2010). Tesis Doctoral. Comparación entre la producción ecológica e 

integrada de hortalizas en basa a parámetros del suelo. Valencia: Universidad Politécnica 

de Valencia. 

Raju, P. S. (1993). Differential effects of subjective knowledge, objective knowledge, and 

usage experience on decision making: An exploratory investigation. Journal of Consumer 

Psychology , 153-180. 

Rao, A. R. (1988). The moderating effect of prior knowledge on cue utilization in product 

evaluations. Journal of Consumer Research , 253-264. 

Rozin, P., Tuorila, H. (1993). Simultaneous and temporal contextual influences on food 

acceptance. Food Quality and Preference , 11-20. 

Sánchez, M., Gil, J.M., Gracia, A. (1998a). Frenos al crecimiento del mercado ecológico: 

¿el precio o la actitud hacia el medio ambiente? Revista Española de Investigación en 

Marketing , 103-116. 

Sánchez, M., Grande, I., Gil, J.M., Gracia, A. (1998b). Evaluación del pontencial de 

mercado de los productos de la agricultra ecológica. Revista Española de Investigación de 

Marketing , 135-150. 

Scheifferstein, H., and Ophius, P. (1998). Health-related determinants of organic food 

consumption in the Netherlands. Food Quality and Preferences , 119-133. 

Shaw, R., McDonagh, P., Prothero, A., Shutz, C. and Stanton, J. (2007). Who are organic 

food consumers? A compilation and review of why people purchase organic food. Jorunal 

of Consumer Behavior , 94-110. 

Shepherd, G. O. (1984). Separability of attitudinal and normative influences on behavioral 

intentions in the Fishbein-Ajzen model. 

Shijiu Yin, LinhaiWu, Lili Dub andMo Chena. (2010). Consumers’ purchase intention of 

organic food in China. Journal of Science Food and Agriculture , 1361-1367. 

Siegrist, M. C. (2000). Perception of hazards: The role of social trust and. Risk Analysis , 

713–719. 



Structural equation modelling of consumer acceptance of organic food in Spain 
 

28 
 

Stefani, G., Cavicchi, A., Romano, D., Lobb, A. (2008). Determinants of Intention to 

Purchase Chicken in Italy: The Role of Consumer Risk Perception and Trust In Different 

Information Sources. Agribusiness , 523-537. 

Sujan, M. (1985). Consumer knowledge: Effects on evaluation strategies mediating 

consumer judgments. Journal of Consumer Research , 31-46. 

Tarkiainen, A. S. (2006). Subjective norms, attitudes and intentions of Finnish consumers 

in buying organic food. British Food Journal , 809-820. 

Tarkiainen, A. S. (2006). Subjective norms, attitudes and intentions of Finnish consumers 

in buying organic food. British Food Journal , 809-820. 

Taylor, J. (1974). The role of risk in consumer behavior. Journal of Marketing , 54-60. 

Thomposon, G. (1999). Consumer demand for organic foods. American society of 

horticultural science 95th Conference. E. U. 

Trumbo, C. a. (2003). The Function of Credibility in Information Processing for Risk 

Perception. Risk Analysis , 343–53. 

Underhill, S. and Figueroa, E. (1996). Consumer preferences for non-conventionally grown 

produce. Journal of Food Distribution Research , 56-66. 

Willer, H. and Kilcher, L. (2010). The World of Organic Agriculture - Statistics and 

Emerging Trends 2010. IFOAM, Bonn, and FiBL, Frick. 

Willer, H. and Kilcher, L. (2011). The World of Organic Agriculture Statistics and 

Emerging Trends 2011. IFOAM. 

Willer, H. and Yussefi, M. (2008). The World Organic Agriculture. Statistics and emerging 

trends 2007. Germany: IFOAM. 

Yeung , R., Morris, J. (2001). Food safety risk. Consumer perception and purchase 

behaviour. British Food Journal , 170-186. 

Zanoli, R., Naspetti S. (2002). Consumer Motivations in the purchase of Organic Food. 

British Food Journal , 643-653. 

  



Structural equation modelling of consumer acceptance of organic food in Spain 
 

29 
 

Fig.1. Consumer conceptual model. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Purchase 
Intention

Price 
Relevance

Attitudes 
toward Organic 

Food

Knowledge

Risk 
Perception

Trust in Organic 
Market Agents 
and Institutions

Health and 
Environmental 

Concern

Subjective 
Norms



Structural equation modelling of consumer acceptance of organic food in Spain 
 

30 
 

 

Table 1. List of indicators used for each construct 

Construct Indicators 
Subjective Norms 
(C1) 

X1: The people who is important to me believe that I should buy 
organic food 

 X2: My family believe that we should include in our diet organic 
food 

 X3: My friends advise me to buy organic food 
Environmental and 
Health Concern (C2) 

X4: Current food production systems are destroying the 
environment  

 X5: For me is important to produce the food in a friendly 
environment 

 X6: For me is important to be that the food I eat have to be rich in 
vitamins and proteins 

Trust (C3) X7: I trust on the veracity of the certification organic food 
labeling 

 X8: I trust in the market agents that sell organic food 
Risk (C4) X9: Could you tell me which is the perceived health risk for 

consume regularly food grown with pesticides and other 
chemicals? 

 X10: Could you tell me which is the perceived risk for consume 
food from animal origin treated with hormones and antibiotic? 

Subjective 
Knowledge (C5) 

X11: How informed do you consider yourself about organic food?

 X12: from my friends. I consider myself an expert in organic food
Price (C6) X13: I put attention to the products on sale when I buy food 
 X14: At the time to purchase I contrast the possible alternatives 
Attitudes toward 
Organic Food (C7) 

X15: Organic food are as safety as conventional. 

 X16: Organic food have the same content of vitamins and 
minerals than conventional ones 

Purchase Intention 
(C8) 

X17: I have the intention to purchases organic food if the price 
decreases 

 

 

 

 

 



Structural equation modelling of consumer acceptance of organic food in Spain 
 

31 
 

 

Table 2.Demographic distribution of the sample 

Demographic N = 338 % 

 Official 

Population 

distribution* 

Gender    

Female 225 67 51 

 Male 113 33 49 

Age in years    

18-34 125 37 30 

35-49 102 30 29 

50-64  93 28 21 

65 or older                18      5    20 

Education    

Primary school 

unfinished 1     0 

   12 

Primary school finished 25     7    26 

Secondary school 

unfinished 29     9 

   25 

Secondary school 

finished 116    34 

   23 

University degree 148    44    14 

Post graduated degree 19     6 

Income in Euros    

1000 or less 53    16 No available 

data  1001-2000 110    33 

2001-3000 81    24 

3001-5000 46    14 

5001 or more 34    12 

NC 14     4  



Structural equation modelling of consumer acceptance of organic food in Spain 
 

32 
 

Childs at home    

Yes  236    70  

No 102    30  

Consume organic food    

Usually 36   11  

Sometimes 189   56  

Never 112   33  

*IDESCAT 2009 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Fig. 2 Descriptive Statistics 



Structural equation modelling of consumer acceptance of organic food in Spain 
 

33 
 

 

SN: Subjective Norms; EHC: Environmental and Health Concern; T: Trust in market 

agents and institutions; R: Perceived Risk; SK: Subjective Knowledge; PI: Purchase 

Intentions; AOF: Attitudes toward organic food. 

Table 3 Correlation matrix among indicators 

  X1 X2 X3 X4 X5 X6 X7 X8 X9 X10 X11 X12 X13 X14 X

X1 1 

X2 0.697 1 

X3 0.541 0.532 1 

X4 0.185 0.206 0.202 1 

X5 0.266 0.296 0.318 0.300 1 

X6 0.196 0.186 0.138 0.238 0.367 1 

X7 0.233 0.182 0.216 0.146 0.152 0.034 1 

X8 0.172 0.195 0.220 0.158 0.164 0.002 0.577 1 

X9 0.180 0.235 0.212 0.340 0.309 0.152 0.078 0.101 1 

X10 0.217 0.305 0.260 0.330 0.306 0.240 0.073 0.135 0.650 1 

X11 0.319 0.347 0.368 0.083 0.147

-

0.117 0.196 0.140 0.088 0.037 1 

X12 0.283 0.280 0.401 0.163 0.147 0.062 0.323 0.219 0.219 0.163 0.394 1 

X13 

-

0.142 

-

0.123 

-

0.075 0.010 

-

0.005 0.093

-

0.092

-

0.015 0.021 0.031 

-

0.133 0.014 1 

X14 - 0.037 - 0.018 0.084 0.149 - 0.073 0.133 0.121 - - 0.086 1 

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

SN EHC T R SK PI Price AOF

Disagree Indiferent Agree



Structural equation modelling of consumer acceptance of organic food in Spain 
 

34 
 

0.015 0.038 0.033 0.055 0.097

X15 0.055 

-

0.009 

-

0.005 

-

0.001 

-

0.039 0.106 0.116 0.072

-

0.014 0.033 

-

0.033 0.005 0.069 0.248 1

X16 

-

0.072 

-

0.141 

-

0.104 

-

0.128 

-

0.092 0.012 0.065 0.037

-

0.068

-

0.117 0.001 0.061 0.118 0.162 0.26

X17 0.267 0.310 0.309 0.208 0.253 0.092 0.211 0.176 0.263 0.217 0.166 0.193 0.136 0.156 0.09

 

Table 4. Reliability of standardized confirmatory factor analysis (CFA). 

Construct 

No. of 

items 

Cronbach's 

α 

Composite 

Reability 

Variance 

Extracted 

Measurement 

Model 

C1 3 0.81 0.91 0.81 χ2  = 207.65 

C2 3 0.60 0.81 0.68 df = 92 

C3 2 0.73 0.83 0.83 χ2 / df = 2.25 

C4 2 0.78 0.87 0.85 p = 0.00 

C5 2 0.57 0.77 0.79 RMSEA = 0.061 

C6 2 0.70 0.72 0.76 CAIC = 1043.93 

C7 2 0.52 0.77 0.70 CFI = 0.97 

GFI = 0.98 

          NNFI = 0.95 

Note about parameters for a better fit: pvalue>0.05; NC<3; RMSE<0.08; GFI, AGFI and PGFI more than 0.9; 
NFI, NNFI and CFI close to 1.(Lomax and Schumacker,2004; Kline, 2005; Costa-Font& Gil,2008) 
 

 

Fig. 3 Path diagram of the estimated model for organic food 



Structural equation modelling of consumer acceptance of organic food in Spain 
 

35 
 

 

 

Table 5. Goodness of fit for the structural equation model 

χ2  250.07   

df  99   

χ2 / df 2.53 < 3 (Carmines and McIver, 1981) 

RMSEA  0.067 <0.5-0.8 (Browne and Cudeck, 1992; Kline 2005) 

GFI 0.96 

>0.90 (Bollen, 1998; Marcouliders and Schumacker, 

1996) 

AGFI 0.96 

>0.90 (Bollen, 1998; Marcouliders and Schumacker, 

1996) 

CFI 0.96 

>0.90 (Bollen, 1998; Marcouliders and Schumacker, 

1996) 

NFI 0.93 

>0.90 (Bollen, 1998; Marcouliders and Schumacker, 

1996) 

NNFI 0.94 

>0.90 (Bollen, 1998; Marcouliders and Schumacker, 

1996) 

 



Structural equation modelling of consumer acceptance of organic food in Spain 
 

36 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Table 6. Summary of results 

 Hypothesis   

H1 

Subjective Knowledge →Trust in organic markets agents and 

institution Supported 

H2 Subjective Knowledge →Perceived Risk Supported 

H3 

Trust in organic market agents and institutions →Purchase 

Intention 

Not 

Supported 

H4 Trust in organic market agents and institutions →Perceived risk Supported 

H5 

Trust in organic market agents and institutions →Attitudes toward 

organic food Supported 

H6 Risk →Attitudes toward organic food Supported  

H7 Environmental and Health concern →Attitude toward organic food 

Not 

Supported 

H8 Subjective Norms →Trust in organic markets agents and institution 

Not 

Supported 

H9 Subjective Norms →Attitude toward organic food 

Not 

Supported 

H10 Subjective Norms →Purchase Intention Supported 

H11 Attitude toward organic food →Purchase Intention Supported 

H12 Price →Purchase Intention Supported 

 


