









































Proceedings 2017.pdf


Proceedings of the 11th International Symposium 
Modern Trends in Livestock Production

October 11-13, 2017

KRŠKOPOLJE PIG IN TREASURE PROJECT: FROM 
REARING TO PRODUCT

-Potokar1,2, Urška Tomažin1, Martin Škrlep1, Nina 
1, Maja Prevolnik Povše1,2 3, Zein Kallas4,

José M. Gil4

1Agricultural Institute of Slovenia, Hacquetova ulica 17, SI-1000 Ljubljana
2University of Maribor, Faculty of Agriculture and Life Sciences, Pivola 10, SI-
3University of Ljubljana, Biotechnical faculty, Department of Animal Science, Groblje 3, SI-1230 
Domžale
4Centre for Agro-food Economy & Development, CREDA-UPC-IRTA, Castelldefels 08860, Spain

-Potokar, meta.candek-potokar@kis.si
Original scientific paper

Abstract: Krškopolje pig, a Slovenian autochthonous breed, is poorly 
studied and exploited, as is the case in many autochthonous (local) pig breeds. 
More knowledge about various aspects of breed as characterisation, performances, 
product quality and socio-economic relevance is needed for the development of 
sustainable pork value chains. To answer these challenges, the studies are 
conducted within H2020 project TREASURE spanning from rearing to product 
evaluation. In this work, an overview of the first partial and preliminary results are 
presented for Krškopolje pig which concern the evaluation of growth performance 
in different rearing systems, effect of the incidence of RYR1 gene mutation and 
sensory quality and consumer acceptability of new traditional product (dry-cured 
sausage – salami type) from Krškopolje pigs.

Keywords: autochthonous breed, Krškopolje pig; growth performance, 
RYR1 mutation, sausages, consumer test

Introduction

Slovenia has only one preserved autochthonous (local) pig breed, the 
Krškopolje pig which has a black coat colour with a white belt across shoulders 
and forelegs. In the seventies of the last century, the breed was gradually 
abandoned and became endangered. In the early nineties of the 20th century in situ
gene bank and herd book were created. An important milestone was also the year 
2003 when individual marking of all newborn piglets was introduced (Kastelic and 

-Potokar, 2013). The interest for Krškopolje breed has been revived in the 
last years, esp. on organic farms and on family farms with direct product sales. The 



Proceedings of the 11th International Symposium 
Modern Trends in Livestock Production

October 11-13, 2017
110

public aid for the conservation of this breed contributes to its wider use. Presently, 
Krškopolje breed is not at risk of extinction, however the breed is far from being 
safe. In order to develop a sustainable use of Krškopolje pig and thus its 
preservation, it would be necessary to develop economically sustainable 
exploitation through valorisation of its products. As is the case for other local pig 
breeds, Krškopolje pig is reared in very diverse conditions adapted to the specific 
local environment. Typically, farmers are rearing these pigs on a small scale basis 
in rather extensive conditions, often using a combination of indoor and outdoor 
system. The breed is reputed for excellent meat quality and used for traditional 
pork products appreciated by consumers. However in terms of the scientific 
substantiation, there is practically no information about nutritional requirements of 
this breed, the performances, productive traits and quality of products are 
practically untapped and studies dealing with this breed are lacking. Studies are 
thus needed to acquire more knowledge as the basis and essential for the 
development of sustainable pork value chains. In light of this, experiments and 
studies on Krškopolje breed are conducted within H2020 project TREASURE from 
rearing to product development and an overview of the first partial or preliminary 
results are presented in this paper.

Materials and Methods

Growth performance of piglets in lactation phase
Piglets (n=156; 68 females and 88 castrated males) from 7 organic and 11 

conventional farms were weighed at weaning (4-6 weeks). Daily gains were 
calculated based on weaning weight and average birth weight (1.2 kg). Details of 
the study (experimental design and statistical analysis) are described in Tomažin et 
al. (2016).

Growth performance in the growing phase 
Three piglets (castrates) per litter were selected from 12 farms/litters at the 

average age of 55 days and average weight of 14 kg, and assigned within litter to 
three groups. One group (two pens of 6 pigs) received organic (ECO) feed mixture 
(12.8 MJ ME/kg, 17.8% crude protein (CP), 0.8% lysine and 11.9 MJ ME/kg, 15% 
CP, 0.6% for growing and fattening diets, respectively) while the other group (four 
pens of 6 pigs) received conventional (CON) feed mixture (13.6 MJ/kg, 16.8% 
crude protein, 1.0 lysine and 11.6 MJ ME, 15.3% CP, 0.9% lysine for growing and 
fattening diets, respectively). The pigs were given an ad libitum access to feed and 
were weighed every 2 weeks until the average age of 155 days and daily gains 
were calculated.



Proceedings of the 11th International Symposium 
Modern Trends in Livestock Production

October 11-13, 2017
111

Fattening trial in conventional and organic system
Pigs were assigned within litter to three treatment groups; ECO (n=12), 

CON (n=12) and CON+L (n=12). Two barley based diets were prepared. For ECO 
pigs (n=12), the diet (12.4 MJ ME/kg, 12.9% CP, 0.7 % Lys) was based on 
organically produced crops whereas for CON and CON+L pigs, the diet (13.2 MJ 
ME/kg, 13.6% CP, 1.2 % Lys) was based on the same ingredients but from 
conventional crop production. ECO pigs were supplemented with lucerne hay, 
CON+L pigs were supplemented with pelleted lucerne and received 10% less feed
mixture than CON and ECO. Pigs in CON and CON+L were housed indoors, 
whereas ECO pigs were reared respecting the rules for organic production. Details 
of the study design are described in Batorek et al. (2016).

Fattening performance of Krškopolje pigs in extensive and intensive system
The growing and fattening of pigs was conducted on two farms. Twelve 

pigs from twelve farms/litters were delivered to both farms at similar age (85.9±2.5 
days) and live weight (26.3±2.1 kg). On the extensive (EXT) farm, the pigs (n=6) 
were housed in a pen (15 m2) with access to outdoor area (50 m2) and fed cooked 
potatoes and root crops supplemented with mixture of cereals, whereas on the 
intensive farm, the pigs (n=6) were housed indoors (in a pen of 7.5 m2) and fed 
complete feed mixture. Pigs were monitored for 138 days and were weighed 4 
times (at 86, 129, 195, 224 days) with 4 growth stages (25-45, 45-75, 75-90 and 
90-120 kg) considered (for more information see Tomažin et al., 2017a). 

Effect of the RYR1 mutation in Krškopolje pigs
Unrelated Krškopolje castrates reared in equivalent conditions (at the same 

farm and fed complete feed mixtures adapted to the stage of growth) were 
genotyped for recessive mutation c. C1843T (p. Arg615Cys) at RYR1 locus 
(recessive allele further denoted as “n”; “N” stands for wild type allele). Carcass 
traits and meat quality were compared between N/n (n=15) and N/N pigs (n=20) 
(more information in Tomažin et al., 2017b).

The quality of salami from Krškopolje pigs as compared to standard product
The effect of raw material (meat and back fat) from Krškopolje pigs on 

quality parameters of non-smoked dry-cured sausage (salami) was assessed. Salami 
was produced by the same producer with the same processing procedure (additives, 
temperature and relative humidity regime, dry-curing and ripening duration) using 
either standard raw material (meat, subcutaneous back fat in proportion 80:20) or 
using meat and subcutaneous back fat (in proportion 80:20) from Krškopolje pigs. 



Proceedings of the 11th International Symposium 
Modern Trends in Livestock Production

October 11-13, 2017
112

Consumer acceptance for salami from Krškopolje pigs as compared to standard 
product

Consumer sensory test were performed in order to determine the consumer 
acceptability and preferences for non-smoked dry-cured sausage (salami) made 
from Krškopolje pig as compared to standard product (salami made of 
conventional modern pig meat). For that purpose products (salami) were made 
using the same processing method but different raw material (meat and fat of 
Krškopolje vs. meat and fat of standard pig). Following the Expectation 
Disconfirmation Theory (EDT) (Olson and Dover, 1979; Oliver 1997), the sensory 
test included three phases, a blind sensory test with no information; an evaluation 
of the expected liking based on product description; a sensory test with complete 
information on the samples. The sensory evaluation was carried out in controlled 
environment with different sessions of 15 consumers by session. Participants 
evaluated the overall acceptability using a nine-point category scale from 1 ‘dislike 
extremely’; to 9 ‘like extremely’.

Results and Discussion

Growth rate of piglets in the lactation
Weight at weaning and growth rates of Krškopolje piglets raised on 

organic farms were approximately 20% lower than of piglets raised on 
conventional ones, however, the differences were not significant when taking into 
account the random effect of farm (Figure 1). Such results are expected in 
Slovenian pig farming conditions as Krškopolje pigs are most often reared on 
unspecialised, small extensive farms, there are often no big differences between 
conventionally and organically raised pigs, explaining the small differences 
between growth rates in lactation period between the two farming systems. The 
lactation periods practiced are generally longer (4-6 weeks; 38 days in average in 
the present study) and in such system piglets need to be supplemented with 
complete feed mixtures to grow well. Diets in organic pig production are often 
deficient in essential amino acids due to the legislation on organic farming 
(Council Regulation (EC) No 834/2007) which does not allow the use of synthetic 
amino acids, genetically modified organisms and feed materials processed with the 
aid of chemically synthesised solvents in organic diets (the latter two are 
particularly referring to soybean meal, which is one of the main protein sources 
used in conventional feed for pigs). 



Proceedings of the 11th International Symposium 
Modern Trends in Livestock Production

October 11-13, 2017
113

Figure 1: Weaning weight (a) and average daily gain in lactation (b) of conventionally and 
organically raised Krškopolje piglets

Growth performance in the growing phase (from weaning until 70 kg)
There was no major difference in weight of pigs (Figure 2a) at the 

beginning of the study whereas after 100 days of fattening, the pigs receiving CON 
diet were slightly heavier (their growth rate being 10% greater) but the difference 
was not significant (P>0.05). Daily gain steadily increased with growth, except in a 
period between 83 and 97 days which could be due to high ambient temperatures 
(Figure 2b). Average daily gain of pigs in the period from 55 to 155 days was 
slightly (but not significantly) lower in ECO than CON pigs. These results suggest 
that no major differences in growth rates of Krškopolje pigs fed organic or 
conventional diet are to be expected in the case of similar nutritional value of the 
diet and similar rearing conditions (as was the case in the present study).

Figure 2: Weight (a) and average daily gain (ADG) (b) of pigs fed conventional (CON) or 
organic (ECO) feed mixtures



Proceedings of the 11th International Symposium 
Modern Trends in Livestock Production

October 11-13, 2017
114

Fattening trial under conventional and organic system
At the beginning of the experiment there were no differences between 

experimental groups of pigs in body weight (P=0.325, Figure 3), but pigs in group 
ECO had thinner back fat than pigs in group CON (P=0.019, Figure 3). After 73 
days of fattening, no differences among groups in body weight or backfat thickness 
(Figure 3) were observed. ECO pigs had 13% higher daily gain than pigs in group 
CON. This could be ascribed to high consumption of lucerne hay and possibly less 
feed dissipation. Pigs in group CON+L did not compensate slight dietary restriction 
with consumption of lucerne pellets, consequently leading to lower daily gains 
(11%) compared to CON pigs. No differences in backfat thickness (Figure 3) at the 
end of the trial and carcass traits (Figure 4) between treatment groups were noted. 
There were also no differences in carcass traits between the experimental groups.

a) b) 

Figure 3: Gain of body weight (a) and backfat (b) in Krškoplje pigs during the experiment



Proceedings of the 11th International Symposium 
Modern Trends in Livestock Production

October 11-13, 2017
115

Figure 4: Dressing, meat %, loin eye area (LEA) and loin eye fat area (LEFA) of experimental 
Krškopolje pigs 
Performance of Krškopolje pigs in extensive and intensive system

Pigs fed complete feed mixture achieved in total 49% higher daily gain and 
were heavier at slaughter than pigs fed traditional meal with root crops and cereals 
(88 vs. 120 kg, P=0.000). In the first observational period (25-45 kg) similar daily 
gain was observed for both groups, whereas pigs fed traditional meal with root 
crops and cereals grew slower than pigs fed complete feed mixture in the periods 
from 45 to 90 kg. In the last period (90-120 kg) only the pigs fed complete feed 
mixture were monitored, and they exhibited lower growth rate than in the previous 
two periods (Figure 5a). Slower growth of pigs fed traditional meal with root crops 
and cereals can be explained with lysine deficiency of their meal (data not shown; 
details about nutritional value of both diets are described in Tomažin et al., 2017a)
As a result, owing to a greater live weight (BW) at slaughter, pigs fed complete 
feed mixture had thicker backfat than pigs fed traditional meal with root crops and 
cereals, however at equal BW (88 kg), no differences were observed. With regard 
to meat quality the results are indicative of more oxidative muscle metabolism of 
slower growing pigs fed a meal deficient in lysine (they exhibited lower CIE L* 
and higher CIE a* colour parameters of LD (i.e. darker, redder LD colour).



Proceedings of the 11th International Symposium 
Modern Trends in Livestock Production

October 11-13, 2017
116

a)

b)

Figure 5: Daily gain (a) and backfat thickness (b) of pigs according to rearing system

Effect of the RYR1 mutation in Krškopolje pigs
Pigs of N/n and N/N genotype at RYR1 locus reared under the same 

conditions were compared. Pigs that carry mutated “n” allele exhibited slower 
growth rate, were more muscular, leaner and less fat and had reduced water 
holding capacity and increased hardness than N/N pigs (Figure 6) which agrees 
with the impact of the mutated “n” allele on muscularity and meat quality traits 
reported for modern white breeds (Monin et al., 1999; Fisher et al., 2000; Salmi et 
al., 2010).

For variables presented in the Figure 6, the effect of “n” allele was significant (P<0.05).

Figure 6: Effect size (of N/n vs. N/N) for carcass and meat quality traits 



Proceedings of the 11th International Symposium 
Modern Trends in Livestock Production

October 11-13, 2017
117

The quality of salami from Krškopolje pigs as compared to standard product
Using the same processing method, dry-cured sausages, made from meat 

and back fat of Krškopolje pigs differed from the sausages using usual raw material 
(conventional pig). Sausages from Krškopolje pigs had higher aw than standard 
sausages (0.892 vs. 0.830, P<0.001) despite similar moisture content (28.7 vs. 
29.6%, P=0.090). Value of pH was slightly lower in the sausages of Krškopolje 
pigs than the standard ones (6.00 vs. 6.09, P=0.109). The sausages of Krškopolje 
pigs had less protein (23.1 vs. 29.9 %, P<0.001), more fat (44.0 vs. 33.8 %, 
P<0.001) but also less salt (3.9 vs. 5.5%, P<0.001) than standard sausages. 
Differences in chemical composition were consistent with the sensory evaluation 
results showing that Krškopolje sausages were scored lower for colour intensity, 
mature smell and saltiness and their texture perceived as softer, more juicy, 
crumbly and pasty (Figure 7). 

Figure 7: Differences in sensory profile of salami from Krškopolje pig and standard salami
Consumer preferences for salami from Krškopolje pigs

In a blind sensory test, standard salami was rated with a higher average 
rating scores compared to the salami from Krškopolje pig (P=0.003; Figure 8). On 
the contrary, respondents showed a significantly better expected acceptability for 
Krškopolje salami (P<0.001; Figure 8). When a sensory test with information about 
the product was applied (informed test), no difference in acceptability between the 
products was noted. According to the disconfirmation model, comparing results of 
blind and expected acceptability tests showed a negative disconfirmation for 
Krškopolje salami (the product is worse than expected; Figure 8). On the other 
hand, according to the assimilation model, higher scores of informed than of blind 
test for Krškopolje salami (P<0.001; Figure 8) are showing a positive assimilation 
and putting in evidence that information about the breed can have a positive impact 



Proceedings of the 11th International Symposium 
Modern Trends in Livestock Production

October 11-13, 2017
118

on consumers’ expectations about the tested product. Consumers showed higher 
acceptance when were informed about the product tasted. This finding highlights 
the importance of direct promotion and advertisement campaign that may give 
consumers the opportunity to know more about the breed.

Figure 8: Results of sensory test and differences between expected (E) and blind (B), informed 
(I) and B, and I and E scores between standard salami and salami from Krškopolje pig

Conclusion

Preliminary results presented provide some basic information about the 
performances, productive traits and product quality of Slovenian local pig breed 
Krškopolje. Further studies are needed with regard to the growth potential 
according to the production system as well as for the purposes of developing 
adapted fattening systems. Krškopolje breed is facing a big challenge with the 
problem of high incidence of RYR1 mutated allele that needs to be dealt with for 
the benefit of meat quality assurance. Studies with consumers show, that 
Krškopolje breed can have a positive impact on their expectations which highlights 
the importance of direct promotion.

Krškopoljska svinja u projektu TREASURE: od uzgoja do 
proizvoda

-

Rezime

utohtonih rasa svinja. Potrebno je više 



Proceedings of the 11th International Symposium 
Modern Trends in Livestock Production

October 11-13, 2017
119

proizvoda, te društveno-
proizvoda. Da bi odgovorili na ove izazove, studije se sprovode u okviru projekta 

radu prezentovani su prvi parcijalni i preliminarni rezultati za krškopoljsku svinju 
ja, efekat 

mutacije RYR1 gena i senzornog kvaliteta i prihvatljivosti novog tradicionalnog 
proizvoda (suva kobasica u tipu salame) od Krškopoljskih svinja.

: autohtona rasa, krškopoljska svinja, performanse rasta, 
RYR1 mutacija,

Acknowledgment

The study was conducted within the project TREASURE, which has 
received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and 
innovation programme under grant agreement No 634476. The content of this 
paper reflects only the author‘s view and the European Union Agency is not 
responsible for any use that may be made of the information it contains.

Authors would also like to acknowledge the core financing of Slovenian 
Agency of Research (grant P4-0133) and Krškopolje pig breeders for their 
cooperation.

References

-POTOKAR M. (2016): Effect of production system (organic vs. 
conventional) and roughage supplementation in diet on performance of growing-
finishing Krškopolje pigs. Book of Abstracts of 9th International Symposium on 
Mediterranean Pig, Instituto Politécnico de Portalegre, Portalegre, Portugal, p. 36.
COUNCIL REGULATION EC (2007): Council Regulation (EC) No 834/2007 of
28 June 2007 on organic production and labelling of organic products and
repealing Regulation (EEC) No 2092/91. Official Journal of the European Union, L 
189/1.
FISHER P., MELLETT F.D., HOFFMAN L.C. (2000): Halothane genotype and 
pork quality. 1. Carcass and meat quality characteristics of three halothane 
genotypes. Meat Science, 54, 97–105.



Proceedings of the 11th International Symposium 
Modern Trends in Livestock Production

October 11-13, 2017
120

-POTOKAR M. (2013): Application of quality labels in 
support of conservation of local breeds – a challenge for Slovenian Krškopolje pig. 
8th International Symposium on the Mediterranean Pig, (Acta Agriculturae 
Slovenica), Biotechnical Faculty, Ljubljana, Slovenia, suppl. 4, 205–209.
MONIN G., LARZUL C., LE ROY P., CULIOLI J., MOUROT J., ROUSSET-
AKRIM S., TALMANT A., TOURAILLE C., SELLIER P. (1999): Effects of the 
halothane genotype and slaughter weight on texture of pork. Journal of Animal 
Science, 77: 408–415.
OLSON, J.C., DOVER P.A. (1979). Disconfirmation of consumer expectations 
through product trial. Journal of Applied Psychology, 64(2), 179-189.
OLIVER, R.L. (1997). Satisfaction: A behavioral perspective on the consumer. 
New York, NY: McGraw-Hill.
SALMI B., TREFAN L., BLOOM-HANSEN J., BIDANEL J.P., DOESCHL-
WILSON A.B., LARZUL C. (2010): Meta-analysis of the effect of the halothane 
gene on 6 variables of pig meat quality and on carcass leanness. Journal of Animal 
Science, 88, 2841–2855.

-POTOKAR M. (2016): Growth of Krškopolje piglets 
during lactation and the first rearing period. Book of Abstracts of 9th International 
Symposium on Mediterranean Pig, Instituto Politécnico de Portalegre, Portalegre, 
Portugal, p. 43.

-POTOKAR M. (2017a): Performance of Krškopolje pigs in extensive 
and intensive production system. 25th International Symposium Animal Science 
Days, September 20 to 22, 2017, Brandlucken, Austria.

-POTOKAR M. (2017b): Meat quality of 
Krškopolje pigs as affected by RYR1 genotype. 11th International Symposium 
“Modern Trends in Livestock Production”, 11th – 13th October 2017, Belgrade, 
Serbia.


