











































Microsoft Word - almeria_2009_.doc


 
 

 

 
 
 

Meta-attitudes and the local formation of consumer 

judgments towards genetically modified food 

 
 
 
 
 

Montserrat Costa-Font 
 

The Centre for Research in Agro-Food Economics and Development (CREDA-UPC-
IRTA), Edifici ESAB, Parc Mediterrani de la Tecnologia, Avda del Canal Olímpic s/n, 

08860 Castelldefels, Spain  Phone: +34-93-552-1213. Fax: +34-93-552-1121.  
E-mail:Montserrat.Costa-Font@upc.edu. 

 

José M. Gil 
The Centre for Research in Agro-Food Economics and Development (CREDA-UPC-

IRTA), Edifici ESAB, Parc Mediterrani de la Tecnologia, Avda del Canal Olímpic s/n, 
08860 Castelldefels, Spain  Phone: +34-93-552-1210. Fax: +34-93-552-1121.  

E-mail: chema.gil@upc.edu  
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



  
Abstract  

 
 

This paper draws upon survey evidence from Spain to examine the causal 

relationship between attitudes towards science and attitudes towards Genetically 

Modified (GM) food.  It employs structural equation modelling and explores this 

association by using sub-samples made of regional groups that have GM agriculture. 

Our results suggest specific behavioural mechanisms in explaining GM consumer 

attitudes involving attitudes towards science whilst medical and food applications 

appear to have no (or mild) significant connection in the formation of attitudes towards 

GM food. Finally, we find significant influence from age and previously characterized 

attitude in the formation of structural models.  As one of the main limitations of this 

study it is worth mentioning the use of externally designed data that restricts the 

availability of existing constructs including “subjective knowledge" and consumer 

purchase intentions. This finding is important for policy makers in directing future 

communication strategies regarding scientific and technological applications.  In 

explaining the mechanisms that explicate individuals’ acceptance of Genetically 

Modified (GM) food, one mechanism that has been largely ignored in the growing body 

of current research lies in the influence of “meta (wider) attitudes” such as the general 

attitudes towards science. Similarly, if attitudes are socially formed, we expect that 

regional self-interest will be determinant. 

 
Keywords: GM food, attitudes towards science, regional self-interest, structural 

equation modelling, attitude formation.  

JEL: Q11, D87. 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 



  

Introduction 

 

Public opinion data reveals that European consumers seem to be persistently 

concerned about the use of genetically modified (GM) foods (Gaskell et al., 2006), 

which partially explains the Europeans moratorium on GM food. While Europeans 

seem to value some biotechnology applications, especially in medicine, food related 

applications exhibit different behavioural reactions.  These reactions occur in spite of 

efforts to communicate their potential benefits. Indeed, after the commercialisation of 

Recombinant Bovine Sematoropin (BST) in 1994, a growth hormone,  the  US milk 

production from cows treated with BST increased from 15% in 1994 to 35% in 2001 

(Chakraborty, 2005). Hence, consumer reactions in Europe might be driven by other 

features that overshadow potential benefits of GM food.  

 

 Consumer attitudes toward GM foods are found to be explained by a 

combination of risk and benefit perceptions associated with this new food generation 

(Moon and Balasubramanian, 2001 and 2004; Grunert et al., 2003; Onyango, 2004; 

Hossain and Onyango, 2004). However, general attitudes towards science and 

biotechnology have been disregarded as standing behind specific attitudes towards GM 

food (Lahteenmaki et al., 2002; Bredahl, 2001). Moreover, perceptions of risk and 

benefits are based on different elements such as a general attitude towards science, 

knowledge, trust, education and values, among others (Chen and Li, 2007; Saher et al., 

2006).  Hence, we hypothesize that meta-attitude, namely general attitudes towards 

science and technology, influence consumer acceptance of GM food.  

In any case, attitudes toward GM food in Europe are widely divergent among 

countries and regions within countries. In fact, few regions have tried to establish GM-

free zones using Article 19 of Directive 2001/18/EC, which allows authorities to specify 

conditions of consent including the protection of particular ecosystems/environments 

and/or geographical areas. This implies that such zones can be excluded from GM 

marketing consents if a scientific case is made demonstrating that the GM product in 

question poses a particular risk to the area. Therefore, it remains as an empirical 



 question whether attitudes in GM free regions are different or, more specifically, 

follow a different structural causal model that those of GM producer regions.  

 

Given the important policy implication of a better understanding of the 

behavioural mechanisms behind the acceptance of GM food, this study employs a 

structural equation approach to examine data from a representative sample of the 

Spanish population in 2001. Particularly, this article puts forward several hypotheses on 

the influence of general meta-attitudes (towards science and technology) underpinning 

behavioural explanations for consumer judgments of acceptance towards GM food. 

Second, given that Spain is a significantly heterogeneous country with GM free and GM 

producer regions, we examine whether the underlying structural model explaining GM 

food attitudes are different among respondents in these two regions. Finally, we explore 

a set of hypothesis regarding the influence of age, gender, and other related factors, as 

well as the reliability of survey respondents.   

 

The structure of the article is as follows. Next section is devoted to the 

theoretical foundation of the models underlying attitudes towards GM food and a set of 

empirical hypothesis are outlined. Then, the third section explores the heterogeneity of 

GM attitudes and regulation. Section four is devoted to data and methods while section 

five reports the results.  We end with some concluding remarks.  

 

 

Theoretical framework 

Perceived benefits and attitude towards science and technology 

 

Understanding the influence of consumer attitudes toward science and 

technology – for instance attitudes toward nature or food neophobia - is important in 

order to define the perceived risk and benefits associated with technological 

applications (Chen and Li, 2007). Indeed, attitudes towards science and technology 

reflect inner respondents’ belief in the ability of technological progress. Accordingly, 

gene technology can be conceptualised as one specific application of new technologies. 



 Hence, general attitudes toward gene technology are expected to be positively 

associated with technology acceptance (Bredahl, 2001).  

 

In explaining the behavioural processes that explain GM food acceptance, 

another important determinant is information processing and regulation along with trust. 

Some survey research (Hoban, 1997) suggests that factual information increases 

consumer acceptance in the US and Japan. Moreover, information gathering in the area 

of GM foods have been linked to the perceived importance of the issue by Wilson et al. 

(2004). However, different information channels are more credible than others. In fact, 

many studies reveal that, regarding GM technology, consumer organizations, 

environmental groups and scientists appear to be more trustworthy than the biotech 

industry and government (Bredahl et al., 1998; Onyango et al., 2003; Savadori et al., 

2004; Veeman et al., 2005).  Similarly, theoretical research (Artuso, 2003) points out 

that the larger the expected net benefits of approved products and the more stringent the 

regulation is, the more confident the consumer might be on the safety of the science 

innovation. Furthermore, Grobe and Raab (2004) found in a referendum that took place 

in the US state of Oregon, on whether to label GM food, that the vast majority rejected 

labels due to its economic and alarmist impacts although there was a positive impact on 

trust building (McCullum, 2000). However, shopping, preparing and eating food is no 

longer only a matter of tradition and consumers direct experience, but are also a matter 

of mediated experience (Thompson, 1995).  

 

Skepticism towards GM food is supported by evidence suggesting behavioral 

inhibition (Saher et al., 2006). Following Baker and Burnham (2001) and Onyango et al. 

(2003), the US consumers’ ‘attitudinal’ segment can be partially explained by cognitive 

mechanisms that are not necessarily observed, such as individual values, or, as in our 

study, meta-attitudes.  However, there is no agreement regarding the significance of 

these personal attributes on consumer’s final attitude. Some scientists such as Frewer et 

al. (1998); Moon and Balasubramanian (2001, 2004) and Loureiro and Hine (2004), 

refer to the relationship between both moral and ethical considerations and consumer 

attitudes. By contrast, Vilella-Vila et al. (2005) concludes that moral issues appear not 

to be relevant in attitude formation with regards to GM food. Indeed, attitudes towards 

science and technology and attitudes towards nature are found to underpin individuals’ 

trust towards scientific progress, where gene technology is a particular application 



 (Lahteenmaki et al., 2002; Bredahl, 2001).  In other words, “high regard towards 

nature makes people more suspicious towards gene technology” and “attitude to 

technology reflects respondents’ belief in the ability of technological progress to solve 

the world’s problems in the future” (Lahteenmaki et al. 2002).  

 

A strong relationship between an individual’s feeling about the environment and 

their environmental attitude was observed by Fraj and Martinez (2007).  Namely, 

people who are worried about pollution show a positive attitude towards the 

environment and are predisposed to act in an environmentally friendly manner. 

Moreover, attitudes towards gene technology are negatively associated with the general 

attitudes toward nature (Bredahl, 2001). In studies based on interviews, applying gene 

technology in food production has been regarded as unnatural and risky (Lahteenmaki et 

al., 2002). Moreover, (Loureiro and Bugbee, 2005) concluded that in the case of the 

tomato plant, attitudinal variables, such as concern about environment, play a negative 

and statistically significant role in explaining US consumer acceptance and WTP for 

different modifications. Finally, evidence that self-transcendence values like 

responsibility for nature are related to negative GM opinions have been reported by 

Bredahl (1999) and Dreezens et al. (2005).   

 

Summing up, the hypotheses this article aims to test on this issue are the 

following (see figure 1):   

  

H1: Consumers that reveal a positive general attitude towards science and 

technology are expected to perceive more benefits associated with science 

and technology.  

H2: Consumers that reveal a positive general attitude towards the environment 

are expected to perceive fewer benefits associated with science and 

technology. 

H3: Consumers that perceive more benefits associated with science and 

technology are expected to reveal a positive attitude towards 

biotechnology. 

 

Insert figure 1 about here 

 



 Attitude and benefit perception of different biotechnological applications    

 

Consumers do not perceive GM technology as being a one-dimensional skill. 

That is, although consumers reveal a positive attitude towards biotechnology, in general, 

this attitude is not the same for all applications. In fact, some studies, such as Gaskell et 

al. (2003); Grunert et al. (2001); Hossain et al. (2002, 2003); Savadori et al. (2004) 

argue that European and US consumers distinguish between different types of 

applications within biotechnology. They find that consumer attitudes and their 

consequent acceptance of a GM technology depend on the purpose of its use. More 

precisely, medical applications of GM are more frequently supported than agri-food 

applications.  In any case, evidence on attitudes has become clearer in European 

countries, suggesting some reluctance towards the introduction of GM foods (Gaskell et 

al., 2003; Gaskell et al., 2004; Gaskell et al., 2006). Hossain et al. (2003), use a discrete 

choice model for fresh fruit and vegetables and find two main segments of consumers: 

those who are totally opposed to GM technology and those who would accept GM 

technology if there were some demonstrable benefits to the consumer. In addition, 

Loureiro and Bugbee (2005) observed that U.S. consumers are willing to pay a premium 

for enhanced flavour, followed by the enhanced nutritional value and pesticide 

reduction attributes. 

 

Then our hypotheses are the following (see figure 1):  

 

H4: Consumers that reveal a positive general attitude towards biotechnology 

perceive more benefits associated with GM food technology.  

H5: Consumers that reveal a positive general attitude towards biotechnology 

reveal a positive attitude towards GM medical applications.  

H6: Consumers that reveal a positive general attitude towards GM medical 

applications perceive fewer benefits associated with GM food technology.  

 

 

 

 

 

 



 Heterogeneity gm food attitudes: regulation in Spain 

As stated in the literature, a further important relationship among the different 

stages of a consumer attitudinal process is their association with socio-economic and 

demographic attributes such as age, ethnicity, residence and income level, which are 

found to be directly related to consumers’ attitudes towards GM food. These 

relationships are supported by Costa-Font and Mossialos (2005); Hossain et al. (2002 

and 2003); Veeman et al. (2005); Noomene and Gil (2004) using mainly logit and probit 

models. Furthermore, Siegrist (2000), and Grimsrud et al. (2004) relate gender 

differences with benefit perceptions. These studies consistently find that women 

perceive lower benefits and are less likely to accept gene technology than men. 

Moreover, some of them revealed that young and middle age, less affluent and those 

who live in suburban areas are more concerned with GM food. On the other hand, 

Frewer et al. (1998) revealed no significant gender differences among respondents with 

high level of environmental concern. Therefore, this article has attempted to examine 

whether age and gender are important determinants of Spanish consumers GM food 

benefit perception. To this end, the full population has been segmented into two groups 

regarding gender (males and females) and into three groups regarding age (18-35, 36-56 

and +56 years old).  

We assume that:  

H7: Age is a relevant individual attribute shaping consumers’ GM food benefit 

perceptions. That is, older people trust less in new food technologies such 

as GM food. 

H8: Gender is a relevant individual attribute shaping consumers’ GM food 

benefit perceptions. Specifically, females trust less in new food 

technologies such as GM food. 

 

On the basis of previous literature, population can be segregated in three main 

groups regarding GM food attitudes and intentions, namely: (i) anti-GM food or 

pessimistic, (ii) risk-tolerant or information searchers and finally (iii) GM-accepters or 

optimistic. Yet, different compositions of such groups within a specific society 

determines final country acceptance of GM food. On this basis it has become apparent 



 that in the U.S. and some European countries such as Spain and Portugal among 

others, the population is found to be broadly more tolerant to GM food as compared to 

France or the Nordic population. Indeed, Huffman et al. (2007) observed that, prior 

subjective beliefs affect bidding behaviour of people for food items that might be 

genetically modified. Therefore, in this study we have segmented the sample in two 

groups based on consumers intentions towards GM food (willing to consume and not 

willing to consume), in order to show that previously defined attitudes towards a market 

product vary the process of perception of its associated benefits.  

 

We assume that:  

H9: previously characterized attitude towards GM food can alter the building 

process of GM food benefit perception.   

 

Finally, in Spain, several regions have reacted to the authorization of 

commercially grown GM varieties, granted by the central government since 1998.  The 

Parliament of Castilla la Mancha asked the central government to declare a moratoria on 

commercial GM crops until risk assessment is done for crops and food that contain 

GMOs (May 2000). In the Balearic Islands, the parliament expressed its worries for the 

introduction of GMOs and asked the central government not to authorize more GMOs 

until an international protocol guarantee their safety (February 2000).  In Andalucía, the 

regional Parliament adopted in June 2000 a 5-year moratorium on trials of GM corps 

and asked the central government to do the same for all of Spain. The Basque country 

has issued a five-year blanket moratorium on GMOs. The Basque Government claims 

full powers on agricultural policy and can provisionally ban GMOs. The Basque 

country has also joined the European Network of GMO-free regions. There are also 

initiatives in Catalonia where several organizations are asking for a GM-free Catalonia. 

In particular, the most recent was carried out in August 2008 by an important Catalan 

social platform (Som lo que sembrem) composed by several organizations, such as the 

most important Catalan farmers union (Unio de Pagesos) among others. This platform 

has asked the regional government on March 9th to declare Catalonia GMO-free. 

Asturias declared itself GMO-free on 20/05/2004. The regional Parliament adopted a 



 resolution that calls on the regional government to become part of the European 

Network of GMO-free regions in order to put pressure on the EU to take into account in 

its policy on GMOs.  The agricultural and environmental strategies of the European 

regions and avoid the negative impacts of GMOs on the quality of farming products 

from Asturias and point out in the National Biosafety Commission the negative impact 

of GMOs on the production strategy of the farming sector in Asturias. 

 

The Spanish crop area currently devoted to GMOs is summarized in table 1. 

Aragón, Castilla la Mancha and Catalunya are the major producers of GM maize in 

Spain. Thus, we segmented the sample between consumers living in GM free (Asturias, 

Baleares, Canarias, Galicia, Castilla-Leon, La Rioja, Murcia, Païs Vasco and Valencia) 

and GM producer regions (Andalucía, Aragón, Castilla-la Mancha, Catalonia, 

Extrmadura, Madrid and Navarra) in order to detect if GMOs regional policy affect their 

GMF benefit perception process. 

Insert table 1 about here  

We assume that:  

H10: The GM food benefit perception process differs between consumers of 

GM free and producer regions within Spain.    

 

Spain is one of the few European countries that produce agricultural 

biotechnology products. Spain, unlike in other countries, the GM controversy has not 

been severe and has had a small influence (Vilella et al., 2005) in the earlier stages of 

implementation.  Environmental organizations – which have headed the debate in other 

EU countries – have had a weaker role in Spain. However, from the mid–nineties, 

critics to GM have acquired a more prominent role and have been discussed in the 

Parliament. The governmental regulation bodies, namely the National Biosafety 

Commission and the public regulatory authorities, have responded to public concerns in 

certain circumstances that include the use of maker genes resistant to antibiotics.   In 

1997, commercialization of antibiotic resistant maker genes were banned in response to 

public debate as it were regarded as unnecessary (Tordt and Lujan, 2000). Indeed the 



 dynamics of policy making in the European Union are not irrelevant for policy 

making in Spain.  The question of consumer acceptance has been rather diffuse (Atienza 

and Lujan, 1997) and relies on important uncertainty on the future consumers reactions 

to new products that gives rise to precautionary measures e.g., some retailers avoid 

implicitly GM products.  

 

Past studies have examined attitudes towards biotechnology and science in 

Spain. Most of them were very descriptive in nature (Atienza and Lujan, 1997; Lujan 

and Moreno, 1994). A deeper analysis of attitudes towards GM products is needed 

given the complexity of the issue.  To this end, a multivariate approach is used in this 

article and is one of the main contributions. Results from this research allow us to 

derive some policy implications on how to manage the information that presumably 

affects the evolution of the market for GM food in Spain.   

  

Data and research methodology 

The Sample 

 

In order to test the hypotheses mentioned in the two above sections, we have 

used the survey carried out by the Centro de Investigaciones Sociológicas (CIS) in 2001. 

The questionnaire concerns science and technology and its genetic engineering and 

biotechnological applications.  The sample was composed by 2,492 respondents from 

Spain, proportionally distributed among the 17 regions. It is the unique survey, up to 

date, carried out on the field of biotechnology considering almost all Spanish regions.  

The sample is comprised of approximately 48% males and 52% women, either for the 

whole sample and or by regions.  Ages range from 18 to 96 with almost uniform 

distribution. More than 90% of respondents have gone to school. From these, 6% do not 

end primary school; 25 % finish primary school; 22% finish “EGB”; 27% finish 

“secondary education”; 18% are “graduates”; finally 1% has postgraduate studies and 

1% other studies.  

 



             Almost half of the respondents are solely responsible for household income. 

Moreover, half are working, almost 20% are pensioners, 20% do not work, around 5% 

are unemployed and another 5% are students 

 

Measures  

 

We have considered, as the literature points out, that responses range from agree 

to disagree going through some uncertainty threshold (Gaskell et al., 2004; Gaskell et 

al., 2006; O’Connor et al., 2006). Therefore, “don’t know” answers are classified as 

“undecided or indifference” which are accordingly placed somewhere between 

acceptance and rejection (Costa-Font and Mossialos, 2007). All questions except for 

general attitudes toward science and the environment were measured on a 3-level Likert 

scale, where “tend to agree” responses are coded as an ordinal value of 1, “undecided or 

indifference” by 2 and finally, “tend to disagree” by ordinal value 3. Similarly, 

questions regarding general attitudes toward science and the environment were 

measured on a 4-level Likert scale, from a lot to nothing. Our selection of CIS questions 

are shown in table 2.  

 

Insert table 2 about here  

 

 

Analytical Procedures 

 

 Structural equation modelling has been used in this study in order to arrange the 

decision making process. Indeed, the structural regression (SR) model has been tested 

following a two-step modelling approach (Anderson and Gerbing, 1988), where we first 

define an acceptable confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) and next an adequate SR model.   

 

Following Jöreskog and Sörbom (1996), we specified a Structural Equation 

Model which consists of three main types of relationships. First, a measurement model 



 is identified after performing confirmatory factor analysis. The outcome relates 

observed indicators with the exogenous latent variables;   

  x = Λ x   ξ + δ   (1) 

where x, is a q × 1 vector of observed exogenous or independent variables, Λ x is a q × n 

matrix of coefficients of the regression of x on ξ, ξ is an n × 1 random vector of latent 

independent variables and δ  is a q × 1 vector of error terms in x. 

 

 On the other hand, observed indicators are related with the endogenous 

constructs; 

  y   = Λ y   η + ε   (2)  

where y, is a p × 1 vector of observed endogenous or dependent variables, Λ y is a p × m 

matrix of coefficients of the regression of y  on η, η is an m × 1  random vector of latent 

dependent variables and ε is a p × 1 vector of measurement errors in y.   

 

 A third equation defines the structural model, which specifies the causal 

relations that exist among the latent variables, describing its causal effects and assigning 

the explained and unexplained variances (Jöreskog and Sörbom, 1996). 

  η   = B η + Г ξ + ζ             (3)  

where B is a m × m matrix of coefficients of the η variables in the structural relationship, 

Г is a m × n matrix of coefficients of the ξ - variables in the structural relationship, and 

ζ is a vector of errors.   

 

 The model assumes that the ε  is uncorrelated with η, δ is uncorrelated with ξ, 

and ξ is uncorrelated with ξ. Moreover, ξ, ε and δ are mutually uncorrelated. 

Furthermore, the covariance matrices of the model are defines as:  

Cov (ξ) = )( nn×Φ ; Cov (ε ) = )( pp×Θε ; Cov (ξ) = )( mm×Ψ  

and Cov (δ) = )( qq×Θδ .  

 

 This study uses ordinal data, where the scale is considered as thresholds of the 

continuous variables (Jöreskog and Sörbom, 1996). Correlations among ordinal 

variables are called polychoric correlations, which are theoretical correlations of the 

continuous version (Jöreskog and Sörbom, 1996). In order to perform the analysis, we 

use the General Weighted Least-Squares (WLS) method instead of Maximum 



 likelihood (ML), since both the data present a non-normal distribution and because 

ML does not allow us to employ the weight matrix required for the analysis, which is 

the inverse of the estimated asymptotic covariance matrix, W , of the polychoric 

correlations (Kline, 2005).  

F (ө) = ( s – σ)’ W ( s – σ)        (4)    

where s’ is a vector of the elements in the lower half of the covariance matrix S of order 

k × k used to fit the model to the data, σ’ is the vector of corresponding elements of Σ 

(θ ) reproduced from the model parametersθ , finally W -1 is the positive definite matrix 

of order u× u where u = k (k+1)/2. The WLS function is the weighted computation of 

the square residuals (Barrio and Luque, 2000).  

 

 We will assess the goodness-of-fit for the model by analysing factor loadings 

that relate each indicator with the constructs. Reliability will be measured by means of 

composite reliability and Cronbach’α. Moreover, the extracted validity for each 

construct will be also measured (Hair et al., 1999).  

 

Since cross group comparisons were performed, the level of invariance will 

already be measured. In this case, the confirmatory factor analysis will be defined by 

means of Multi-Sample analysis (Steenkamp and Baumgartner, 1998). For Multi-

Sample analysis it is assumed that equations (1), (2) and (3) holds in each group. 

Considering a set of G groups, the model for group g is defined by the parameter 

matrices: )(g
y

Λ , )(g
x

Λ , )(gΒ , )(gΓ , )(gΦ , )(gΨ , )(gεΘ , 
)(g

δΘ ,  where the subscript )(g  

refers to the g -th group, Gg ,...,2,1=  (Jöreskog and Sörbom, 1996). Each of these 

matrices may contain fixed, free and constrained parameters as before. To estimate all 

the models simultaneously, the following fit function is minimized,   

),,,( )()()(

1

ggg

g

G

g

g WSF
N

N
F Σ








=∑

=

    (5)  

where, 
g

F is the fit function (4), 
g

N is the sample size in group g  and 

G
NNNN +++= ...21  is the total sample size; 

)(g
S  and )(gΣ are the sample and 

population covariance matrices in group g , and )(gW  is the weight matrix for group g .  

 



 Once the parameters have been estimated, the “configual” or “pattern” 

invariance is considered. This level of invariance implies that the pattern of salient and 

non salient factor loadings for the measurement model is the same for the different 

segmented groups (Steenkamp and Baumgartner, 1998). In this case, similar but not 

equal latent variables are presented in the different groups. We have to note that, 

“configural” invariance does not indicate that people in different groups respond to the 

same items in the same way (Steenkamp and Baumgartner, 1998). However, it allows 

us to explore the basic structure of the construct cross-groups.  

 

As a second step, full or partial metric invariance has to be satisfied because the 

scale intervals of the latent constructs have to be the same or at least comparable across 

groups. In other words the following condition must be fulfilled.  

 

)()2()1()()2()1( , G
xxx

G

yyy
and Λ==Λ=ΛΛ==Λ=Λ KK  

 

This allows us to examine structural relationships with other constructs cross-groups.  

 

Regarding the structural model, we begin with an assessment of the estimated 

parameters in the structural equations (Hair et al., 1999). We proceed with estimating 

the reliability coefficients of each equation and the associated correlation matrix among 

constructs examined in our model (Barrio and Luque, 2000). Finally, diagnostic 

parameters such as Chi square (X2); Root Mean Square Error of Approximation 

(RMSE); Goodness of Fit Index (GFI); the Adjusted Goodness of Fit Index (AGFI); the 

Comparative-Fit-Index (CFI); the Normed-Fit-Index (NFI) and the Non Normed-Fit-

Index (NNFI) will be also considered as indicators of the model goodness-of-fit for the 

CFA and the SR model.  

 

Results 

  Descriptive Analysis  

 

Before empirically testing the theoretical structural model defined in this study, 

some descriptive results from the survey are provided. First, some questions regarding 



 science and technology are evaluated. Interestingly, there is some ambivalence in 

public opinion on science and technology. One the one hand, 61% of respondents agree 

that science and technology is a source of risk, which is characterized as “skepticism on 

science”. However, about 63% of the respondents also trust in science for solving 

current and future problems.  Moreover, the Spanish society seems to be divided into 

three groups regarding their perception of science (see figure 2). This division has been 

already detected by Gaskell et al. (2003, 2004, 2006) and Onyango et al. (2004):  49% 

of the respondents answered that science will be beneficial in the next 20 years 

(“science supporters”), 31% just opposite (“science reluctance”) and 20% either don’t 

know or don’t answer (“indifferentist”). This last group is relevant and should have 

something to do with the lack of information already stated. The final consumer 

decision of “undecided” is a key element for social acceptance or reluctance of science 

advances.    

 

Insert figure 2 about here 

 

Although 65% of the respondents are interested on science, only 37% are self-

defined as “informed”, while, 60% describe themselves as not well informed. These 

percentages display evidence of a lack of compressible information available on science 

and technology for Spanish citizens. A similar situation takes place for environmental 

issues. Around 74% of respondents reveal to be interested, but only 46% consider 

themselves as “informed”, while 50% declared they are not well informed.  

 

Looking at regional differences, Aragon, Canary Islands, Catalonia and Madrid 

are the most interested in science and technology – with more than 70% of respondents 

interested. Regions on the opposite side include Andalusia, Asturias, Cantabria, 

Extremadura and the Bask Country.  Likewise, public “subjective knowledge” on 

science and technology is only relevant for two regions, Rioja and Navarra. Catalonia, 

Aragon, Valencia and Madrid are near the average (40%) of respondents feeling well 

informed about science and technology while in the rest the percentage rages from 20 to 

30%.  

 



 The last part of the questionnaire aims to examine Spanish public 

perception towards biotechnology and genetic engineering.  First, general public 

subjective knowledge on this technologic application seems to be lower than on science 

and technology taken as a whole. Results indicate that only 18% of the sample feels 

well informed about genetic engineering or biotechnology. These results are consistent 

with previous studies in Spain, as those by Martinez et al. (2004) ; Noomene and Gil et 

al. (2004) ; Vilella-Vila et al. (2005), among others. Moreover, these authors also state 

that the Spanish population has not made a significant effort to be informed. As well as 

for science and technology, the region with major “subjective knowledge” is Rioja – 

where almost 60% of the sample feel well informed about genetic engineering and 

biotechnology- followed by Cantabria – with almost 30% - and Navarra – with more 

than 26%.   

 

Risk perception of damages derived from biotechnology and genetic engineering 

on people and environment is visibly important for Spanish society. Almost 50% of the 

sample considers these applications as dangerous for people and more than 50% 

consider them a danger for the environment. This important level of risk perception 

seems strange as many people who perceive biotechnology as a risky activity admit to 

be under-informed on the topic.  

 

In spite of this general attitude, some differences exist depending on the type of 

application. In general, people tend to positively value those applications with major 

direct benefits to the public, as it happened when evaluating science and technology in 

broad sense.  As can be observed in table 3, people mainly value medical applications, 

followed by environmental applications and agricultural applications. In addition, no 

main regional differences on perceptions and use of genetic engineering applications 

appear to exist.  Respondents in Aragon give high value to agricultural applications, 

(average value of 8). This can be partially explained by the fact that it is one of the main 

producer regions of GM maize.  

 

Insert Table 3 about here 

 

 

 



 Table 4 shows that respondents feel alarmed about these products, and find 

them unnecessary and unnatural. There are no significant regional differences, in 

relation to this question: However, Asturias shows a clearer pattern of GM food 

tolerance, as items considering GM food as beneficial, and with acceptable risks, get an 

average score of 6.    

 

Insert Table 4 about here 

 

Measurement Model (Confirmatory Factor Analysis) 

 

Following the methodological approach described in section 3, the first step of 

the study is to carry out a confirmatory factor analysis for the whole set of constructs 

considered in the theoretical model: 1) consumers approach towards science and 

technology; 2) consumers approach towards the environment; 3) perceived benefits of 

science and technology; 4) attitudes toward biotechnology; 5) attitudes toward GM 

medical applications; and  6) Perceived Benefits of GM food, assuming all errors to be 

uncorrelated. It has been performed using both a single full population analysis and 

some Multi-Group Analyses. More precisely, in this study the sample has been 

segmented by: a) consumer intentions towards GM food; b) GM-free and GM producer 

regions; c) gender; and d) age. The confirmatory factor analysis with all indicators 

resulted suitable for both the full sample and Multi-Group Analyses. The correlation 

matrix among all variables for the full model is presented in Table 5.  

 

Insert Table 5 about here 

 

The main parameters to test for the robustness of the constructs, following Hair 

et al. (1999) and Kline (2005), appear to show acceptable results for the full sample as 

well as for the Multi-Sample models, as shown in tables 6 to 10. Indeed, the reliability 

of factor loadings for all constructs are above 0.5 and the t-values associated with the 

loadings are all significant (P<0.001), implying a satisfactory convergent validity 

(Olsen, 2003). Four additional parameters are important in examining the internal 

consistency of the model, which include composite reliability (which must be > 0.7), 

internal consistency reliability, measured by Cronbach’s α, (which must be around 0.7), 



 extracted validity (which must be >0.5) and discriminant validity (correlations 

among constructs < 0.85) (Hair et al., 1999; Bagozzi and Yi, 1988). For every construct, 

all composite reliabilities are greater than 0.7 and all Cronbach’s α are around 0.7, thus 

we can say that reliability is acceptable. Regarding the variance extracted, it is higher 

than 50% in all cases.  Finally, since the correlations among latent factors do not exceed 

0.85, in any case, it can be stated that discriminant validity has been accomplished too.  

 
 

Insert Tables 6 to 10 about here 

 

 The model meets the widely accepted goodness of fit standards for the Full 

sample confirmatory model and for the Multi-Sample confirmatory models (configural 

invariance) indicating that the conceptual model satisfactory fits the data, (see also 

tables 7 to 11). It must be pointed out that although the chi-square was significant, it is 

highly affected by sample size (Kline, 2005). Therefore, alternatively goodness of fit 

criteria were considered.  For the full sample (see table 7), the Root Mean Square Error 

of Approximation (RMSEA) is 0.06, which is well under the 0.5-0.8 limit interval 

offered by Hair et al. (1999) and Kline (2005). The goodness-of-fit index (GFI) was 

0.98, the adjusted Goodness of Fit Index (AGFI) was 0.97, the Comparative-Fit Index 

(CFI) 0.95, the Normed-Fit Index (NFI) 0.94 and the Non-Normed Index (NNI) 0.94, 

all were greater than 0.90 as suggested by Marcoulides and Schumacker (1996) and 

Chen and Li (2007).  

 

Finally, the results for the levels of invariance, regarding the different Multi-

Group Confirmatory Factor Analyses, indicate that configural invariance is 

accomplished across all segmented groups (see tables 8 to 11). This model is estimated 

with science as the baseline model against other models (Steenkamp and Baumgartner, 

1998). Although the chi-square was significant (p<0.001), the RMSEA, the GFI, AGFI, 

CFI, NFI and the NNFI were above the commonly recommended levels. Moreover, all 

factor loadings were highly significant for all Multi-Group Analyses, and standardized 

factor loadings exceeded 0.6 in all cases. Therefore, it can be stated that the model 

exhibits configural invariance across age, gender, consumer intentions and GM regional 

regulation groups. This level of invariance implies that the pattern of salient and non 

salient factor loadings for the measurement model are the same for the different 



 segmented groups (Steenkamp and Baumgartner, 1998). That is, the model of 

interest fits across the groups, that is, the basic structure of each construct fits across 

groups; however, the unknown parameters (latent variables) of the model are assumed 

to be similar but not identical across the groups.  

 

A stronger test of invariance (the metric invariance) has also been analyzed. This 

analysis examines whether respondents of the different groups respond to the items in 

the same way by allowing us to examine structural relationships among constructs 

(Steenkamp and Baumgartner, 1998). Results indicate that the hypothesis of full metric 

invariance, that is, factor loadings being invariant across groups, is supported only for 

gender. As table 8 shows, there is a non significant increase in chi-square between the 

model of configural invariance and the model of full metric invariance 

( 10.0,03.16)19(2 >=∆ pχ ). Moreover, other goodness of fit criteria such as RMSEA 

are also adequate. Therefore, we can support full metric invariance for the 19 loadings.  

 

For the other three Multiple-Group analyses, a significant increase in the chi-

square statistic between the model of configural invariance and the model of full metric 

invariance was detected (Age segmentation: 001.0,70.134)38(2 pp=∆χ ; Consumer 

intentions: 001.0,98.151)19(2 pp=∆χ ; GM regional policy: 

001.0,4.114)19(2 pp=∆χ ). The analysis of the Modification Indices (MIs) shows that 

five, four and six of the nineteen factor loadings for age, consumer intentions, and 

regional GM policy, respectively, are responsible of the model lack of invariance. Let us 

consider each of these three segmentations.  

 

In relation to the age segmentation factor loading of items X2, X9, X10 and X18 

(see table 2 to name the items) were lower in Age 18-36 than in the other age groups. In 

addition, X8 was higher in Age 36-56 than in the other age groups. We set free these 

factor loadings to test partial metric invariance. Table 9 shows the statistical results of 

this model. We can see that the increase in chi-square between the configural invariance 

model and the metric invariance model is not significant ( 01.03.46)28(2 ≥=∆ pχ ), 

moreover, other goodness of fit values such as RMSEA are also adequate. Therefore, 

we can support partial metric invariance with five of the 19 invariance constrains 

relaxed.   



  

As can be observed in table 10 factor loadings of X1, X8, X14 and X18 in the 

consumer intentions segment were lower in the not willing to consume GM food 

segment than in the other group. We also observe that the increase in the chi-square 

statistic between the configural and metric invariance models is not significant 

( 10.056.23)19(2 ≥=∆ pχ ). As a result, we can support partial metric invariance with 

four of the 19 invariance constrains relaxed.   

 

Finally, for the regional GM policy segmentation, factor loadings of X4, X5, X8, 

X15 and X16 (see table 2 to name the items) were lower in the GM producer regions 

group than in the other group. In addition, X19 (see table 2 to name the item) was lower 

in the GM free regions. Thus, we set free these factor loadings to test partial metric 

invariance. Table 11 shows the statistical results of this model. Contrary to the other 

two cases, in this case there is a significant increase in the chi-square statistic between 

the configural and the metric invariance models ( 01.06.54)13(2 <=∆ pχ ). As a 

consequence, even though other goodness of fit values such as RMSEA are adequate, 

we cannot support partial metric invariance.   

 

To sum up, we have obtained a common pattern among all different segments 

regarding the adequacy of the used constructs.  That is, the structure of each construct is 

equal across groups. However, a perfect comparison of the structural relationships 

among groups can only be ensured for gender segmentation on the basis of our 

diagnostic tests. In any case, valid cross-group comparisons of the structural model can 

be conducted even when the ideal of full invariance is not realized (Steenkamp and 

Baumgartner, 1998).  Therefore we can clearly compare among gender, age and 

consumption intentions groups since at least partial metric invariance has been checked. 

On the contrary, the comparison of structural relations between regions with different 

GM policies must be analyzed in further analysis due to its lack of metric invariance.  

 

 

 

 



  Structural Model 

 

When testing the structural relations of the models using a Structural Equation 

Model we find that a satisfactory fit has been obtained for all models (table 11).  Figure 

3 shows the path diagrams obtained for the full sample model.  All hypotheses except 

hypothesis 6 are with paths significant at  001.0=p  level and therefore supported. This 

means that consumer’s attitude towards science and technology does have a positive 

and important influence on its benefit perceptions of science and technology ( =β 0.5). 

The opposite takes place when considering attitudes towards the environment ( =β -

0.21). The estimation of path coefficients from perceived benefits of science and 

technology to attitudes towards biotechnology reveals that there is a positive relation 

among these two constructs ( =β 0.73). Finally, hypothesis 4 and hypothesis 5 that 

assume a better acceptance of GM medical applications and major GM food benefit 

perception if consumers reveal a positive attitude towards biotechnology were also 

supported ( =β 0.45 and 0.68 respectively). In contrast, a negative relation among 

attitudes towards medical applications and GM food benefits perception was not 

supported (hypothesis 6).  

 

Insert figure 3 and Table 11about here 

 
If we examine Spanish consumers’ heterogeneity by age (figure 4), we observe 

that younger respondents tend to be more homogenous than the full population. 

However, the behaviour of the oldest group is different. As can be observed in figure 4, 

for this segment there is a weaker relationship of attitudes towards science and 

technology and benefits perception. In addition, there is a positive relationship between 

attitudes regarding the environment and science and technology perceived benefits.  

Hypothesis 3, 4 and 5 have the same sign and level of significance as other groups, but 

the path coefficient is lower, especially for hypothesis 4 and hypothesis 5. Finally, the 

negative association between attitudes towards GM medical applications and GM food 

benefits perception (hypothesis 6) is not supported as it was the case in the other age 

groups, as well as in the full sample.  In conclusion, older people (+56 years old) 

understand benefits of science and technology differently than the rest of respondents, 

especially regarding its relation towards the environment. However, the behavioural 



 process that goes from science and technology benefit perception to GM food 

benefit perception is similar for the entire sample no matter the age of respondents.  

 

Insert figure 4 about here 

 

Figure 5 shows the main relationships concerning consumer intentions.  

Regarding to hypothesis 1, 3, 4 and 5, there is a clear agreement among groups, that is:  

(hypothesis 1), a positive approach towards science and technology has a positive 

impact on science and technology benefit perception with a path of about 0.5; 

hypothesis 3, attitudes towards biotechnology rely on benefit perception of science and 

technology, more for people willing to consume GM food; either hypothesis 4 and 5 

were supported for the two groups. That is, attitudes towards GM medical applications 

depend on consumers attitudes towards biotechnology with similar path coefficients and 

significance for the two segmented groups. However, GM food perceived benefits 

depend on attitudes towards biotechnology with a major path coefficient for consumers 

willing to consume GM food than for consumers not willing to consume GM food. 

Finally, hypothesis 2 and hypothesis 6 were significant for only one of the two 

segmented groups. Explicitly, a positive approach towards the environment has a 

negative impact on science and technology benefit perception only for people not 

willing to consume GM food (hypothesis 1). Furthermore, positive attitudes towards 

GM medical applications were considered to have a negative influence on GM food 

perceived benefits for the group willing to consume GM food. Therefore, we can 

conclude that attitudes towards biotechnology rely more on benefit perception of 

science and technology for people willing to consume GM food. Moreover, a positive 

approach towards the environment has a significant negative impact on science and 

technology benefit perceptions for people not willing to consume GM food. And 

parallel, attitudes towards biotechnology have a major influence on GM food perceived 

benefits for consumers willing to consume GM food and attitudes towards medical 

applications are significantly negative related to GM food perceived benefits only for 

the group willing to consume GM food. 

 

Insert figure 5 about here 

 



 Although metric invariance was not supported, we compared the structural 

model results among Spanish GM free and producer regions. Indeed, all hypotheses 

were significant for the two groups. Moreover, hypothesis 1, 3, 4 and 5 present similar 

path coefficients among groups- see figure 6. Dissimilar, the path coefficient of 

hypothesis 2 is bigger for the GM free group. That is, respondents from GM free 

regions reveal a more important negative relation between consumers’ positive 

approach towards the environment and consumers benefit perception towards science 

and technology. Finally, an important difference in hypothesis 6 exists among groups. 

That is, respondents from GM producer regions reveal a negative relation between 

positive attitudes towards GM medical applications and GM food benefit perception, 

opposite the positive relations revealed for consumers of the GM free regions. Indeed, 

this comparison must be cautiously considered since we cannot ensure that the 

structural relations among the Latent Variables that we are relating are comparable 

among the two groups.  

 

Insert figure 6 about here 

 

Finally, gender heterogeneity is analyzed, see figure 7. Minor heterogeneity was 

detected for this segmentation. All paths present the same singe and significance for the 

two groups. Moreover, almost all groups have similar path coefficients but for 

hypothesis 1 and hypothesis 2 that females reveal a bigger coefficient. That is, the 

positive and negative influence that science and environmental approaches have on 

science and technology perceived benefits is more important for females than for males.    

 

Insert figure 7 about here 

 

Conclusion 

 

The motivation of these articles is grounded on exploring the influence of meta-

attitudes in explaining specific consumer judgments of GM food. In this article, we test 

the causal and empirical validity of a behavioural mechanism to explain evidence of 

scepticism towards Genetically Modified (GM) food. Consumer reactions to GM food 

appear to demonstrate a simultaneous endorsement of risk and benefit perceptions 

(Pidgeoen et al., 2005).  



  

From exploring the causal empirical model, we found that individuals’ interest 

and information towards either science or the environment are key factors in defining 

their perceived benefits associated with scientific and technological applications, 

supporting hypothesis 1 and hypothesis 2 of the analysis. This finding is important for 

policy makers in directing future communication strategies regarding scientific and 

technological applications. Results show that a positive approach towards science and 

technology is positively related with science and technology benefit perception 

(hypothesis 3). This result exhibits the relation among what is know as “subjective 

knowledge” and attitude towards a behavior, stated by some studies such as Lusk et al. 

(2004).  Indeed, “subjective knowledge” depends on an individual’s general values and 

this makes people search information from diverse sources - consumer organisations, 

environmental groups and scientists among others. Therefore, more effective risk-

benefit communication strategies are needed regarding new scientific applications, such 

as GM food.  

 

This study also supports a link between positive attitudes toward biotechnology 

and the perception of benefits associated to either GM medical applications (hypothesis 

4) or food applications (hypothesis 5), consistent with earlier research.  However, 

consumers do not perceive GM technology as being a one-dimensional skill. Therefore, 

no significant relation has been detected between the acceptance of GM medical 

applications and GM food applications (hypothesis 6). Consequently different risk-

benefit communication strategies must be developed for each GM application.  

 

In addition to the behavioral mechanism, this study also considers the relevance 

of individual values and social elements in constructing this mechanism. For that, a 

Multi-Sample analysis has been performed. We segmented the sample by: consumer 

intentions towards GM food; consumer of GM-free and GM producer regions; gender 

and age. Results indicate that for the Multi-group analyses, the measurement 

instruments are at least partially invariant for almost all cases – not for GM-free and 

GM producer regions. Nevertheless, valid cross-group comparisons can be conducted 

even when full invariance is not realized (Steenkamp and Baumgartner, 1998).   

 



 First of all, no main gender heterogeneity was detected in this study 

(hypothesis 8), except for the female group, which was more positively and negatively 

influenced by science and environment approaches, respectively, on science and 

technology benefit perceptions. Regarding to respondents age (hypothesis 7), two main 

behavioral mechanism groups were defined: less than 56 and more than 56 years old. 

The main difference is the positive, instead of negative, relations of consumers approach 

towards the environment and its perceived benefits of science and technology. That is, 

older people who are more interested and knowledgeable about nature do perceive 

benefits associated to science and technology, which is in contrast to younger people. 

Furthermore, some heterogeneity was detected regarding consumer previous 

characterized attitude towards GM food (hypothesis 9). Finally, no main results can be 

reported regarding the structural relations of GM free and producer regions since 

measurement invariance among these groups is not supported (hypothesis 10).   

 

The model developed in this study examines only one side of the complex 

process that underpins individuals’ purchase intentions towards GM food. An extension 

of the model definition could be undertaken with the introduction of additional latent 

variables  such as,  GM food subjective knowledge, labelling information, risk attitudes, 

social behaviour regarding GM food and purchase intentions towards GM food. 

Although the model developed in this study highlights the relevance of general values 

(meta-attitudes) in shaping individuals behaviour, our findings call for a future research 

to explore alternative explanations.  As one of the main limitations of this study it is 

worth mentioning the use of externally designed data that restricts the availability of 

existing constructs including subjective knowledge and consumer purchase intentions.  



 References 

 

Anderson, J.C., and Gerbing, D.W. (1988), “Structural equation modelling in practice: a 

review and recommended two-step approach,” Psicological Bulletin, 103, 411-423. 

 

Artuso, A. (2003), “Risk perceptions, endogenous demand and regulation of agricultural 

biotechnology,” Food Policy, 28, 131-145.  

 

Atienza, J., and Lujan, J.L. (1997), La imagen social de las nuevas tecnologías en 

España, Opiniones y Actitudes, N 14.  Madrid, CIS. 

 

Bagozzi, P. and  Yi, Y. (1988), “On the evaluation of structural equation models,” 

Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 16 (1), 74-94. 

 

Baker, G.A., and Burnham, T.A. (2001), “Consumer response to genetically modified 

foods: market segment analysis and implications for producers and policy makers,” 

Journal of Agriculture and Resource Economics, 26, 387-403.  

 

Barrio, S. and Luque, T. (2000), “Análisis de ecuaciones estructurales,” in  Técnicas de  

análisis de datos en investigación de mercados, Madrid, Pirámide.  

 

Bredahl, L., Grunert, K.G., and Frewer, L.J. (1998), “Consumer attitudes and decision-

making with regard to genetically engineered food products. A review of the literature 

and a presentation of models for future research,” Journal of Consumer Policy, 21, 251-

277.  

 

Bredahl, L. (1999), “Consumers’ cognitions with regards to genetically modified foods. 

Results of a qualitative study in four countries,”  Appetite, 33, 343-360. 

 

Bredahl, L. (2001), “Determinants of consumers attitudes and purchase intentions with 

regards to genetically modified foods – results of a cross-national survey,” Journal of 

Consumer Policy, 24, 23-61.  

 



 Chakraborty, K (2005), “Consumer’s attitude towards hormone-free milk: what 

have we learned?,” Applied Economics Letters, 12, 633-637. 

 

Chen M.-F. and Li H.-L. (2007), “The consumer’s attitude toward genetically modified 

foods in Taiwan,” Food Quality and Preference, 18, 662-674. 

 

Costa-Font, J., and Mossialos, E. (2005), “Is dread of genetically modified food 

associated with the consumers demand for information?,” Applied Economics Letters, 

12, 859-863. 

 

Costa-Font, J., and Mossialos, E. (2007), “Are perceptions of “risk” and “benefits” of 

genetically modified food (in) dependent?,” Food Quality and Preference, 18, 173-182. 

 

Dreezens E., Martijn, C., Tenbült, P., Kok, G., and de Vries, N.K. (2005), “Food and 

values: an examination of values underlying attitudes towards genetically modified and  

organic grown food products,” Appetite, 44, 115-122. 

 

Fraj, E., and Martinez, E. (2007), “Ecological consumer behaviour: an empirical 

analysis,” International Journal of consumer studies, 31, 27-33. 

 

Frewer, L.J., Howard, C., and Aaron, I. (1998), “Consumers acceptance of transgenic 

crops,” Pesticide Science, 52, 338-393. 

 

Gaskell,G., Bauer, M.W., Durant, J., and Allum,N.C. (2003), “Worlds apart? The 

reception of Genetically Modified foods in Europe and the U.S.,” Science, 285, 384–

387. 

 

Gaskell, G., Allum, N., Wagner, W., Kronberger, N., Torgersen, H., Hampel, J. and 

Bardes, J. (2004), “GM foods and the misperception of risk perception,” Risk Analysis, 

24, 185-194. 

 

Gaskell G., Allansdottir, A., Allum, N., Corchero, C., Fischler, C., Hampel, J., Jackson, 

J., Kronberger, N., Mejlgaard, N., Revuelta, G., Schreiner, C., Stares, S., Torgersen, H. 



 and Wagner, W. (2006), Europeans and Biotechnology in 2005: Patterns and 

Trends, Eurobarometer 64.3, Centre for the study of Bioscience BBaSB.  

 

Grimsrud, K., McCluskey, J., Loureiro, L., and Wahl, T. (2004), “Consumer attitudes to 

genetically modified food in Norway,” Journal of agricultural economics, 55 (1), 75-90. 

 

Grobe, D., and Raab, C (2004), “Voter’s Response to labelling genetically engineered 

food: oregon’s experience,” Journal of Consumer Affairs, 38 (2), 320-331.   

 

Grunert, K.G., Lähteenmaki, L., Nielsen, N.A., Poulsen, J.B., Ueland, O., and Åström, 

A. (2001), “Consumers perceptions of food products involving genetic modification - 

results from a qualitative study in four Nordic countries,” Food Quality and Preferences, 

12, 527-542. 

 

Grunert, K.G., Bredahl, L., and Scholderer, J. (2003), “Four questions on European 

consumers’ attitudes toward the use of genetic modification in food production,” 

Innovative Food Science and Emerging Technologies, 4, 435-445.  

 

Hair, J., Anderson, E., Tathan, R., and Black, W. (1999). Análisis Multivariante, 

Prentice  Hall.   

 

Hoban, T.J. (1997), “Consumer acceptance of biotechnology: an international 

perspective,” Nature Biotechnology, 15, 232-234.  

 

Hossain, F., Onyango, B., Adelaja, A., Schilling, B., and Hallman, W. (2002), 

“Uncovering factors influencing public perceptions of food biotechnology”, Food 

Policy Institute, Working Paper 0602-003. 

 

Hossain, F., Onyango, B., Schilling, B., Hallman, W., and Adelaja, A. (2003), “Product 

attributes, consumer benefits and public approval of genetically modified foods,” 

International Journal of Consumer studies, 27, 353-365. 

 



 Hossain, F., and Onyango, B. (2004), “Product attributes and consumer acceptance 

of nutritionally enhanced genetically modified foods,” International Journal of 

Consumer Studies, 28 (3), 255-267. 

 

Huffman, W., Rousu, M., Shogren, J.F., and Tegene, A. (2004), “The effects of prior 

beliefs and learning on consumers’ acceptance of genetically modified foods,” Journal 

of economic behaviour and organization, 63, 193-206.  

 

Jöreskog, K. and Sörbom, D. (1996), Lisrel 8: User’s Reference Guide, Scientific 

Software international. 

 

Kline, R. (2005), Principles and practice of structural equation modelling, New York, 

The Guilford press.  

 

Lähteenmäki, L., Grunert, K., Ueland, Ø., Åström, A., Arvola, A., and Bech-Larsen, T. 

(2002), “Acceptability of genetically modified cheese presented as real product 

alternative,” Food quality and preference, 13, 523-533.  

 

Loureiro, M.. and Hine S. (2004), “Preferences and willingness to pay for GM labelling 

policies,” Food Policy, 29,467-483.  

 

Loureiro, M., and Bugbee, M. (2005), “Enhanced GM foods: are consumers ready to 

pay for the potential benefits of biotechnology?,” The Journal of Consumer Affairs, 39, 

52-70. 

 

Luján, J.L. and L. Moreno (1994), “Biotecnología y sociedad: conflicto, desarrollo y 

regulación,” Arbor, 585, 9-47. 

 

Lusk, J.L., House, L.O., Valli, C., Jaeger, S.R., Moore, M., Morrow, B., and Traill, W B. 

(2004), “Effect of information about benefits of biotechnology on consumer acceptance 

of genetically modified food: evidence from experimental auctions in the United States, 

England, and France,” European Review of Agricultural Economics, 31, 179-204 

 



 Marcoulides, G.A., and Schumacker, R.E. (1996), Advanced structural equation 

modelling,  Mahnwah, K.J:  Erlbaum. 

 

Martinez, A., Mollá-Bauzá, M.B., Martinez, L.M., and del Campo, F.J. (2004), “Imagen 

percibida de los alimentos transgénicos. Un estudio exploratorio,” Paper at V Congreso 

de la Asociación Española de Economía Agraria. 15-17 September, Santiago de 

Compostela.  

 

McCullum, C. (2000), “Food biotechnology in the new millennium: promises, realities 

and challenges,” Journal of the American Dietetic Association, 100 (11), 1311-1315.  

 

Moon, W., and Balasubramanian, S.K. (2001), “A multi-attribute model of public 

acceptance of genetically modified organisms”, Paper at American Agricultural 

Economics Association annual meeting, 5-8 August, Chicago. 

 

Moon, W., and Balasubramanian, S.K. (2004), “Public attitudes toward 

agrobiotechnology: the mediating role of risk perceptions on the impact of trust, 

awareness, and outrage,” Review of Agricultural Economics, 26, 186-208. 

 

Noomene, R., and Gil, J.M. (2004), “Grado de conocimiento y actitudes de los 

consumidores españoles hacia los alimentos con organsimos modificados 

geneticamente,” Paper at V Congreso de la Asociación Española de Economía Agraria. 

15-17 September, Santiago de Compostela. 

 

O’Connor, E., Cowan, C., Williams, G., O’Connell, J., and Boland, M.P. (2006), “Irish 

consumer acceptance of a hypothetical second-generation GM yogurt product,” Food 

Quality and Preference, 17, 400-411. 

 

Olsen, S. (2003), “Understanding the relationship between age and seafood 

consumption: the mediating role of attitude, health involvement and convenience,” 

Food Quality and Preference, 14, 199-209.   

 



 Onyango, B., Ferdaus, H., Hallman, W., Schilling, B., and Adelajan, A. (2003), 

“Public perceptions of food biotechnology: uncovering factors driving consumer 

acceptance of genetically modified food,” Journal of Food Distribution Research, 34, 

37-42. 

 

Onyango, B. (2004), “Consumer acceptance of genetically modified foods: the role of 

product benefits and perceived risks,” Journal of Food Distribution Research, 35, 154-

161. 

 

Onyango, B., Govindasamy, R., Hallman, W., Jang, H., and Puduri, V.S. (2004), 

“Consumer acceptance of genetically modified foods in Korea: factor and cluster 

analysis,” Paper at Northeast Agricultural and Resource Economics Association and 

Canadian Agricultural Economics Society annual meeting, 20-23 June 2004, Halifax, 

Nova Scotia. 

 

Pidgeon, N.F., Poortinga,W., Rowe, G., Horlick-Jones, T., Walls, J., and o’Riordan, T. 

(2005), “Using surveys in public participation processes for risk decision making: the 

case of 2003 British GM nation? Public Debate,” Risk Analysis, 25(2), 467479. 

 

Saher, M., Lindeman, M., and Koivisto, U. (2006), “Attitudes towards genetically 

modified and organic foods,” Appetite, 46, 324-331. 

 

Savadori, L., Savio, S., Nocotra, E., Rumiati, R., Finucane, M., and Slovic, P. (2004), 

“Expert and public perception of risk from biotechnology,” Risk Analysis, 24, 1289-

1299. 

 

Siegrist, M. (2000), “The influence of trust and perceptions of risk and benefit on the 

acceptance of gene technology,” Risk Analysis, 20, 195-203. 

 

Steenkamp, J.-B. and Baumgartner, H. (1998), “Assessing measurement invariance in 

cross-national consumer research,” Journal of consumer research, 25, 78-90. 

 

Thompson, J. B. (1995), The Media and Modernity. A Social Theory of the Media, 

Cambridge Polity Press. 



  

Todt, O., and Lujan, J.L. (2000), “Spain: commercialisation drives public debate and 

precaution,” Journal of Risk Research, 3, 237-245.  

 

Veeman, M., Adamowicz, W., and Hu, W. (2005), “Risk perceptions, social interactions 

and the influence of information on social attitudes to agricultural biotechnology,” 

Project report 05-02; AARI project report 2001J025.   

 

Vilella-Vila, M., Costa-Font, J., and Mossialos, E. (2005), “Consumers involvement and 

acceptance of biotechnology in the European Union: a specific focus on Spain and the 

U.K.,” International Journal of Consumer Studies, 29,18-118. 

 

Wilson, C., Evans, G., Leppard, P., and Syrette, J. (2004), “Reactions to genetically 

modified food crops and how perceptions of risks and benefits influences 

consumers’information gathering,” Risk Analysis, 24 (5), 1311-1321. 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 Table 1. Spanish area devoted to GM maize production by regions.  

Year 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 
Andalucía 780 2.800 1.500 450 1.800 2.089 
Aragón 11.500 7.300 9.000 4.250 9.200 12.905 
Asturias 0 0 0 0 0 6 
Baleares 2 2 26 0 30 2 
Castilla la Mancha 4.500 6.800 5.650 870 4.150 8.171 
Castilla León 200 360 270 0 0 0 
Catalunya 1.700 3.000 4.500 3.250 5.300 5.278 
Extremadura 1.000 2.500 2.500 600 1.500 1.633 
La Rioja 25 30 30 0 0 0 
Madrid 660 1.560 1.970 1.940 780 678 
Navarra 1.760 300 220 80 500 1.401 
Valencia 190 300 150 100 20 1 
Total 22.317 24.952 25.816 11.540 23.280 32.164 

Source: MAPA 

 

Table 2. List of indicators used for each construct. 

Construct  Indicators  

Approach towards 
science and technology 
(C1) 

X1: I am interested in science and technology 
X2: I feel well informed about science and technology 

Approach towards the 
environment(C2) 

X3: I am interested in the environment  
X4: I feel well informed about the environment  

Perceived Benefits of 
science and technology 
(C3) 

X5: In the next twenty years, science and technology development will be 
positive for the world.  
X6: In the next twenty years, science and technology benefits will overcome 
its risks.  
X7: The problems of current technology will be solved by future 
technology.  
X8: Science and technology have made this world dangerous.  

Attitudes towards 
biotechnology and  
genetic engineering 
(C4) 

X9: Genetic engineering have contributed to increase human quality live.  
X10: Biotechnology have contributed to increase human quality live 
X11: Biotechnology and genetic engineering advances are dangerous for 
humans.  

X12: Biotechnology and genetic engineering advances are dangerous for the 
environment. 

Attitudes towards 
genetic engineering 
medical applications 
(C5) 

X13: Genetic engineering is totally acceptable for identify genetic illness in 
humans.  
X14: Genetic engineering is totally acceptable for application in new 
medical treatments.   

Perceived Benefits of 
GMF (C6) 

X15: The existence of GMF will benefit almost all population.  
X16: Risks associated to GMF are acceptable.  
X17: Although GMF have benefits this product is a danger for nature.  
X18: The idea of GMF frightens me.   
X19: GMF do not raise any danger for future generations.   

 

 

 

 



 Table 3 Public opinion on the genetic engineering applications  

Question mean s.e 

To develop crops resistant to frozen and “plagas”. 6.37 0.072 

To develop cattle “engordar” fater.   1.58 0.052 

To develop bacterium for cleaning up black “marea”  7.72 0.059 

To detect people hereditary diseases  8.36 0.044 

To apply new medical treatments  8.45 0.044 
Question: how you would value the use of genetic engineering for the following purposes? (Note: 0 
“totally disagree” and 10 “totally agree”) 

 

 

Table 4. Public opinion on GM food  

Question mean s.e 

The existence of GM will benefit most of the population   3.55 0.071 

Risks associated with GM food are acceptable 3.50 0.067 

Although some benefits are associated to GM food, these are unnatural  7.50 0.057 

The idea of GM food alarms me  6.50 0.066 

The existence of GM food is not dangerous for future generations 3.02 0.069 

 

Question: Now I will read you some opinions on the existence of GM food, and would like you to tell me 
the degree of agreement or disagreement with them. (Note: 0 “totally disagree” and 10 “totally agree”) 

 

Table 5 Correlation matrix among indicators (Full population)   
 

 X1 X2 X3 X4 X5 X6 X7 X8 X9 X10 X11 X12 X13 X14 X15 X16 X17 X18 X19 
X1 1.00                   
X2 0.66 1                  
X3 0.60 0.44 1                 
X4 0.47 0.72 0.65 1                
X5 0.28 0.20 0.10 0.13 1               
X6 0.16 0.16 0.02 0.07 0.67 1              
X7 0.18 0.20 0.04 0.14 0.46 0.47 1             
X8 -0.09 -0.13 0.00 -0.06 -0.33 -0.40 -0.28 1            
X9 0.21   0.16 0.13 0.11 0.26 0.28 0.21 -0.18 1           
X10 0.28 0.27 0.17 0.19 0.33 0.30 0.25 -0.25 0.64 1          
X11 -0.09 -0.07 0.01 -0.05 -0.24 -0.37 -0.28 0.38 -0.36 -0.26 1         
X12 -0.05 -0.04 0.07 -0.02 0.21 -0.34 -0.29 0.36 -0.26 -0.24 0.84 1        
X13 0.24 0.21 0.17 0.21 0.28 0.22 0.27 -0.09 0.25 0.25 -0.27 -0.25 1       
X14 0.21 0.19 0.14 0.16 0.28 0.25 0.30 -0.12 0.26 0.25 -0.32 -0.29 0.92 1      
X15 0.13 0.13 0.03 0.11 0.24 0.31 0.29 -0.25 0.28 0.30 -0.43 -0.43 0.28 0.30 1     
X16 0.09 0.13 -0.01 0.06 0.22 0.28 0.25 -0.26 0.27 0.27 -0.39 -0.38 0.20 0.26 0.65 1    
X17 0.00 0.02 -0.05 -0.02 0.14 0.24 0.23 -0.18 0.22 0.23 -0.36 -0.35 0.15 0.17 0.52 0.62 1   
X18 -0.01 -0.05 0.10 0.00 -0.04 -0.16 -0.09 0.38 -0.11 -0.20 0.28 0.29 0.04 0.02 -0.46 -0.48 -0.35 1  
X19 -0.07 -0.11 0.07 -0.03 -0.13 -0.22 -0.18 0.41 -0.17 -0.21 0.40 0.37 -0.06 -0.05 -0.49 -0.51 -0.43 0.62 1 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 



 Table 6. Reliability of the standardized Confirmatory Factor Analysis  (Full 

population).   

Construct  

 

Indicators  Standardized loadings   

(t-Value) 

 

Composite reliability  

(Variance extracted) 

Goodness of fit 

parameters  

C1 Cronbach’s  α 0.73 0.89 
(0.80) 

2χ = 1263.14 

df = 137 

p = 0.00 
 

RMSEA = 0.06 
 

GFI =  0.98 
 

AGFI = 0.97 
 

CFI  = 0.95 
 

NNFI = 0.94 
 

NFI = 0.94 

 X1 0.88 (62.63) 
X2 0.91 (74.43) 

C2 Cronbach’s  α 0.72 0.90 
(0.82)  X3 0.87 (51.71) 

 X4 0.94 (64.60) 
C3 Cronbach’s  α 0.64 0.83 

(0.50)  X5 0.77 (43.42) 
 X6 0.84 (55.34) 
 X7 0.66 (34.11) 
 X8 -0.69  (34.94) 
C4 Cronbach’s  α 0.66 0.89 

(0.59)  X9 0.70 (39.93) 
 X10 0.74 (43.49) 
 X11 -0.94 (90.06) 
 X12 -0.89 (74.76) 
C5 Cronbach’s  α 0.88 0.96 

(0.93)  X13 0.97 (47.51) 
 X14 0.96 (50.76) 
C6 Cronbach’s  α 0.75 0.85 

(0.65)  X15 0.85 (61.93) 
 X16 0.85 (65.80) 
 X17 0.72 (42.71) 
 X18 -0.71 (36.82) 
 X19 -0.80 (49.87) 

Note: RMSEA <0.05-0.08 (Browne and Cudeck, 1992; Kline, 2007; Baumgartner and Homburg, 1996) GFI; 
AGFI; CFI; NFI and NNFI >0.90 (Bollen, 1989; Marcoulides and Schumacker, 1996) 
 

 
Table 7. Reliability of the standardized Confirmatory Factor Analysis (Gender 

segmentation) 

Construct  

 

Indicators  Standardized loadings  (t-

Value) 

Composite reliability  

(Variance extracted) 

Configural invariance Metric invariance 

Males  Females  Males  Females   
2χ = 1580.74 

 

df = 274 
 
 
p = 0.00 

 

RMSEA =0.067 
 
CAIC =2498.01 
 
CFI  = 0.96 
 
NNFI =0.95 

Full: 
2χ = 1597.04 

 

df = 293 
 
p = 0.00 

 

RMSEA = 0.065 
 

CAIC = 2349.90 
 
CFI = 0.96 
 

NNFI = 0.95 

C1 Cronbach’s  α 0.71 0.74  0.90 
(0.81) 

0.89 
(0.80)  X1 0.87 (41.71) 0.90 (46.90) 

X2 0.93 (50.94) 0.90 (53.56) 
C2 Cronbach’s  α 0.72 0.72 0.93 

(0.87) 
0.90 
(0.82)  X3 0.88 (40.42) 0.87 (45.10) 

X4 0.98 (48.90) 0.94 (51.82) 
C3 Cronbach’s  α 0.65 0.63 0.85 

(0.5) 
0.84 
(0.50)  X5 0.81 (34.95) 0.82 (36.27) 

X6 0.88 (48.00) 0.85 (47.78) 
X7 0.69 (27.16) 0.65 (25.28) 

 X8 -0.68 (24.53) -0.68 (24.82) 
C4 Cronbach’s  α 0.66 0.66 0.91 

(0.64) 
0.90 
(0.61)  X9 0.76 (33.41) 0.73 (32.77) 

X10 0.77 (34.03) 0.73 (33.19) 
X11 -0.97 (72.56) -0.97 (71.64) 
X12 0.89 (56.60) -0.89 (57.02) 

C5 Cronbach’s  α 0.89 0.88 0.98 
(0.95) 

0.96 
(0.92)  X13 0.96 (43.32) 1.00  (48.13) 

 X14 1.00 (48.97) 0.94 (49.66) 
C6 Cronbach’s  α 0.76 0.73 0.85 

(0.65) 
0.83 
(0.61)  X15 0.85 (48.04) 0.86 (47.07) 

 X16 0.82 (39.29) 0.78 (37.17) 
 X17 -0.74 (29.12) -0.70 (27.46)  
 X18 -0.83 (40.89) -0.79 (38.81) 
 X19 0.74 (30.58) 0.72 (28.65) 

Note: RMSEA <0.05-0.08 (Browne and Cudeck, 1992; Kline, 2007; Baumgartner and Homburg, 1996) GFI; AGFI; CFI; NFI and 
NNFI >0.90 (Bollen, 1989; Marcoulides and Schumacker, 1996) 



  
Table 8 Reliability of the standardized Multi-Group Confirmatory Factor Analysis (age 

segmentation).  

Construct  

 

Indicators  Standardized loadings  (t-Value) Composite reliability  

(Variance extracted) 

Configural 

invariance 

Metric invariance 

18-35 36-56 +56 18-35 36-56 +56  
2χ = 

1909.70 
 

df = 411 
 
 
p = 0.00 

 
RMSEA

=0.072 
 
CAIC  
=3285.61 
 
CFI   
= 0.96 
 
NNFI  

=0.95 

Full: 
2χ = 

2044.40 
 

df = 
449 
 
p = 0.00 

 
RMSEA

= 0.071 
 
CAIC

= 3091.47 
 
CFI  
 = 0.96 
 
NNFI

=0.95 

Partial: 
2χ = 

1956 
 

df = 
439 
 
p = 0.00 

 
RMSEA

= 0.07 
 
CAIC

=3090.4 
 
CFI  = 
0.96 
 
NNFI

=0.95 

C1 Cronbach’s  α 0.71 0.67 0.75 0.88 
(0.78) 

0.90 
(0.82) 

0.92 
(0.85)  X1 0.91 (37.87) 0.85 (39.69) 0.90 (41.57) 

X2 0.86 (38.36) 0.96 (43.37) 0.94 (44.01) 
C2 Cronbach’s  α 0.68 0.67 0.75 0.89 

(0.80) 
0.92 
(0.84) 

0.93 
(0.87)  X3 0.89 (33.10) 0.85 (32.52) 0.87 (36.28) 

X4 0.89 (33.56) 0.98 (38.32) 0.99 (40.84) 
C3 Cronbach’s  α 0.65 0.66 0.60 0.86 

(0.6) 
0.88 
(0.6) 

0.82 
(0.5)  X5 0.84 (29.71) 0.80 (28.60) 0.76 (24.28) 

X6 0.88 (41.26) 0.93 (41.04) 0.83 (33.26) 
X7 0.69 (24.64) 0.73 825.73) 0.70 (21.62) 

 X8 -0.67 (22.13) -0.73 (23.71) -0.60 (17.57) 
C4 Cronbach’s  α 0.60 0.68 0.69 0.88 

(0.54) 
0.95 
(0.75) 

0.90 
(0.61)  X9 0.65 (22.08) 0.82 (29.67) 0.72 (23.42) 

X10 0.65 (22.03) 0.88 (30.97) 0.74 (24.15) 
X11 -0.96 (59.23) -0.99 (62.56) -0.94 (52.62) 
X12 -0.89 (50.35) -0.90 (50.85) -0.91 (43.17) 

C5 Cronbach’s  α 0.84 0.91 0.89 0.96 
(0.93) 

0.98 
(0.96) 

0.99 
(0.99)  X13 0.96 (31.75) 0.96 (37.92) 1.01 (34.95) 

 X14 0.97 (34.00) 1 (42.17) 1.00  (34.02) 
C6 Cronbach’s  α 0.74 0.75 0.75 0.85 

(0.66) 
0.83 
(0.62) 

0.83 
(0.62)  X15 0.89 (49.46) 0.86 (45.98) 0.85 (40.84) 

 X16 0.81 (34.92) 0.78 (32.95) 0.79 (30.28) 
 X17 -0.72 (23.95) -0.72 (23.85) -0.72 (21.42) 
 X18 -0.79 (33.15) -0.87 (35.46) -0.77 (28.64) 
 X19 0.73 (27.06) 0.75 (27.59) 0.75 (24.19) 

 Note: RMSEA <0.05-0.08 (Browne and Cudeck, 1992; Kline, 2007; Baumgartner and Homburg, 1996) GFI; AGFI; CFI; NFI and 
NNFI >0.90 (Bollen, 1989; Marcoulides and Schumacker, 1996) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 Table 9 Reliability of the standardized Confirmatory Factor Analysis (consumer 

intentions towards GMF).  

Construct  

 

Indicators  Standardized loadings  (t-Value) Composite reliability  

(Variance extracted) 

Configural 

invariance 

Metric invariance 

Willing to 
consume GMF 

Not Willing to 
consume GMF 

Willing to 
consume GMF 

Not Willing to 
consume GMF 

 
2χ = 

1454.97 
 

df = 274 
 
 
p = 0.00 

 
REMSEA

=0.067 
 
CAIC  
=2363.60 
 
CFI   
= 0.97 
 
NNFI  

=0.96 

Full: 
2χ =  

1606.95 

df = 293 
 
p = 0.00 

 
REMSEA

= 0.068 
 

CAIC = 
2352.71 
CFI  
 = 0.96 
 
NNFI =

0.95 

Partial: 
2χ = 

1478.53 
 

df = 289 
 
p = 0.00 

 
REMSEA

= 0.065 
 

CAIC =
2258.58 
 
CFI  = 
0.96 
 
NNFI

=0.96 

C1 Cronbach’s  α 0.75  0.70 0.88 
(0.79) 

0.88 
(0.79)  X1 0.94 (39.32) 0.85 (46.84) 

X2 0.93 (46.85) 0.93 (58.97) 
C2 Cronbach’s  α 0.72 0.71 0.90  

(0.82) 
0.90 
(0.82)  X3 0.89 (29.81) 0.87 (42.92) 

X4 0.96 (38.98) 0.94 (56.87) 
C3 Cronbach’s  α 0.62 0.63 0.81  

(0.50) 
0.81 
(0.50)  X5 0.83 (29.11) 0.76 (34.61) 

X6 0.81 (34.01) 0.84 (42.67) 
X7 0.66 (21.42) 0.64 (24.96) 

 X8 -0.77 (23.53) -0.63 (24.40) 
C4 Cronbach’s  α 0.64 0.64 0.89 

(0.57) 
0.89 
(0.57)  X9 0.73 (26.86) 0.72 (34.07) 

X10 0.83 (29.10) 0.71 (32.25) 
X11 -0.92 (50.84) -0.95 (66.76) 
X12 -0.89 (40.32) -0.86 (51.77) 

C5 Cronbach’s  α 0.79 0.90 0.97 
(0.93) 

0.97 
(0.93)  X13 1.01 (34.66) 0.99 (33.23) 

 X14 1.00 (36.95) 0.94 (36.03) 
C6 Cronbach’s  α 0.67 0.68 0.75 

(0.51)  
0.75 
(0.51)  X15 0.81 (28.19) 0.74 (32.86) 

 X16 0.70 (21.92) 0.73 (31.21 
 X17 -0.62 (18.37) -0.66 (23.86) 
 X18 -0.87 (26.59) -0.71 (28.67) 
 X19 0.69 (21,43)  0.75 (29.81)  

Note: REMSEA <0.05-0.08 (Browne and Cudeck, 1992; Kline, 2007; Baumgartner and Homburg, 1996) GFI; AGFI; CFI; NFI and 
NNFI >0.90 (Bollen, 1989; Marcoulides and Schumacker, 1996) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 Table 10 Reliability of the standardized Confirmatory Factor Analysis (GM-free 

and producer regions). 

Construct  

 

Indicators  Standardized loadings  (t-

Value) 

Composite reliability  

(Variance extracted) 

Configural 

invariance 

Metric invariance 

GM free 
region 

GM 
producer 
region 

GM free 
region 

GM 
producer 
region 

 
2χ = 

1497.11 
 

df = 274 
 
 
p = 0.00 

 

RMSEA =0
.064 
 
CAIC  
=2418.62 
 
CFI   
= 0.96 
 
NNFI  

=0.95  

Full: 
2χ = 1611.51 

 

df = 293 
 
p = 0.00 

 

RMSEA = 
0.064 
 
CAIC = 
2367.84 
 
CFI  
 = 0.96 
 
NNFI = 

0.95 

Partial: 
2χ = 

1551.77 
 

df = 
287 
 
p = 0.00 

 
RMSEA

= 0.063 
 
CAIC

=2360.26 
 
CFI  = 
0.96 
 
NNFI

=0.95 

C1 Cronbach’s  α 0.71 0.74 0.90 
(0.81) 

0.92 
(0.85)  X1 0.87 (52.11) 0.91 (57.08) 

X2 0.93 (55.29) 0.90 (58.14) 
C2 Cronbach’s  α 0.73 0.71 0.96 

(0.92) 
0.89 
(0.80)  X3 0.92 (40.40) 0.88 (39.75) 

X4 0.99 (48.38) 0.91 (46.40) 
C3 Cronbach’s  α 0.66 0.64 0.87 

(0.60) 
0.82 
(0.50)  X5 0.87 (34.39) 0.76 (32.81) 

X6 0.89 (41.22) 0.82 (40.73) 
X7 0.65 (24.50) 0.68 (27.48) 

 X8 -0.76 (26.88) -0.65 (25.42) 
C4 Cronbach’s  α 0.68 0.64 0.93 

(0.70) 
0.88 
(0.55)  X9 0.79 (32.41) 0.67 (29.23) 

X10 0.85 (34.75) 0.70 (30.48) 
X11 -0.95 (66.05) -0.94 (68.26) 
X12 -0.90 (54.29)  -0.88 (56.99) 

C5 Cronbach’s  α 0.89 0.88 0.99 
(0.97) 

0.96 
(0.92)  X13 0.98 (41.91) 1.01 (48.16) 

 X14 0.99 (49.61) 0.92 (46.21) 
C6 Cronbach’s  α 0.75 0.74 0.86 

(0.67) 
0.81 
(0.59)  X15 0.91 (44.35) 0.82 (43.29) 

 X16 0.83 (36.81) 0.75 (36.43) 
 X17 -0.69 (27.29) -0.74 (31.03) 
 X18 0.80 (36.70) -0.81 (42.07) 
 X19 0.67 (27.46) 0.75 (33.08) 

Note: REMSEA <0.05-0.08 (Browne and Cudeck, 1992; Kline, 2007; Baumgartner and Homburg, 1996) GFI; AGFI; CFI; NFI and 
NNFI >0.90 (Bollen, 1989; Marcoulides and Schumacker, 1996) 

 

 

Table 11 Goodness-of-fit for the structural regression models  

 Full  18-35 36-56 +56 WTC  NWTC GMfree GM 
producer 

Male  Female 

2
df

χ  1326.80 704.10 695.38 669.41 658.97 953.05 743.61 853.73 812.21 851.69 

p  0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
REMSEA  0.062 0.070 0.070 0.070 0.070 0.060 0.066 0.063 0.067 0.069 
GFI 0.98 0.97 0.98 0.97 0.98 0.98 0.98 0.98 0.98 0.97 
AGFI 0.97 0.96 0.97 0.97 0.97 0.97 0.97 0.97 0.97 0.96 
CFI 0.95 0.94 0.96 0.96 0.97 0.95 0.96 0.96 0.96 0.94 
NFI 0.94 0.92 0.95 0.95 0.96 0.94 0.95 0.95 0.96 0.93 
NNFI 0.94 0.93 0.96 0.95 0.97 0.94 0.96 0.95 0.96 0.93 
REMSEA <0.5-0.8 (Browne and Cudeck, 1992; Kline, 207) GFI; AGFI; CFI; NFI and NNFI >0.90 (Bollen, 1989; 
Marcoulides and Schumacker, 1996) 
 

 
 

 

 



 FIGURES  

 

Figure 1. Consumer conceptual process of acceptance 

 

 
 
Figure 2. Public benefit perceptions of science and technology.  

 

0
10
20
30
40
50
60

In the next twenty years,

science and technology

benefits will overcome its

risks. 

The problems of current

technology will be solved

by future technology. 

Science and technology

have made this world

dangerous

 Agree Disagree  Don't Know
 

 
Question: Now I will read you some opinions on science and technology, and would like you to tell me if 

you agree or disagree with them. 

 
 

Perceived 
Benefits of 
science and 
technology 

Attitudes towards 
GM medical 
applications  

Perceived 
Benefits of GMF 

 

Approach 
towards 
science & 
technology   

Approach 
towards the 
environment  

Attitudes towards 
biotechnology  

H1 

H2 

H3 

H4 

H5 

H6 



 Figure 3.  Path diagram results Spanish full sample 
 
 
 

 
 
 * 05.0=p  ** 01.0=p  *** 001.0=p  

Figure 4.  Path diagram results Spanish age segmented sample (18-35; 36-56; +56) 

 
 
* 05.0=p  ** 01.0=p  *** 001.0=p   

 

Perceived 
Benefits of 
science and 
technology 

Attitudes towards 
GM medical 
applications  

Perceived 
Benefits of GMF 

 

Approach 
towards 
science & 
technology   

Approach 
towards the 
environment  

Attitudes towards 
biotechnology  

0.53***; 0.56***; 0.14* 
 

-0.39***; -0.29***; 0.19 *** 
 

0.74***; 0.76***; 0.73*** 

0.50***; 0.59***; 0.43*** 

0.75***; 0.67***; 0.59*** 

-0.06; 0.083; -0.07 

Perceived 
Benefits of 
science and 
technology 

Attitudes towards 
GM medical 
applications  

Perceived 
Benefits of GMF 

 

Approach 
towards 
science & 
technology   

Approach 
towards the 
environment  

Attitudes towards 
biotechnology  

0.50*** 
(13.34) 

-0.21*** 
(5.64) 

0.73*** 
(24.76) 

0.45*** 
(15.48) 

0.68*** 
(22.24) 

0.04 
(1.32) 



  
 
Figure 5.  Path diagram results Spanish consumer intentions towards GM food 

segmented sample (willing to consume; not willing to consume) 

 
 
 * 05.0=p  ** 01.0=p  *** 001.0=p   

Figure 6.  Path diagram results Spanish GM producer region segmented sample (GM 

producer; GM free) 

 

* 05.0=p  ** 01.0=p  *** 001.0=p  

Perceived 
Benefits of 
science and 
technology 

Attitudes towards 
GM medical 
applications  

Perceived 
Benefits of GMF 

 

Approach 
towards 
science & 
technology   

Approach 
towards the 
environment  

Attitudes towards 
biotechnology  

0.53***; 0.66*** 
 

-0.18***; -0.37*** 
 

0.75***; 0.70*** 

0.46***; 0.48*** 

0.71***; 0.60*** 

 

-0.13***; 0.15*** 

Perceived 
Benefits of 
science and 
technology 

Attitudes towards 
GM medical 
applications  

Perceived 
Benefits of GMF 

 

Approach 
towards 
science & 
technology   

Approach 
towards the 
environment  

Attitudes towards 
biotechnology  

0.53***; .44*** 
 

-0.075; -0.24*** 
 

0.81***; 0.65*** 

0.34***; 0.38*** 

0.80***; 0.54*** 

 

-0.25***; -0.057 



 Figure 7.  Path diagram results Spanish segmented sample by gender (male; 

female) 

 

  

* 05.0=p  ** 01.0=p  *** 001.0=p   

 
 

 

 

 
 

 

Perceived 
Benefits of 
science and 
technology 

Attitudes towards 
GM medical 
applications  

Perceived 
Benefits of GMF 

 

Approach 
towards 
science & 
technology   

Approach 
towards the 
environment  

Attitudes towards 
biotechnology  

0.39***; 0.64*** 
 

-0.10*; -0.33*** 
 

0.72***; 0.76*** 

0.54***; 0.45*** 

0.76***; 0.63*** 

 

-0.065; 0.0005 


