
















































Effect of Price-Discount Distribution in Multi-Unit Price Promotions on Sales Value of a New Product: Evidence from Multi-Unit Auctions


Effect of Price-Discount Distribution in Multi-Unit Price Promotions on 
Consumers’ Willingness to Pay, Sales Value, and Retailers’ Revenue: 

Evidence from Multi-Unit Auctions 

 

1. Background 

Developing new products is said to be the lifeblood of companies. Due to changing 

consumer needs and increasing competition, companies that want to enhance their 

market position and grow must develop new products to improve their competitive 

posture or even survive. New product development often requires a lot of resources in 

terms of research and invested capital.  Unfortunately, the success rate of new products 

in the market is generally low.  For example, Stevens and Burley (2003) reported that 

the failure rate of new products is somewhere between 40% and 75%. Cooper (2001) 

mentioned that approximately 46% of all resources allocated to product development 

and commercialization by U.S. firms had been spent on products that were cancelled or 

failed to yield an adequate financial return. Given the high costs associated with new 

product development, it is imperative for firms to find ways to market their new products 

better to minimize the probability of failure. Numerous studies have been conducted to 

determine the causes of new product failure and success. A common finding is that a 

good product idea and quality cannot by themselves guarantee the success and many 

other factors such as sales promotions have to be considered (Montoya-Weiss & 

Calantone, 1994; Calantone et al., 1996). In this paper, we tackle the issue of price or 

sales promotions as a tool that can be used to increase sales for new products.   

 1 



Sales promotions are defined as a set of activities and techniques, mostly short 

term, designed to attract attention to a particular product and to increase its sales 

(Kotler, 2000). Sales promotions have become a fundamental strategy typically 

employed as part of a marketing mix.  Consequently, they have become a significant 

part of promotional budgets over the years. For example, sales promotions have been 

estimated to represent 74% of the marketing budgets of US packaged goods 

manufacturers (Cox Direct, 1998).   

There is a large body of literature on sales promotions that includes contributions 

that dates back from the 1970s.  This body of literature is mainly composed of two 

broad streams of research. The first stream of research is concerned with developing 

and reviewing the theoretical perspectives that can help explain consumer responses to 

promotions. For instance, theoretical perspectives such as adaptation level theory (see 

Monroe, 1973, Lattin and Bucklin, 1989; Kalwani and Yim, 1992), assimilation contrast 

theory (see Blair and Landon, 1979; Berkowitz and Walton, 1980; Urbany et al., 1988; 

Bearden et al., 1984), attribution theory (see Mizerski et al., 1979; Neslin and 

Shoemaker, 1989), prospect theory (see Tversky and Kahneman, 1992; Diamond and 

Sanyal, 1990) and transaction utility theory (see Thaler, 1985; Grewal and Monroe, 

1998; Lichtenstein et al., 1990) have been proposed to explain how promotions 

influence consumers’ preferences and behavior.  

The second stream of research is concerned with the empirical assessment of 

the effects of price promotion on sales (Guadagni & Little, 1983; Blattberg & Neslin, 

1990; Narasimhan et al., 1996; Manning & Sprott, 2007 etc.). A number of these papers 

have focused on studying the ways in which sales promotions affect sales such as 

 2 



brand switching (Dodson et al., 1978; Gupta, 1988; Blattberg & Neslin, 1990), 

stockpiling and purchase acceleration (Wilson et al., 1979; Neslin et al., 1985; Bucklin 

and Gupta, 1992; Bucklin et al., 1998), bundling (Stremersch & Tellis, 2002;  Foubert & 

Gijsbrechts, 2007) and consumption or quantity increase (Folkes et al., 1993; Ailawadi 

& Neslin, 1998; Bell et al., 1999; Nijs et al., 2001). Some papers focused on the 

decomposition of the total effect of promotions. For example, Gupta (1988) found that 

more than 84% of the total sales increase is due to brand switching, 14% due to 

purchase acceleration and 2% is due to quantity increase. Bell et al. (1999) extended 

the work of Gupta (1988) by studying 13 product categories and found that sales 

increases due to brand switching, purchase acceleration, and quantity increase are 

about 75%, 11%, and 14%, respectively. 

Although there is a large number of studies that have evaluated the effect of 

brand promotions, store promotion, and coupons, very few studies have examined the 

effect of multi-unit price promotions which involve selling more than one product for one 

price (e.g., “buy 5 units for $5, you save $2” etc.) on sales1. Nowadays, multi-unit price 

promotions can be beneficial to marketers for two major reasons. First, for retailers and 

manufacturers, it might be preferable to guarantee sales today than probabilistic future 

sales. An increase in the quantity of units sold on any shopping trip generates more 

revenue and also provides the customer a lower likelihood of running out of stock and 

consequently a lower likelihood of purchasing a competing product (Wansink et al., 

1998). Second, due to increasing time constraints, many consumers are becoming 

1 However, some studies have been carried out to assess the pricing of different package sizes. For 
example, Soman et al. (2001) examined how price bundling affects the decision to consume. 

 3 

                                                           



increasingly concerned about optimizing shopping efficiency by purchasing multiple 

units of products to save several trips to the store.  

To our knowledge, compared to the multitude of studies done on single-unit price 

promotions (e.g., buy one unit for $1, save $0.20), only few empirical works have been 

carried out to study the effect of multi-unit price promotions (e.g. “buy 5 units for $5, you 

save $2) on sales.  Blattberg & Neslin (1990) found that the sales of seven brands were 

significantly higher using multi-unit price promotions than using single-unit price 

promotions. Across a grocery chain of 86 stores, Wansink et al. (1998) carried out a 

field experiment to study the effect of multi-unit price promotions on sales of thirteen 

products. They found that for nine products, multi-unit price promotions generated a 

32% increase in sales volume compared to single-unit price promotions. However, they 

mentioned that the increase is in part due to the confusion of some consumers who 

believed that they need to buy multiple units to benefit from the promotion. Manning & 

Sprott (2007) mitigated this problem by informing participants in a hypothetical 

experiment that the price discount per unit is the same in both multi-unit price 

promotions and single-unit price promotions (i.e., “$1 for each unit” vs. “8 units for $8”). 

They found that multi-unit price promotions led to higher sales volume despite informing 

subjects about the absence of a difference in the amount of price discounts between 

multi-unit price promotions and single-unit price promotions. They also found that 

increasing the quantity specified in multi-unit price promotions (i.e., “2 units for $2” vs. “8 

units for $8”) has a positive effect on sales volume. Manning & Sprott (2007) explained 

the positive effect of multi-unit price promotions with the so called “anchoring effect”. 

Specifically, multi-unit price promotions can stimulate consumers to think about the 

 4 



possibilities of using and stocking a quantity of the product higher than they usually 

would use and stock. These thoughts can then lead, in many cases, to purchases of 

higher quantities.  

We attempt to contribute to the literature on multi-unit price promotions by 

examining the effect of the distribution of the amount of price discounts on sales value 

and change in retailers’ revenue. The main objective of multi-unit price promotions is to 

induce consumers to purchase more units of the product. This objective is 

accomplished by offering price discounts on purchases involving more than one unit 

(Blattberg & Neslin, 1990). Past studies have examined the effect of an increase in the 

amount specified in multi-unit price promotions on sales volume. The amount of 

discount examined in these studies is generally set equal in single and multi-unit price 

promotions but the form of presentation is different (e.g., for single-unit price discount 

“1unit for $1, Save $0.25/unit”; for multi-unit price promotions “4 units for $4, Save $1”). 

Since the amount of price discount per unit is the same, a rational consumer should be 

indifferent between the two types of promotion. However, retailers generally just 

mention the multi-unit price promotion, making the consumer think that s/he has to 

purchase all the units to benefit from the discount (Wansink et al. 1998).  Indeed, 

Manning & Sprott (2007) (study1) found that 35.6% of people were confused about this 

issue.  

In contrast to previous studies on multi-unit price promotions, we decided to keep 

the number of units constant but vary the distribution across units of the amount of price 

discount to identify the price-discount distribution that yields the highest increase in 

sales and retailers’ revenues. Specifically, we compared the effect of three types of 

 5 



price-discount distribution: (1) the quantity of price discount is distributed equally among 

units (i.e. “single-unit price promotions”); (2) the quantity of price discount is 

concentrated on the last purchased unit (i.e. like in the price promotion “buy n units and 

pay only for (n-1) units”); and (3) the amount of price discount is increasing in the 

number of units (i.e. the price discount on the second purchased unit is higher than 

price discount on the first unit and so on). 

 

2. Hypothesis  

As mentioned above, offering buyers a discount equally distributed among 

various units has been found to positively affect retailers’ sales (Manning & Sprott, 

2007). The positive effect of single-unit price promotion is partly attributed to its 

advantage of offering buyers a discount on every acquired unit (i.e. buyers of any 

number of units can benefit from the single-unit price promotion). Therefore, we are 

expecting to see a positive effect of single-unit price promotion on consumers’ WTP and 

sales of food products. 

Hypothesis 1: offering buyers a discount equally distributed among units (i.e. single-

unit price promotion) can increase consumers’ WTP and sales of food products. 

The second type of price-discount distribution is currently used by retailers 

offering buyers to purchase N units of the same product and to just pay the price of N-1 

units (i.e. get the last unit for free). For example, the promotion technique of “buy-one-

get-one-free” has been found to persuade consumers to increase their purchases and 

benefit retailers by increasing their sales and speeding up the stock clearance (Sinha 

and Smith, 2000; Li et al., 2007). In our case, the “buy N units and pay the price of N-1 

 6 



units” discount can motivate, especially, the buyers of, e.g., (n-1)/(n-2)/(n-3)  units to 

buy n units and get the last one for free2. As a result we expect that offering consumers 

the last acquired unit for free can increase their WTP as well as retailers’ sales. 

Hypothesis 2: offering buyers of N units to pay the price of N-1 units can increase 

consumers’ WTP and sales of food products. 

While multi-unit price promotions that use an increasing amount of price discount 

is not currently used in retail stores, this type of price promotion is consistent with 

consumer demand theory for any normal good. For instance, it is well known, 

theoretically and empirically, that consumer WTP for a normal good is decreasing in 

quantity (i.e., the price decreases when the quantity increases; hence, a consumer is 

willing to pay more for the nth unit than for the (n+1)th unit). Therefore, a retail price that 

does not increase with the quantity is likely to not do much to change real consumer 

preferences. To provide an incentive for consumers to purchase more units, we propose 

in this paper a multi-unit price promotion strategy that provides consumers an 

increasing price discount on each additional purchased unit. The price discount is 

lowest on the first unit and reaches the maximum on the last unit. Consequently, we 

expect that - buyers will be attracted by the increasing benefit they can get from 

purchasing additional units of the product. 

Hypothesis 3: offering buyers an increasing price discount on each additional 

purchased unit can increase consumers’ WTP and sales of food products. 

2 However, it is important to mention that the quantity of discount specified in the promotion can significantly influence 
the effect of the price discount. For example, the “buy 6 and pay for 5” discount allows a buyer of six units to save 
one sixth of the price he/she has to pay for the six units in the absence of promotion. Nonetheless, if the discount is 
“buy 2 and pay for 1”, a buyer of six units can save 50% of the price he/she has to pay for the six units (i.e. same as 
buy 6 and pay for 3). Although it would be interesting to assess the effect of varying the quantity of discount (e.g. 
“buy 6 pay for 5” vs. “buy 6 pay for 4” vs. “buy 6 pay for 3” etc.), this is beyond the scope of our study and 
consequently, we opted to only use the “buy 6 pay for 5” promotion where all the discount is applied to the last unit. 

 7 

                                                           



To assess the effect of the distribution of the amount of price discounts, we used a 

relatively new value elicitation method, the so called multi-unit auctions. In the next 

section, we describe how a multi-unit auction works. Specifically, we first explain why 

we used a non-hypothetical experiment rather than real market data (e.g., scanner 

data). We then discuss why the use of multi-unit auction is more appropriate in our 

study than single-unit auction. In the third section, we present our experimental design.  

We then discuss the results in the fourth section and then draw some concluding 

remarks in the last section of the paper. 

3. Multi-unit auction 

Among the three studies done on multi-unit price promotions, Blattberg & Neslin 

(1990) and Wansink et al. (1998) carried out field experiments using scanner data from 

stores to assess the effect of multi-unit price promotions on sales volume. Scanner data 

constitutes a very useful data source due to its prominent advantages.  They are 

characterized by a high number of observations and the accuracy of collected values 

(prices, sales etc.) that can lead users to obtain good estimations and reliable results.  

However, access to scanner data is not easy, not to mention the generally prohibitive 

cost of its acquisition.  In addition, scanner data sets may not always include information 

about customers’ socio-economic and demographic characteristics. They are also not 

useful when examining new products that are being developed or are not in the market 

yet.  Due to these disadvantages, a number of researchers have used hypothetical and 

non-hypothetical experiments rather than scanner data, to evaluate promotion effects.  

For example, in contrast to Blattberg & Neslin (1990) and Wansink et al. (1998), 

Manning & Sprott (2007) carried out hypothetical experiments to study the effect of 

 8 



multi-unit price promotions. In hypothetical experiments, however, participants tend to 

overestimate their values since they have no incentive to behave truthfully (Lusk & 

Shogren, 2007).   

Due to the skepticism surrounding the validity of values obtained from 

hypothetical experiments, economists and marketing researchers have turned to 

experimental approaches that involve the exchange of real goods and real money 

(Hoffman et al., 1993; Fox et al., 2002; Dickinson & Bailey, 2002; Shaw et al., 2006; 

Kassardjian et al., 2005; Rousu et al., 2005; Alfnes, 2007; Akaichi et al., 2012 etc.). 

Among these experimental methods, perhaps none has been more popular than 

experimental auctions that provide people the incentive to submit bids equal to their 

value for the good.  In these auctions, the participant may incur real costs if he or she 

deviates from their true values (Lusk & Hudson, 2004). The use of experimental auction 

in marketing and agricultural economics, however, has mostly been limited to single-unit 

auctions (e.g. second price auction (Vickrey), random nth price auction, BDM auction 

(Becker et al. (1964) etc.). In single-unit auctions, participants are generally asked to 

report their willingness to pay (WTP) only for a single unit of the auctioned product. To 

assess the effect of multi-unit price promotions, however, consumers’ WTP for multiple 

units of the same product is required. Hence, our paper stands out by being the first that 

uses non-hypothetical multi-unit auctions to assess the effect of multi-unit price 

promotions on consumers’ willingness to pay and sales value for a food product. Unlike 

single-unit auctions, multi-unit auctions allow participants to bid on multiple units of the 

same product. Multi-unit auctions require that a participant who is declared a winner 

pays the clearing price and purchases the quantity s/he revealed to be willing to buy. 

 9 



Therefore, in contrast to the methods used up to now to study the effect of multi-unit 

price promotions, multi-unit auctions allow us to assess the effect of multi-unit price 

promotions on sales volue and valuation of new food products that are being developed 

or are not in the market yet (or have not been in the market that long yet).  

In our experiment, we used an incentive compatible multi-unit auction mechanism, 

the so called multi-unit Vickrey auction. Multi-unit Vickrey auction is a generalization of 

the second price auction. Each participant is asked to bid on multiple units of the same 

product and the winner pays an amount corresponding to the sum of the bids (excluding 

his or her own bids) that are displaced by his or her successful bids (Krishna 2010). For 

a better understanding of the auction mechanism, consider three bidders and three 

identical units of the same product to be auctioned. Each bidder reports a bid of three 

values (i.e. one value for each unit). Let’s say that bidder 1’s bid is (14, 9, 3), bidder 2’s 

bid is (12, 7, 2) and bidder 3 bids (10, 5, 0). If we rank the nine values, we obtain (14, 

12, 10, 9, 7, 5, 3, 2, 0). The pricing rule dictates that the owner(s) of the three highest 

bids is (are) declared the winner(s).  In this particular example, the owners of the bids 

14, 12 and 10 (i.e. bidder 3, bidder 1 and bidder 2) are the winners.   

The price that each winner has to pay (i.e. clearing price) is determined as follows. 

First, the common set of rejected values (i.e. the values that do not make their owners 

winners of the auctioned product) is determined. In our example the common set of 

rejected values is {9, 7, 5, 3, 2, 0}. Second, for each winner an individual set of rejected 

values, consisting of the common set of rejected values without the winner’s own 

values, is determined. In our particular example, the individual set of rejected values for 

bidder 1, bidder 2 and bidder 3 are {7, 5, 2, 0}, {9, 5, 3, 0} and {9, 7, 3, 2}, respectively. 

 10 



Third, if the winner wins one unit, he/she pays a price equal to the first highest value in 

his/her individual set of rejected values. If the winner wins two units, he/she pays a 

price equal to the sum of the first and the second highest value in his/her individual set 

of rejected values and so on. In our particular example, bidder 1, bidder 2 and bidder 3 

each pays a price equal to 7, 9 and 9, respectively.  

In multi-unit auction, a participant can win more than one unit. For example, 

suppose that bidder 3 provided a bid equal to (15, 13, 8) so the ranking of values is now 

(15, 14, 13, 12, 9, 8, 7, 3, 2). Hence, bidder 1 wins one unit, bidder 2 does not win any 

unit and bidder 3 wins two units. The individual set of rejected values for bidder 1 and 

bidder 3 are {12, 8, 7, 2} and {12, 9, 7, 3, 2}, respectively. So, bidder 1 pays 12 and 

bidder 3 pays 12 for the first unit and 9 for the second unit. Since the price that the 

winner has to pay is not based on the winner's bid but on the bids of the other 

participants, bidding truthfully is a dominant strategy in the multi-unit Vickrey auction 

(Engelbrecht-Wiggans & Kahn, 1998).  

In our study, we auctioned six units of a new product in two rounds. In the first 

round participants report their WTP for each auctioned unit. We then provided the 

participants the price-promotion information and then asked them to again reveal their 

WTP for each of the six units. From the participants’ WTP before and after price 

discount promotion, we determine the quantity that can be sold, the value of sales 

before and after promotion, and retailers’ revenue from offering the corresponding 

discount. Using statistical and econometrics tools, we then assess if the price 

discounts increase or decrease WTP, sales value and retailers’ revenue and determine 

which of the price discount strategies yields the highest positive effect. Detailed 

 11 



information about the multi-unit experimental auction used in our study is presented in 

the experimental design section. 

4. Experimental design 

We conducted our experiment in Barcelona (Spain). Before going through the 

experimental design, it is important to describe the product we used in our experiment 

especially in terms of packaging and its novelty. Since the implementation of the multi-

unit experimental auction requires the number of auctioned units to be fixed beforehand, 

we used a six-pack product (i.e. a package of six identical units of organic milk) for at 

least two reasons. First, we surveyed 80 consumers of milk and we asked them about 

the quantity of milk they are used to purchasing every week. We found that 56% of the 

surveyed subjects mentioned to buy a pack of six units of milk (each unit is equivalent to 

one liter). We also asked participants in our experiment the same question. The results 

showed that 66% of the participants buy a pack of six units of milk every week. Second, 

“six-pack” is the packaging form popularly used in Spain for products such as soda, 

juice, water, beer, and milk, which are products that consumers are used to buying in 

multiple units in the same shopping trip.  While a “six-pack” consists of 6 identical units 

of the same product together in a bundle, consumers in retail stores are not forced to 

buy the entire bundle – that is they can purchase less than 6 units by just opening the 

package and take the number of units they want to buy. This handling flexibility makes 

the product available to all consumer types (regular and occasional buyers)3 and also 

3 Otherwise, only consumers who need to buy the entire bundle will be able to purchase the product and, 
as a result, sellers can incur losses by ignoring buyers of few units. 

 12 

                                                           



enables retailers and manufacturers to perform different types of multi-unit price 

promotions for the products.  

In our experiment we used a six-pack of organic milk. Each unit contains one liter 

of organic milk. Organic milk is a relatively new product in Spain. The novelty of the 

product and hence the absence of promotions make the use of scanner data to examine 

the effect of multi-unit price promotions infeasible. Finally, it is important to note that 

Spanish milk is Ultra Pasteurized (using UHT method) which extends its shelf life and 

allows the milk to be stored unrefrigerated because of the longer lasting sterilization 

effect. Hence, milk buyers have the flexibility to store the products. Since we are 

interested in studying the effect of price promotions on consumer behavior for new food 

products, the novelty of the product was the fundamental criterion we used in selecting 

the product(s) that will be used in the experiment. Milk, water, beer, soda, and juice are 

products that are typically offered in six-pack bundles in Barcelona’s retail stores. 

Among the many attributes that are generally used to differentiate new products from 

their conventional counterparts, the organic attribute is currently one of the most 

prominent that is being used by food producers.  Since milk is a unique six-pack product 

that can be sold in both conventional and organic forms, we chose organic milk as the 

new product to use in our experiment.  

 In our experiment, we recruited a random sample of consumers in Barcelona 

metropolitan area. 120 subjects were randomly drawn from a list of people who are 

consumers of milk and responsible for food shopping in their household. These subjects 

were then randomly assigned to four treatments. Sessions were conducted in groups of 

 13 



10 subjects so each treatment consisted of three sessions.  In the first treatment4, 

subjects were offered a single-unit price promotion that consists of a discount of 0.20€ 

on each purchased unit. In the second treatment, participants were told that if they buy 

six units of organic milk, they will only pay for five units. The participants in the third 

treatment were offered a promotion consisting of an increasing price discount that starts 

from 0.06€ on the first unit to a maximum of 0.34€ discount on the sixth unit (i.e., 0.06€ 

on the first unit, 0.12€ on the second unit, 0.17€ on the third unit, 0.23€ on the fourth 

unit, 0.28€ on the fifth unit and 0.34€ on the sixth unit). For robustness check, we 

provided the subjects of the fourth treatment the three types of price promotion at the 

same time. Since our objective in this paper is to examine the effect of different 

distributions of price discount and not the amount of price discount, we kept the total 

amount of price discounts across the units in the three types of price promotions 

constant. The experiment was performed in a room equipped with computers. We used 

the z-tree software (Fischbacher, 2007) to collect bids and to determine the winner and 

the clearing price.  

The experiment was performed in four steps. In step 1, each subject sat in a table 

separated from the rest to minimize any possible interactions and allow anonymous 

bidding. After taking a seat, each subject was provided an identification number, 15€ as 

a compensation for his/her participation and a questionnaire on various aspects related 

to organic products, in general, and organic milk, in particular. To avoid brand effects, 

4 In each treatment, participants received the information on price discounts in the second round of the 
auction. In all treatments, we also informed participants that the amount of the corresponding discount 
will be deducted from the price that the winner (s) has (have) to pay. We did not provide the participants 
any information on the characteristics of organic milk. 

 14 

                                                           



we covered all the milk items with white paper. We then asked participants to complete 

the questionnaire.  

In step 2, once the questionnaire was completed, the actual experiment began. 

One of the main determinants of success in experimental auctions is a good 

understanding by the participants of the functioning and the incentive compatibility of 

the auction mechanism. To achieve this goal, we gave each participant a printed 

material that included a detailed explanation of how the auction works and some 

examples to illustrate the auction. After reading and discussing the instructions, 

participants were given an oral explanation supported by some examples on the board. 

During the explanation, participants were totally free to ask questions to dissipate any 

doubts about the process. Given the importance of this step, we informed participants 

that it is very important that they fully understand the auction mechanism. We also 

demonstrated to them how they can lose money if they deviate from their true 

valuations. We moved to the next step only after being sure that all participants fully 

understood how the auction mechanism worked. Before conducting the actual auction, 

we also carried out a training session, auctioning six identical items of organic milk but 

informed participants that no actual economic exchange will take place at the end of the 

training session. In this session, we asked participants to bid the amount they are willing 

to pay for each unit of organic milk5. Once all participants reported their bids through the 

computer, the identification number of winner(s) and the price he/she (they) has (have) 

to pay (i.e. clearing price) was determined. Subjects were again encouraged to ask 

5 Similar to the real market, we informed participants that they are not forced to buy the six units of 
organic milk. For example, if someone wants to buy just two units, s/he should bid positive bids for the 
first and the second unit and zero for the rest of the units. 

 15 

                                                           



questions after the training session to make sure that they understand the auction 

mechanism and procedures. 

In step 3, once the participants became familiar with the procedure, we announced 

the start of the real auction of organic milk. We informed them that two rounds of 

auction will be performed and that one of these will be chosen as the binding round after 

the auctions. The winner(s) in the binding round will be appointed as the winner(s) of 

the auction. The products will be given to the winner(s) who will then have to pay the 

corresponding market-clearing price. In each round, the subjects had to submit, again 

through the computer, how much he or she was willing to pay for each of the six units of 

organic milk. Once all participants finished reporting their bids, the software determined 

whether the participant was the winner or not and the price that he/she had to pay for 

each unit won6.  

In step 4, we provided the participants information about the price promotion after 

the first round.  Those in treatment 1 were offered the single unit price promotion; those 

in treatment 2 were offered the “buy six and pay for five” promotion; and subjects in 

treatment 3 were offered the increasing price-discount promotion.  Subjects in treatment 

4 were simultaneously offered the three price promotions. We then asked participants to 

again report their willingness to pay for each of the six units of organic milk. Since 

participants in the fourth treatment were simultaneously offered three types of price 

promotion that were ordered randomly for each subject, they have to report three values 

for each unit (i.e. one under the single-unit price promotion, one under the “buy six and 

6 However, the clearing price was not revealed to participants to avoid any affiliation effect (Corrigan & 
Rousu, 2006) and for clean assessment of price promotion effect. 

 16 

                                                           



pay for five” promotion and another value taking into account the increasing price-

discount promotion).  

As explained to the subjects in step 3, at the end of the auction, one round was 

chosen randomly to determine the binding round. The winner(s) in the binding round 

was (were) appointed as the winner(s) of the auction. Once the results were 

announced, the experiment ended by handing the product to the winner(s) who had to 

pay the corresponding market-clearing price. If the binding round is the second one, the 

corresponding discount is applied and the winner pays a price decreased by the amount 

of the discount. For example, in the case of single unit price promotion, the price for 

each unit won is discounted by 0.20€. In the “buy 6 pay for 5” treatment, winner of six 

units pays the corresponding price for the first five units and gets the sixth one for free. 

In the increasing price-discount promotion treatment, the winner of three units, for 

example, pays for the first, the second and the third unit at a price discounted by 0.06€, 

0.12€ and 0.17€, respectively. As previously mentioned, in the fourth treatment we 

obtained values for each type of price promotion.  For each type of price promotion, the 

winner(s) and the clearing price are determined. If the second round is chosen as the 

binding round, the auctioneer chooses randomly one of the three types of price 

promotion as the binding price discount and the corresponding discount is applied to the 

price that winner(s) has (have) to pay.  

5. Results 

 Although there is theoretical and empirical evidence on the need for price 

discounts and promotions for products generally sold in multiple quantities (Blattberg & 

Neslin, 1990; Wansink et al., 1998; and Manning & Sprott, 2007), many retailers 

 17 



continue to offer a majority of these types of products without any discounts (i.e. the 

price is independent of the quantity bought). Manning & Sprott (2007) went through the 

data of the top twenty grocery firms in terms of US market share and found that 27% of 

the products are promoted using multi-unit price promotions with price discount. They 

also reported that in addition to single unit-price promotions, the most common way to 

promote products sold in multiple units is to offer two units of the same product for a 

single price. Although these two price promotion approaches have been shown to have 

a significant effect on sales value, another approach is to use price promotions that 

might adjust better to consumer preferences. Both single unit-price promotions and 

multi-unit price promotions studied by Manning and Sprott (2007); Blattberg & Neslin 

(1990) and Wansink et al. (1998) offer the same price discount per unit. However, the 

decreasing shape of demand curve suggests that a consumer is more interested in 

buying the first unit than the last ones. Therefore, to increase his/her interest on the last 

units, it may be appropriate to apply more price discount on these last units than on the 

first ones. In this paper we examine the effect of three price promotion approaches that 

share the same total amount of price discount but differ in terms of the distribution of 

these discounts across units. 

We assessed the effect of price-discount distribution on participants’ WTP, sales 

value and retailers’ revenues. To examine the effect on participants’ WTP, we estimated 

a random effect Tobit model. The effect of the different types of price discount is 

assessed by including three dummy variables. Each dummy variable takes the value 1 if 

the corresponding price promotion is offered to participants; and 0 otherwise7. As in 

7 Since participants received price promotion only in the second round, all the dummy variables take 0 for 
all the observations corresponding to the first round. 

 18 

                                                           



previous studies, we also evaluate the effect of price-promotions on sales value. Unlike 

previous studies, however, we calculated the value of sales from participants’ WTP. We 

first estimated the average market price of organic milk and ended up with a price of 

1.16 € for a single unit8. If subject’s WTP for a unit is higher than 1.16€, we then 

considered it as a sold unit. Otherwise, the sales value is equal to zero. For example, 

suppose that a participant reported the following WTP: 1.90€ for the first unit, 1.63€ for 

the second unit, 1.20€ for the third unit and 0€ for the fourth, fifth and the sixth unit. 

Hence, considering the estimated market price, this participant can buy 3 units at 1.16€ 

each since his/her WTP for the first three units is higher than 1.16€. In this case the 

sales value is then equal to 3.48€ (i.e. 1.16€ x 3). To test the statistical significance of 

the effect of price-promotions on sales value, we used a paired t-test. 

A positive effect of price-discount promotion on participants’ WTP and sales 

value does not always imply that the effect benefits retailers. For example, a participant 

may increase his/her WTP by an amount at most equal to the quantity of price discount.  

As a result, sales value increases but the change in retailers’ revenue (i.e. the 

difference between the sales value before the promotion and the sales value after the 

promotion decreased equivalent to the amount of the price-discount) will be equal to 

zero or negative. Hence, retailers can benefit from a particular promotion if the sales 

value after the promotion surpasses the sales value before the promotion plus the 

promotion cost.  

8 There was an attempt by a supermarket of high quality foods in Barcelona to introduce its own brand of 
organic milk with a market price of 1.04€/unit. Also the manufacturer who provided the organic milk 
used in our experiment had the intention to sell his product at a price of 1.28€/unit. Since the auctioned 
units of organic milk used in our experiment were covered (therefore, consumer cannot determine if the 
product is a retailer or private brand), we estimated the market price as the average of the prices of the 
two mentioned brands (i.e. 1.16 = (1.04+1.28)/2). 

 19 

                                                           



To determine retailers’ revenue, we first calculated sales value before and after 

promotion using the 1.16€ as the estimated market price. We then subtracted the 

amount of the price discount from the sales value after promotion. Retailers’ revenue is 

determined by the difference between sales value after the promotion, decreased by the 

price-discount amount, and the sales value before the promotion. Retailers’ revenue is 

then calculated for each participant. For robustness check, we also calculated retailers’ 

revenue using the estimated market prices of 1.04€ and 1.28€.  To illustrate, here is an 

example of how retailers’ revenue is calculated in the treatment where participants 

received the single-unit price promotion. We have seen in the previous numeric 

example that if a participant reported 1.90€ for the first unit, 1.63€ for the second unit, 

1.20€ for the third unit and 0€ for the fourth, fifth and the sixth unit, he/she can buy 3 

units at 1.16€ each. The sales value from selling three units to this particular participant 

is 3.48€ (i.e. 1.16€ x 3). Suppose that this participant reported the following values after 

receiving the single-unit price promotion: 2.00€ for the first unit, 1.85€ for the second 

unit, 1.50€ for the third unit, 1.18€ for the fourth unit and 0€ for the fifth and the sixth 

unit. Therefore, he/she can buy 4 units at 0.96€ (i.e. 1.16€ - 0.20€) each and the sales 

value after promotion is 3.84€ (i.e. 0.96€ x 4). In this particular example, retailers’ 

revenue is 0.36€ (i.e. 0.36 = 3.84 - 3.48). After deriving the retailers’ revenue from each 

participant’s WTP, we then test the statistical significance of the revenue values using 

the paired t-test.  

Before examining the effect of the distribution of price discounts in multi-unit price 

promotions on WTP, sales value and retailers’ revenue, we use the data obtained from 

our multi-unit auction experiment to show the need to apply price discounts on products 

 20 



generally sold in multiple units. Figure 1 exhibits the mean of participants’ WTP for each 

of the six auctioned units of organic milk. As expected, we found that subjects’ WTP is 

decreasing in the number of units ranging from 1.29€ for the first unit to 0.66€ for the 

sixth unit.  However, in real market, the price of the majority of food products sold in 

multiple units is independent of the quantity purchased (e.g. a buyer of three units of 

milk pays the same price for the first, the second and the third unit). Our finding shows 

that it is in the benefit of retailers and manufacturers to apply price discounts on 

products that consumers are used to buying in multiple units. As mentioned in the 

introduction, a large number of studies have shown that retailers and manufacturers can 

lose the opportunity to garner more sales if they fail to adjust their prices to consumer 

preferences by making them independent of the purchased quantity. 

After showing the importance of price discount as a possible tool for retailers and 

manufacturers to adjust their product prices to consumer preferences, we dedicate the 

following section to the assessment of the effect of different price promotions, which 

differ in terms of price discount distribution, first on participants’ WTP, second on sales 

value of the product and third on change in retailers’ revenue. In the three exercises, 

between-subjects (i.e., treatments 1, 2, 3) and within-subjects (i.e., treatment 4) 

analyses are performed9.  To examine the sensitivity of participants’ WTP to the price 

discount distributions and to take into account the panel nature of our data, we 

estimated a random effects Tobit model for each one of the six auctioned units.  

Formally, the random effect Tobit model is expressed as follows: 

 

9 In treatment 1, the price promotion is single-unit price promotion. In treatment 2, the price promotion is “buy 
six and pay five”. In treatment 3, the price promotion consists in an increasing price discount. 
Participants in treatment 4 received the three types of price promotion 

 21 

                                                           



                       

0

0   0

       1,... ;  1, 2;   1,...,6β ε

∗ ∗

∗

∗

 >
= 

≤

= + + ∀ = = =

irj irj
irj

irj

irj irj j ij irj

y si y
y

si y

y x u i N r and j
 

where: j indexes the six units auctioned in the experiment (that is, this equation is 

estimated six separate times, once for each of the unit of organic milk under analysis); i 

indexes cross-section units such that i = 1, 2, . . . , N (N is the number of participants); 

and r indexes the number of rounds (time series units) such that r = 1, 2. The matrix Xirj 

is of dimension (2N x K) and contains data on the observable explanatory variables of 

the model for the six auctioned units j. Yirj is the amount consumer i is willing to pay for a 

unit j of organic milk. ( )
'

,1 ,...
j

j

k
j j j k Rβ β β= ∈ are vectors of parameters to estimate. The 

effects of relevant unobservable variables and time-invariant factors are captured by the 

vector uij. The stochastic disturbances of the model for the six auctioned units are 

captured by the vector εirj.  

 The dependent variables are BIDj, where j = 1 to 6 indexes the WTP for the jth 

auctioned unit. Table 1 exhibits the independent variables we used in our models and 

the summary statistics.  Since inventory effects can be an important issue that could 

potentially influence WTP, we asked our subjects questions related to the number of 

units (similar unit we used in our experiment) of milk they normally buy every week 

(QUANTITY), frequency of buying organic foods (FREQ_OF), and size of their 

household (HOUSEHOLD).  These questions tend to provide less measurement errors 

than questions that directly ask people the amount of inventory they have at home 

 22 



(Raphael, 1987; Coughlin, 1990; Koriat, 1993).  In addition to these variables, we also 

include a number of demographic factors as control variables in the models. 

Results reported in Table 2 show the effect (between-subjects) of the three 

approaches of price promotions on participants’ WTP. The model that deals with the 

effect of single-unit price promotion shows that offering subjects a 0.20€ off on each unit 

bought increases subjects’ WTP for all units.  Specifically, results indicate that this 

promotion type increases WTP by a range of 10.8 cents on the second unit to 20.9 

cents on the sixth unit, ceteris paribus.  As for the second model (treatment 2 model), 

results suggest that informing participants that buyers of six units will only pay the price 

of five units significantly increases the WTP only for the sixth unit by 15.9 cents at the 

0.10 level. Unlike the second model, results from the third model show that offering 

participants an increasing price discount in the number of units significantly increases 

the WTP for all six units of the product at the 0.01 level.  The increase in WTP ranges 

from 15.7 cents on the first to 21.6 cents on the second unit.  The average marginal 

effect across units of the increasing price discount promotion is about 18.6 cents 

compared to 14.9 cents for the single-unit price promotion. Therefore, the results 

generally indicate that the effect on WTP of the increasing price discount weakly 

surpasses the effect of single-unit price promotion.  In addition to the effect of price 

promotion, results in Table 2 show that participant’s socio-economic and demographic 

characteristics influence their WTP for organic milk. For instance, habitual buyers of 

organic food reported a higher WTP for organic milk. In addition, elderly and highly 

educated participants are willing to pay a lower price for organic milk than their 

counterparts. 

 23 



To test the robustness of the results in the between-subjects analysis, we also 

conducted a within-subjects analysis using data from treatment 4 where the three types 

of price promotion strategies were simultaneously offered to the participants.  The WTP 

values from this treatment will reflect the relative utilities that each promotion type 

provides the subjects.  Table 3 exhibits results from the estimation of the random effect 

Tobit model10.  Interestingly, results indicate that single-unit price promotion increases 

WTP only for the last three units, ranging from 9 cents on the fourth unit to 13.5 cents 

on the fifth unit, ceteris paribus.  The “buy six and pay for five” strategy does not 

significantly increase WTP in any of the units.  In contrast, the increasing price discount 

strategy increases WTP of all units except the first one.  Marginal effects range from 

10.6 cents on the third unit to 14.8 cents on the fifth unit.  

Hence, our results generally suggest that the distribution of price discount in 

price promotions matters. We found that price promotion increases consumers’ WTP 

more when the distribution of the amount of price discount is increasing with the number 

of units than when it is uniform. However, when the amount of price discount is 

concentrated on the last unit as commonly practiced by some retailers, the response of 

consumers in terms of WTP is generally not statistically significant. 

As previously mentioned, there is a probability that participants increase their 

WTP by the amount of the offered discount.  To check whether participants used this 

strategic behavior, we compared the increase in participants’ WTP after being offered 

the discount to the amount of the actual offered discount for each purchased unit of 

10 This was possible, since participants in the fourth treatment and in the second round bid their WTP for 
each unit under the three price promotion scenarios: single-unit price promotion, buy six and pay five 
and increasing price discount. 

 24 

                                                           



organic milk. The t-test for independent samples was the statistical test used to test the 

significance of the differences between participants’ WTP and the amount of the actual 

discount. Tables 4 and 5 report the results from the between and the within-sample 

analysis, respectively. In the analysis, we considered only the participants who 

responded positively to the offered discount. The results showed that, in general, 

participants who received the “buy six and pay for five” discount or the increasing 

discount did not increase their WTP by the amount of the discount. However, 

participants who were offered the single-unit price promotion increased their WTP by an 

amount, generally, not significantly different from the offered discount (i.e. 0.20€). This 

might be explained by the fact that it is relatively easier for participants to identify the 

strategic behavior in the single-unit price promotion than in the other two forms of price 

promotion11.  

As in previous studies, we also evaluate the effect of price-promotions on sales 

value. Results on the effect of the three price promotion approaches are reported in 

Table 6. In the between-subjects analysis involving treatments 1, 2, and 3, we found 

that the single-unit price promotion and the increasing price-discount promotion 

increase sales value by 25% and 24%, respectively. The “buy six and pay for five” 

promotion only increases sales value by 3%.  Results from the within-subjects analysis, 

involving treatment 4, paint a little different picture.  While the single-unit price 

11 It is important to note that even in cases when participants behave strategically and increase their WTP by the 
amount of the discount; this would not necessarily result in zero retailers’ revenues.  For instance, let’s 
suppose that ith participant’s bids are as follows 1.80, 1.30, 1.00, 0.80, 0 and 0 for the first unit, the 
second unit, the third unit, the fourth unit, the fifth unit and the sixth unit, respectively. Suppose that the 
market price is 1.16. So, before offering the discount, retailer’s sales are equal to (1.16 X 2). Let’s 
suppose that after offering the discount (e.g.  0.20€ discount on each purchased unit) ith participant 
increased this/her bid for each unit by 0.20€ resulting in the following bids 2.00, 1.50, 1.20, 1.00, 0.20 
and 0.20 for the first unit, the second unit, the third unit, the fourth unit, the fifth unit and the sixth unit, 
respectively. Retailers’ sales are now equal to (1.16 X 3). As a result, the retailer’s revenue after the 
promotion is positive and equal to 0.56€ (i.e. (1.16 X 3) – (1.16 X 2) – (0.20 X 3)).  

 25 

                                                           



promotion and “buy six and pay for five” promotion generally increases sales value by 

20% and 15%, respectively, the increasing price-discount promotion augments sales 

value by 52%. Hence, the increasing price-discount promotion strategy seems to 

provide the most positive effect in terms of WTP and sales value while the “buy N, pay 

N-1” promotion strategy that is regularly utilized by retailers seems to provide the least 

positive effect. 

In our multi-unit experimental auction, we only auctioned a maximum of 6 units 

and, hence, participants were not allowed to buy more than 6 units. As a result, it is very 

unlikely that buyers of 6 units would be positively affected by price promotion, since they 

can’t increase their demand.  For a cleaner analysis, we divided our sample into two 

subsamples: (1) buyers of six units and (21% of the whole sample) (2) buyers of less 

than six units (79%f the whole sample). We then tested the effect of the three price 

promotion approaches on sales value in both subsamples, and again conducted the 

within and between-subjects analyses.  Table 7 exhibits the between-subjects analysis 

while Table 8 shows the within-subjects analysis of the effect of three types of 

promotion strategies on sales value.  We found that the effect of the increasing price-

discount promotion is significantly larger than the effect of the other two price 

promotions when considering only the buyers of less than 6 units.  Specifically, the 

increase in sales value was about 204% in the between-subjects analysis and 87% in 

the within-subjects analysis. We also found that the increase in sales value generated 

by single-unit price promotion is equal to 58%, compared to 6% by the “buy six and pay 

for five” promotion in the between-subjects analysis for buyers of less than 6 units. Also, 

in treatment 4 where all price promotion approaches were simultaneously presented, 

 26 



the increase in sales value generated by the single-unit price promotion is higher than 

the increase provided by “buy six and pay for five” promotion (i.e. 39% vs. 31% ; see 

table 8).  As expected, the different types of price promotions did not generate positive 

effects on sales value for the buyers of six units since they were not allowed to buy 

more than six units.   

Our findings on the sensitiveness of WTP and sales value to price promotions 

clearly suggest that consumers respond positively to price discounts. We found that the 

sensitiveness of sales to price promotion depends on the distribution of the amount of 

price discount across the units. In fact, our results showed that the most effective 

discount distribution strategy among those we examined is to allow the amount of price 

discount to increase through the number of units. For robustness check, we also 

calculated change in retailers’ revenue using three levels of estimated market price 

1.04€, 1.16€ and 1.28€. The results displayed in Table 9 show that only the increasing 

price discount strategy generated positive benefits in both between and within 

treatments and for all the estimated market prices. For example, considering 1.16€ as 

the estimated market price to determine sales value, we found that the increasing price 

discount generated revenues of 0.10€ per person in the between subjects treatments 

and 0.42€ per person in the within subjects treatment. The results are mixed in the 

single-unit promotion and the “buy 6 pay for 5” promotion. For example, the single-unit 

promotion strategy yields positive revenue values in the between subjects treatments 

but negative revenue values in the within subject treatment.  Although, the effect of the 

increasing price discount on retailers’ revenue is economically significant, our result 

showed that this effect is statistically insignificant. 

 27 



6. Concluding remarks 

 Increasing time constraints are pushing consumers to optimize their shopping 

efficiency by acquiring more quantity of the same product. To take advantage of this 

change in consumer behavior, retailers and manufacturers are increasingly using multi-

unit price promotions that involve a price discount for multiple units of a product. 

Previous studies found that multi-unit price promotions generate significantly higher 

sales value relative to single-unit price promotions even if both price-promotion 

approaches offer an equivalent price discount per unit.  In this paper, we examined an 

issue of emerging interest to researchers, retailers and manufacturers - that is the 

distribution of price discount across units of a good. Specifically, we assessed the effect 

of three price-discount distributions (uniform price discount distribution, increasing price 

discount distribution and price discount concentrated on the last unit) on WTP, sales 

value and retailer’s revenue for a relatively new product.  We focused on examining this 

issue on a new product due to the historically and well documented low success rate of 

new product introductions and hence, the importance of finding appropriate marketing 

strategies that can increase likelihood of a successful product launch. In addition to 

contributing to a better understanding of consumer behavior toward multi-unit price 

promotion, we also show how multi-unit auctions can be used as a non-hypothetical 

experimental tool to study the effect of marketing strategies on consumer behavior for 

multiple units of a new food product.     

Our results generally suggest that increasing price discount with the number of 

units increases WTP, sales value, and revenue. We also found that uniform price 

discount promotion has the potential to motivate consumers to buy more units of the 

 28 



same product but its effect on WTP, sales value, and change in revenues is generally 

lower than the increasing price discount strategy. The multi-unit price promotion (e.g. 

buy six and pay for five for six-pack products) that applies all the amount of price 

discount on the last unit provided only a weak effect on sales value.  These results can 

have significant implications for retailers.  Considering that the “buy N, pay N-1” strategy 

is often utilized by retailers (Laroche et al., 2003; Raghubir, 2004), our findings 

generally imply that these retailers would be better off to use an increasing price 

discount strategy in their multi-unit price promotions for new products. In this study, 

however, we only examined one type of increasing discount strategy. A good topic for 

future research is the assessment of the effect of different amounts of increasing 

discount across units on consumers’ WTP for a product. As mentioned in the 

introduction, Gupta (1988) and Bell et al. (1999) found that the increase in total sales is 

generally due to brand switching, purchase acceleration and quantity increase. This 

paper provided insights on how consumers’ WTP and sales are affected by the 

distribution of price discount across multiple units of a new food product. For a better 

generalization of the results reported in this paper, assessing the effect of price-discount 

distributions on brand switching and purchase acceleration could also be an interesting 

topic for future studies. 

 

References 

Ailawadi, K., & Neslin, S. (1998). The Effect of Promotion on Consumption: Buying More 
and Consuming it Faster. Journal of Marketing Research, 35, 390–398.  

Akaichi, F., Gil, J.M., & Nayga, Jr. R.M. (2012). Assessing Consumers’ Willingness to 
Pay for Different Units of Organic Milk: Evidence From Multi-unit Auctions. 
Canadian Journal of Agricultural Economics, 60,  469-494 

 29 



Alfnes, F. (2007). Willingness to Pay Versus Expected Consumption Value in Vickrey 
Auctions for New Experience Goods. American Journal of Agricultural 
Economics, 89, 921-931. 

Bearden, W. O., Lichtenstein, D. R. & Teel, J. E. (1984). Comparison Price, Coupon 
and Brand Effects on Consumer Reactions to Retail Newspaper 
Advertisements. Journal of Retailing, 60, 11-35 

Becker, G.M., DeGroot, M. H., & Marschak, J. (1964). Measuring Utility by a Single-
Response Sequential Method. Behavioural science, 226-232. 

Bell, D., Chiang, J., & Padmanabhan, V. (1999). The Decomposition of Promotional 
Response. Marketing Science, 18, 504-526. 

Berkowitz, E.N. & Walton, J. R. (1980). Contextual Influences on Consumer Price 
Responses: An Experimental Analysis. Journal of Marketing Research, 17, 349-
359. 

Blair, E. A. & Landon, Jr. E. L. (1981). The Effects of Reference Prices in Retail 
Advertisements. Journal of Marketing, 45, 61-69. 

Blattberg, R., & Neslin, S. (1990). Sales Promotion: Concepts, Methods, and Strategies, 
1st ed Prentice Hall, New Jersey. 

Bucklin, R., & Gupta, S. (1992). Brand Choice, Purchase Incidence and Segmentation: 
An Integrated Approach. Journal of Marketing Research, 29, 201-215. 

Bucklin, R., Gupta, S., & Siddarth, S. (1998). Determining Segmentation in Sales 
Response Across Consumer Purchase Behaviors. Journal of Marketing 
Research, 35, 189-197. 

Calantone, R., Schmidt, J., & Song, X. (1996). Controllable factors of new product 
success: a cross national comparison. Marketing Science, 15, 341-358. 

Cooper, R. (2001). Winning at New Products: Accelerating the Process from Idea to 
Launch. 3rd ed. Perseus Publishing, Cambridge.. 

Corrigan, J.R., &Rousu, M.C. (2006). Posted prices and bid affiliation: evidence from 
experimental auctions. American Journal of Agricultural Economics, 88, 1078–
1090. 

Coughlin, S. (1990). Recall bias in epidemiologic studies. Journal of Clinical 
Epidemiology, 43, 1431-1432.  

Cox Direct. (1998). 20th Annual Survey of promotional Practices, Largo, Filadelfia.. 
Diamond, W.D., & Sanyal, A. (1990). The Effect of Framing on Choice of Supermarket 

Coupons. Advances in Consumer Research.17, 494-500 
Dickinson, D.L., & Baily, D. (2002). Meat Traceability: Are U.S. consumers willing to pay 

for it? Journal of agricultural and resource economics, 27, 348-364. 
Dodson, J., Alice, T., & Brian, S. (1978). Impact of Deals and Deal Retraction on Brand 

Switching. Journal of Marketing Research,  15, 72–81. 
Engelbrecht-Wiggans, R., & Kahn, C.M. (1998). Multi-Unit Auctions with Uniform Prices. 

Economic Theory, 12, 227-58. 

 30 



Fischbacher, U. (2007). Z-Tree: Zurich Toolbox for Ready-made Economic 
Experiments. Experimental Economics, 10, 171-78. 

Folkes, V., Martin, I., & Gupta, K. (1993). When to say when: Effects of supply on 
usage. Journal of Consumer Research, 20, 467-477. 

Foubert, B., & Gijsbrechts, E. (2007). Shopper Response to Bundle Promotions for 
Packaged Goods. Journal of Marketing Research, 44, 647-662. 

Fox, J. A., Hayes, D., & Shogren, J. (2002). Consumer Preferences for Food Irradiation: 
How Favorable and Unfavorable Descriptions Affect Preferences for Irradiated 
Pork in Experimental Auction. Journal of Risk and Uncertainty, 24, 75-95. 

Grewal, D. & Monroe, K. B. (1998). The Effect of Price Comparison Advertising on 
Buyers’ Perception of Acquisition Value, Transaction Value and Behavioral 
Intentions. Journal of Marketing, 62 , 46-60. 

Guadagni, P., &  Little, J. (1983). A Logit Model of Brand Choice Calibrated on Scanner 
Data. Marketing Science, 2, 203-238. 

Gupta, S. (1988). Impact of sales promotions on when, what and how much to buy.” 
Journal of Marketing Research, 25, 342-355. 

Hoffman, E., Dale, J.M., Dipankar, C., Ray, A.F., & Glen, D.W. (1993). Using Laboratory 
Experimental Auctions in Marketing Research: A Case Study of New Packaging 
for Fresh Beef. Marketing Science, 12: 318 - 338. 

Kalwani, M.U. and Yim, C.H. (1992). Consumer Price and Promotion Expectations. 
Journal of Marketing Research, 29, 90-100. 

Kassardjian, E., Gamble, J., Gunson, A., & Jaeger, S.R. (2005). “A new approach to 
elicit consumers’ willingness to purchase genetically modified food apples.” 
British Food Journal. 107, 541-555. 

Koriat, A. (1993). How do we know that we know? The accessibility model of the feeling 
of knowing. Psychological Review, 100, 609-39.  

Kotler, P. (2000). Marketing Management. New Jersey: Prentice Hall.  
Krishna, V. (2002). Auction Theory. California: Academic Press San Diego,  
Laroche, M., Pons, F., Zgolli, N., Cervellon, M., & Kim, C. (2003). A mode of consumer 

response to two retail sales promotion techniques. Journal of Business 
Research, 56, 513-522.  

Lattin, M. J. & Bucklin, R. E. (1989). Reference Effects of Price and Promotion on Brand 
Choice Behavior. Journal of Marketing Research, 26, 299-310.   

Li, S., Sun, Y., and Wang, Y. (2007). 50% Off or Buy One Get One Free? Frame 
Preference as a Function of Consumable Nature in Dairy Products. The Journal 
of Social Psychology, 147(4), 413-421. 

Lichtenstein, D. R, Netemeyer, R. G. & Burton S. (1991). Using a Theoretical 
Perspective to Measure the Psychological Construct of Coupon Proneness. 
Advances in Consumer Research, 18, 501-507.    

 31 



Lusk, J. & Shogren, J. (2007). Experimental Auctions.  Cambridge University Press. 
Lusk, J., & Hudson, D. (2004c). Willingness-to-Pay Estimates and their Relevance to 

Agribusiness Decision Making. Review of Agricultural Economics, 26, 152-169. 
Manning, K., & Sprott, D. (2007). Multiple Unit Price Promotions and their Effects on 

Quantity Purchase Intentions. Journal of Retailing, 83, 411-421. 
Mizerski, R. W., Golden, L. L. & Kernan, J. B. (1979). The Attribution Process in 

Consumer Decision Making. Journal of Consumer Research, 6, 123-140.  
Monroe, K. B. (1973). Buyers’ Subjective Perceptions of Price. Journal of Marketing 

Research, 10, 70-80.    
Montoya-Weiss, M., & Calantone, R. (1994). Determinants of New Product 

Performance, A Review and Meta-Analysis. Journal of Product Innovation 
Management, 11, 397-417. 

Narasimhan, C., Neslin, S., & Sen, S. (1996). Promotion elasticities and category 
characteristics. Journal of Marketing,  60, 17-30. 

Neslin, S. A., & Shoemaker, R. W. (1989). An Alternative Explanation for Lower Repeat 
Rates after Promotion Purchases. Journal of Marketing Research, 26, 205-213.   

Neslin, S., Henderson, A., & Quelch, J. (1985). Consumer Promotions and the 
Acceleration of Product Purchases.  Marketing Science, 4, 147-165. 

Nijs, V., Dekimpe, M., Steenkamp, J-B., & Hanssen, D. (2001). The Category-Demand 
Effect of Price Promotions”, Marketing Science, 20, 1-22. 

Raghubir, P. (2004). Coupons in context: discounting prices or decreasing profits? 
Journal of Retailing, 80, 1-12. 

Raphael, K. (1987). Recall bias: a proposal for assessment and control. International 
Journal of Epidemiology, 16, 167–170. 

Rousu, M., Monchuk, D.C., Shogren, J.F., & Kosa, K.M. (2005). Consumer Willingness 
to pay for “second generation” genetically engineered products and the role of 
marketing information. Journal of Agricultural and Applied Economics, 37, 647-
657. 

Shaw, W.D., Nayga, R.M., & Silva, A. (2006). Health benefits and uncertainty: an 
experimental analysis of the effect of risk presentation on auction bids for a 
healthful product. Economics Bulletin, 4, 1-8. 

Sinha, I., and Smith, M. F. (2000). Consumers’ Perceptions of Promotional Framing 
Price. Psychology and Marketing, 17, 257–275. 

Soman, D., & John, T. (2001). Transaction Decoupling: How Price Bundling Affects the 
Decision to Consume. Journal of Marketing Research, 38, 30-44. 

Stevens, G., & Burley, J. (2003). Piloting the Rocket of Radical Innovation. Research 
Technology Management, 46, 16–26. 

Stremersch, S. & Tellis, G.J. (2002). Strategic Bundling of Products and Prices: A New 
Synthesis For Marketing. Journal of Marketing, 66, 55-72. 

 32 

http://ideas.repec.org/b/cup/cbooks/9780521671248.html


Thaler, R. (1985). Mental Accounting and Consumer Choice. Marketing Science, 4, 
199-214.    

Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1992). Advances in prospect theory: Cumulative 
representation of uncertainty. Journal of Risk and uncertainty, 5, 297-323. 

Urbany, J. E, Bearden, W. O. & Weilbaker, D. C. (1988). The Effect of Plausible and 
Exaggerated Reference Prices on Consumer Perceptions and Price Search. 
Journal of Consumer Research, 15, 95-111. 

Wansink, B., Kent, R. & Hoch, S. (1998). An Anchoring and Adjustment Model of 
Purchase Quantity Decisions.” Journal of Marketing Research, 35, 71–81 

Wilson, R., Newman, L. & Paksoy, C. (1979). On the Validity of Research Methods in 
Consumer Dealing Activity: An Analysis of timing Issues. In Educators’ 
Conference proceedings, eds. N. Beckwith, N., Houston, M., Mittelstaedt, R., 
Monroe, k., & Ward, S.: 41-46, Chicago: American Marketing Association. 

 33 


	1. Background
	Sales promotions are defined as a set of activities and techniques, mostly short term, designed to attract attention to a particular product and to increase its sales (Kotler, 2000). Sales promotions have become a fundamental strategy typically employ...
	There is a large body of literature on sales promotions that includes contributions that dates back from the 1970s.  This body of literature is mainly composed of two broad streams of research. The first stream of research is concerned with developing...
	The second stream of research is concerned with the empirical assessment of the effects of price promotion on sales (Guadagni & Little, 1983; Blattberg & Neslin, 1990; Narasimhan et al., 1996; Manning & Sprott, 2007 etc.). A number of these papers hav...
	Although there is a large number of studies that have evaluated the effect of brand promotions, store promotion, and coupons, very few studies have examined the effect of multi-unit price promotions which involve selling more than one product for one ...
	To our knowledge, compared to the multitude of studies done on single-unit price promotions (e.g., buy one unit for $1, save $0.20), only few empirical works have been carried out to study the effect of multi-unit price promotions (e.g. “buy 5 units f...
	We attempt to contribute to the literature on multi-unit price promotions by examining the effect of the distribution of the amount of price discounts on sales value and change in retailers’ revenue. The main objective of multi-unit price promotions i...
	In contrast to previous studies on multi-unit price promotions, we decided to keep the number of units constant but vary the distribution across units of the amount of price discount to identify the price-discount distribution that yields the highest ...
	2. Hypothesis
	As mentioned above, offering buyers a discount equally distributed among various units has been found to positively affect retailers’ sales (Manning & Sprott, 2007). The positive effect of single-unit price promotion is partly attributed to its advant...
	Hypothesis 1: offering buyers a discount equally distributed among units (i.e. single-unit price promotion) can increase consumers’ WTP and sales of food products.
	The second type of price-discount distribution is currently used by retailers offering buyers to purchase N units of the same product and to just pay the price of N-1 units (i.e. get the last unit for free). For example, the promotion technique of “bu...
	Hypothesis 2: offering buyers of N units to pay the price of N-1 units can increase consumers’ WTP and sales of food products.
	While multi-unit price promotions that use an increasing amount of price discount is not currently used in retail stores, this type of price promotion is consistent with consumer demand theory for any normal good. For instance, it is well known, theor...
	Hypothesis 3: offering buyers an increasing price discount on each additional purchased unit can increase consumers’ WTP and sales of food products.
	Among the three studies done on multi-unit price promotions, Blattberg & Neslin (1990) and Wansink et al. (1998) carried out field experiments using scanner data from stores to assess the effect of multi-unit price promotions on sales volume. Scanner ...
	In our study, we auctioned six units of a new product in two rounds. In the first round participants report their WTP for each auctioned unit. We then provided the participants the price-promotion information and then asked them to again reveal their ...
	4. Experimental design
	In step 3, once the participants became familiar with the procedure, we announced the start of the real auction of organic milk. We informed them that two rounds of auction will be performed and that one of these will be chosen as the binding round af...
	In step 4, we provided the participants information about the price promotion after the first round.  Those in treatment 1 were offered the single unit price promotion; those in treatment 2 were offered the “buy six and pay for five” promotion; and su...
	As explained to the subjects in step 3, at the end of the auction, one round was chosen randomly to determine the binding round. The winner(s) in the binding round was (were) appointed as the winner(s) of the auction. Once the results were announced, ...
	5. Results
	Although there is theoretical and empirical evidence on the need for price discounts and promotions for products generally sold in multiple quantities (Blattberg & Neslin, 1990; Wansink et al., 1998; and Manning & Sprott, 2007), many retailers contin...
	We assessed the effect of price-discount distribution on participants’ WTP, sales value and retailers’ revenues. To examine the effect on participants’ WTP, we estimated a random effect Tobit model. The effect of the different types of price discount ...
	A positive effect of price-discount promotion on participants’ WTP and sales value does not always imply that the effect benefits retailers. For example, a participant may increase his/her WTP by an amount at most equal to the quantity of price discou...
	To determine retailers’ revenue, we first calculated sales value before and after promotion using the 1.16€ as the estimated market price. We then subtracted the amount of the price discount from the sales value after promotion. Retailers’ revenue is ...
	Before examining the effect of the distribution of price discounts in multi-unit price promotions on WTP, sales value and retailers’ revenue, we use the data obtained from our multi-unit auction experiment to show the need to apply price discounts on ...
	After showing the importance of price discount as a possible tool for retailers and manufacturers to adjust their product prices to consumer preferences, we dedicate the following section to the assessment of the effect of different price promotions, ...
	Formally, the random effect Tobit model is expressed as follows:
	The dependent variables are BIDj, where j = 1 to 6 indexes the WTP for the jth auctioned unit. Table 1 exhibits the independent variables we used in our models and the summary statistics.  Since inventory effects can be an important issue that could ...
	Results reported in Table 2 show the effect (between-subjects) of the three approaches of price promotions on participants’ WTP. The model that deals with the effect of single-unit price promotion shows that offering subjects a 0.20€ off on each unit ...
	To test the robustness of the results in the between-subjects analysis, we also conducted a within-subjects analysis using data from treatment 4 where the three types of price promotion strategies were simultaneously offered to the participants.  The ...
	Hence, our results generally suggest that the distribution of price discount in price promotions matters. We found that price promotion increases consumers’ WTP more when the distribution of the amount of price discount is increasing with the number o...
	As previously mentioned, there is a probability that participants increase their WTP by the amount of the offered discount.  To check whether participants used this strategic behavior, we compared the increase in participants’ WTP after being offered ...
	As in previous studies, we also evaluate the effect of price-promotions on sales value. Results on the effect of the three price promotion approaches are reported in Table 6. In the between-subjects analysis involving treatments 1, 2, and 3, we found ...
	In our multi-unit experimental auction, we only auctioned a maximum of 6 units and, hence, participants were not allowed to buy more than 6 units. As a result, it is very unlikely that buyers of 6 units would be positively affected by price promotion,...
	Our findings on the sensitiveness of WTP and sales value to price promotions clearly suggest that consumers respond positively to price discounts. We found that the sensitiveness of sales to price promotion depends on the distribution of the amount of...
	6. Concluding remarks
	Increasing time constraints are pushing consumers to optimize their shopping efficiency by acquiring more quantity of the same product. To take advantage of this change in consumer behavior, retailers and manufacturers are increasingly using multi-un...
	Our results generally suggest that increasing price discount with the number of units increases WTP, sales value, and revenue. We also found that uniform price discount promotion has the potential to motivate consumers to buy more units of the same pr...

