




































Microsoft Word - DURATION_Agro_Industries_Extended abstract


1 
 

Duration analysis to analyze factors leading wine and processed meat agro-

industries to abandon their activities: Policy implications  
 

Zein KALLASa, Fatima LAMBARRAAa and Jose María GILa 
 

Centre de Recerca en Economia i Desenvolupament Agroalimentaris 
(CREDA)-UPC-IRTA, Parc Mediterrani de la Tecnologia, Barcelona, Spain. 

 

ABSTRACT 

 
Our paper focuses on assessing the determinants factors that drive agro-industries to abandon 

their activities as well the timing of their decision. Moreover, we try to compare results between two 

different agro-industry sector; the wine and processed meat sectors. We apply the Duration 

Analysis (DA) due to its potential to analyze both the decision and diffusion aspects of abandoning 

behavior. The dependent variable used in the DA is the time agro-industries remain active before 

deciding to leave market from their first year of establishment. Several explanatory variables were 

considered representing agro-industries characteristics, profitability, operations results, profit 

margin, return on total assets and exogenous factors among other factors.  

 
The empirical analysis uses agro-industry level data of wine and processed meat sectors in 

Catalonia (Spain). The selection of both sectors has been motivated by the strategic position that 

they occupy within the Catalonian agro-industry sector. Both have a relevant economic function 

representing 43% of the total sales. Moreover, the input-output tables show a strong 

interrelationship with other economic sectors such as agricultural input suppliers (50% of total 

input), logistic enterprises, banking, technological, etc., making them relevant for the regional 

economy. Furthermore, they play an important social and territorial role employing the equivalent 

of 31,534 full-time workers, representing 42% of the labor force in the agro-industry sector. Data 

were collected using the official balance sheets of economic results published in the commercial 

registry office of Catalonia. The sample size for the wine and processed meat sectors is formed by 

80 and 100 active agro-industries. For the inactive ones the sample size is 38 and 52 respectively. 

 
Economic results, exportation activities and brands’ number influence abandoning decision. 

Moreover, small agro-industries are more prone to leave market due to their low competitiveness. 

The results will help policy makers to target those agro-industries that have higher hazard to 

abandon market in order to lengthen their “lives”. By doing so, they will contribute to maintain the 

social fabric associated to these agro-industries. 

 

 

KEYWORDS: Agro-industries, wine, processed meat, Duration Analysis. 


