












































Microsoft Word - R1_Title Page_CR_23ene2017.docx


1 

Application of the Analytical Hierarchy Process to evaluate consumer acceptance and preferences 

for omega‐3 enriched eggs. 

 

 

Baba, Y.1; Kallas, Z.2* & Realini, C.E.3 

 

1Instituto de Sostenibilidad, Universidad Politécnica de Cataluña, Barcelona, Spain. 

2 Centre for Agro‐food Economy and Development (CREDA), Castelldefels, Spain. 

3IRTA‐Monells, Finca Camps I Armet, 17121 Monells, Spain. 

 

 

 

 

 

* Corresponding author. 

CREDA-UPC-IRTA 

Parc Mediterrani de la Tecnologia 

Edifici ESAB  

Esteve terrades, 8 

08860 

Castelldefels -(Barcelona), Spain 

Phone: + (34) 93 55 21213 

Fax: + (34) 93 55 21121 

 

E-mail address: zein.kallas@upc.edu 



1 

Application of the Analytical Hierarchy Process to evaluate consumer acceptance and 
preferences for omega-3 enriched eggs. 

 

Structured abstract 

Purpose 

This paper analyses the appropriateness of the Analytical Hierarchy Process (AHP) to 

measure consumers’ acceptance and preference for eggs enriched with omega-3 (n-3) fatty 

acids as a health claim and to compare its results with the traditional 9-point hedonic scale. 

Design/methodology/approach 

The AHP was used as a multi‐criteria decision analysis. Data were obtained from a 

face-to-face questionnaire completed by 122 consumers in a controlled environment in 

Cataluña (Spain). 

Findings 

Results showed the capacity of the AHP to analyse consumers’ acceptance and 

preferences. An agreement between the AHP and the 9-point scale was found showing that n-

3 enriched eggs had lower flavour acceptance, conventional eggs had higher yolk colour 

acceptance, and conventional and the free-range eggs had similar and higher odour acceptance 

than the other egg types. The most important attributes that determine preferences for egg 

purchase were the type and the egg price followed by the origin and the egg size. 

Research limitations/implications 

The AHP approach seems to be a reliable tool to evaluate consumers’ hedonic 

preferences. However, further testing on other food products with larger sample size is 

needed. 

Originality/value 

The AHP methodology has been widely used in many fields in the last decades, but to 

our knowledge, not in the sensory field. In the Spanish market, studies that analyse 

consumers’ preferences and acceptance of eggs are scarce, and new insights are needed 

particularly regarding n-3 enriched eggs. 

 

Keywords: AHP, 9-point hedonic scale, consumers’ acceptance, consumers’ preference, 

eggs, n-3. 

  



2 

1. Introduction 

Different sensory evaluation techniques are available and the selection of the suitable 

method depends greatly on the main objective of the research. On one side, if the aim is to 

indicate whether the difference is perceived among food products or to describe and estimate 

differences in size, specific protocols are used. In this case, the panellists are formed by 

trained judges. On the other side, if the aim is to analyse consumers’ acceptance and 

preference to estimate the level of likeness of food products, the hedonic sensory protocols 

are usually applied. In this case, the panellist sample is usually formed by non-trained 

consumers which are stratified by age, gender or other socio-demographic variables. 

The comparative methods are one of the relevant techniques to estimate differences 

among products (Meilgaard et al., 2006). Difference tests are the most accepted and simplest 

way of product testing (Lim, 2011). They are used to determine differences in some specific 

descriptors between two or more samples, and are also applied to test if a product in its 

holistic evaluation is preferred to others. Several sensory discriminative protocols can be 

found in the sensory literature (Kim et al., 2015). The most commonly used in the empirical 

applications for food products are the 2-AFC, 3-AFC, triangle, and the duo-trio methods 

among others. The 2-AFC and the 3-AFC are directional technics that require specific 

attributes in testing differences between products. The triangle and the duo-trio methods are 

non-directional because they test un-specified differences (Christensen, 2015). Data in these 

protocols are analysed by estimating the percentage of correct responses or the probability of 

discrimination.  

For consumer acceptance and preference studies, pairwise and ranking approaches can 

be used. Following the former, consumers are asked to state the product they prefer or like the 

most from two products. For the latter approach, consumers are asked to rank more than two 



3 

products from the most to the least preferred. Furthermore, the traditional hedonic evaluation 

approach can be also applied using the most accepted 9-point hedonic-scale of likeness. 

The 9-point hedonic scale is one of the most used (Lim, 2011) scales when carrying out 

hedonic evaluations for food products, mainly due to its reliability and discriminability 

(Peryam and Pilgrim, 1957). As originally defined, this scale is a balanced bipolar around a 

neutral center with four positive and four negative categories on each side. It is easy to apply 

and highly heterogeneous participants can respond meaningfully to it without prior experience 

(Peryam and Girardot, 1952). Furthermore, data obtained can be handled by parametric 

methods allowing to estimate levels of preferences. The commonly used verbal anchors of the 

scale as commented by Jones et al. (1955) are: like extremely, like very much, like 

moderately, like slightly, neither like nor dislike, dislike slightly, dislike moderately, dislike 

very much and dislike extremely. Peryam and Pilgrim (1957), Moskowitz (1980) and Lim et 

al. (2009) mentioned that the psychological distances between the semantic labels on the 9-

point hedonic scale are not equal and data are usually treated as continuous instead of 

categorical ordinal data. Nevertheless, the categories used may not reflect differences in 

perception and the presence of extreme categories lead participants to effectively use only 7 

points of the scale (Villanueva and Da Silva, 2009). In all cases, there is a consensus in the 

sensory and consumer field that the 9-point scale can be safely used as continuous data for the 

analysis of consumer hedonic responses. Peryam and Pilgrim (1957) stated that labels’ 

variations had “no major effect” on the results. 

The Analytical Hierarchy Process (AHP) is a multi‐criteria decision analysis method 

(MCDA) that can be proposed as a discriminative technique and a valid method to analyse 

consumers’ acceptance and preference. This methodology has been widely used in many 

fields in the last decades. It was applied in environmental valuation (Govindan et al., 2015), 

in agriculture management (Giri and Nejadhashemi, 2014), in technology adoption (Nikou 



4 

and Mezei, 2013), in credit assessments (Gutiérrez-Nieto et al., 2016), in public policies 

evaluation (Brent et al., 2007), in decomposing food product value (Kallas and Gil, 2012) 

among other areas and research applications. However, to our knowledge, the AHP has not 

been used yet in the sensory field. This paper, up to date, is the first application of the AHP to 

analyse consumers’ acceptance in order to test for differences among products on the basis of 

their characteristics and attributes. 

The AHP method relies on mathematics and psychology and aims to organize and 

analyse complex decisions (Saaty, 1980). It is based on decomposing the product into a 

hierarchy of their attributes or descriptors. On one hand, the AHP is able to analyse 

consumers’ acceptance through the hedonic evaluation of sensory attributes, and on the other 

hand, this technique also allows studying consumers’ preference for non-sensory descriptors. 

Both approaches may help researchers to understand the willingness to accept and purchase 

food products. In this line, consumers’ acceptance is highly relevant and may have an 

influence on consumers’ willingness to pay when studying food choices (Maehle et al., 2015). 

Not only the intrinsic quality cues are determinant features affecting consumers’ response, but 

also the extrinsic cues of the product (Ares, et al., 2010). Thus, the hedonic and purchase 

intent ratings are both relevant to understand consumers’ acceptance and preference of a 

product. 

In this context, the main objectives of this research were twofold: First, at the 

methodological level, to test the appropriateness of the AHP as a valid technique in the 

analysis of consumers’ acceptance and preference for chicken eggs enriched with omega-3 (n-

3) fatty acids and to compare its results with the traditional 9-point hedonic scale. Second, at 

the empirical level, to evaluate the relative importance of egg attributes including its 

enrichment with n-3 fatty acids on purchasing decisions of Catalan consumers in Spain. 

 



5 

2. Materials and methods 

2.1. Background and case study 

Chicken eggs enriched with n-3 fatty acids were selected as a case study to analyse 

consumers’ acceptance and preference by the AHP approach. Data were obtained from a face-

to-face survey procedure completed in a controlled environment. The sample consisted of 122 

consumers over 18 years of age who purchase food and beverages regularly and having 

purchased eggs in the last month. Participants were recruited through the Centre for Agro-

food Economy and Development (CREDA). Consumers were seated in individual booths at 

the test lab of the Agriculture Engineering School of Barcelona (ESAB) according to the 

UNE-ISO 8589 (2010). 

Analysing consumers’ acceptance for n-3 enriched eggs is not new and has been studied 

decades ago (Adams et al., 1989; Caston et al., 1994; Scheideler et al., 1997; Parpinello et al., 

2006 and Lawlor et al., 2010). However, in the Spanish market, the analysis of consumers’ 

preferences and acceptance of eggs, particularly those enriched with n-3 fatty acids, has not 

been explored. New insights are needed to update knowledge on actual consumers’ 

preferences and acceptance. The selection of enriched eggs with n-3 fatty acids as an 

empirical application, was based on the increasing relative importance of introducing n-3 

enrichment as a health claim in food products, and because this egg product has differentiated 

attributes. 

Health claims are gaining prominence as key factors affecting the purchasing decision 

for food products and are becoming one of the most relevant predictors for food consumption 

(Lusk et al., 2003). Food producers and marketers are continuously exploring new strategies 

for providing markets with healthier food products. In this context, according to our analysis 

of a Mintel data set (Mintel, 2015), the percentage of new launched food products with health 

claims in the Spanish market grew by 172.2% between 2010 and 2014. The proliferation of 



6 

these products has led the public authorities responsible for food policy to regularly control 

the appearance of these new claims. The list of allowed health claims in the EU is found in 

the annex of the Regulation 432/2012 (EC, 2012) which authorizes the use of 222 claims. The 

enrichment with n-3 fatty acids is identified within the category of ‘risk reduction claims’. 

Omega-3 fatty acids help on reducing the risk factor in the development of heart disease and 

also contribute to the maintenance of normal blood cholesterol levels. 

The penetration in Spanish households of enriched eggs with n-3 fatty acids is very 

limited, which represents an opportunity for egg producers. Modifying the type of fat in eggs 

through modifications in the animal diet, would offer the consumer a fatty acid profile closer 

to the current nutritional recommendations for a healthy diet and would improve the 

nutritional image of eggs. Animal feeding strategies have been successfully used to 

significantly increase polyunsaturated fatty acids in eggs (Parpinello et al., 2006; Lawlor et 

al., 2010). The most common practice for producing n-3 fatty acid-modified eggs is by 

feeding flax seeds and fish oil to laying hens. Antioxidants are also added in order to 

minimize lipid oxidation (Qi and Sim, 1998). 

 

2.2. Purchasing preferences  

The first step consisted on a pre-sensory questionnaire (20 minutes) carried out to 

analyse factors affecting consumers’ decisions when purchasing eggs using the AHP. 

Consumers were asked to make pairwise comparisons between attributes and levels of those 

attributes that usually take into consideration in their decision when purchasing eggs. The 

relative importance of the attributes and their levels was then estimated following a hierarchy 

structure. The estimation procedure and the theoretical approach of the AHP are explained in 

section 2.4. 



7 

A key element for the application of the AHP is the identification of the attributes and 

their levels. The process of purchasing food products is complex in general and depends on a 

various number of cues that characterize the different products. Such complexity generates 

some difficulties when trying to determine the key factors that intervene in the consumer’s 

decision making process. We identified various attributes from the literature that are usually 

taken into consideration when purchasing eggs, that were subsequently discussed in a non-

formal focus group involving lecturers and researchers in the field of agro-food marketing as 

well as members of household associations in Catalonia. 

Gracia et al. (2013) analysed the Spanish consumers’ preferences when purchasing 

eggs. They used the egg price, the origin and the production method as the most relevant 

attributes. Mesías et al., (2011) in another Spanish case study used the animal feed, if the eggs 

were enriched or not with n-3 fatty acids, the rearing conditions, the egg size and the price. 

Ness and Gerhardy (1994) focused on the freshness and quality of the eggs as determinant 

factors for purchasing eggs. They used the production method, the origin, the freshness 

information and the price. Norwood and Lusk (2011), focused on hen welfare aspects such as 

the barn space per hen and the beak trimming as potential attributes to infer animal welfare 

when taking purchasing decisions of eggs. Finally, the first attribute included in our 

experiment was the egg type with three levels: conventional, free-range and enhanced with n-

3 eggs. By conventional eggs we refer to the traditional offer of eggs from battery-caged hens, 

with intensive feeding and production systems. By free-range eggs we refer to eggs from hens 

with improved animal welfare standards that are not reared in cages and have access to 

outdoor runs. By enhanced eggs with n-3 fatty acids we refer to eggs from battery-caged hens 

with intensive feeding enriched by flax seeds and fish oil (rich sources of n-3 fatty acids), and 

antioxidants to minimize lipid oxidation. The second attribute considered in the present study 

was the egg size with small, medium and large levels. The third attribute was the origin with 



8 

local, Catalan and other Spanish region levels, and the last attribute was the egg price. These 

identified egg descriptors and their levels were compared and their relative importance was 

estimated by the AHP procedure. An example of the pairwise comparisons of the attributes 

can be shown in Table 1. 

It is worth mentioning that in order to minimize the hypothetical bias of the pre sensory-

questionnaire a standard “cheap talk” procedure was included at the beginning of the test as 

proposed by Carlsson et al., (2005) to motivate participants to state their real preferences as 

follows: “Previous studies indicate that individuals in general respond to surveys differently 

from the way they act in real life. It is quite common to find that individuals say they are 

willing to pay higher prices than those that they are really willing to pay or to select the 

products that are environmentally friendly or committed with animal welfare. We believe that 

this is due to the difficulty in calculating the exact impact of these higher expenses on the 

household economy or because we would prefer to be more committed with the environment, 

but we do not do it. It is easy to be generous when in reality one does not need to pay more”. 

 

2.3. Sensory evaluation 

The second step consisted on the evaluation of consumers’ acceptance towards three 

commercial types of eggs. Regular, free-range and enriched with n-3 eggs that were laid in the 

same day, were collected from the same farm. The eggs were purchased within two days of 

the sensory study and kept under refrigerated storage (4°C) for the duration of the experiment. 

We followed Parpinello et al. (2006) for the preparation of the different types of egg samples. 

Eggs were cooked in separate pots in boiling water for 8 minutes, using six eggs per 

treatment, and subsequently cooled them using running water to an external temperature of 

about 40ºC. Next, they were shelled and divided longitudinally into 4 portions that contained 



9 

approximately a similar content of yolk. Samples were prepared without salt addition and the 

portions were covered by aluminium foil to preserve odour compounds. 

Seven sensory sessions were conducted with approximately 15-20 consumers per 

session. Consumers evaluated in a blind condition, the acceptability of the three egg samples. 

They were presented with one plate of 3 samples coded with different 3-digit code in a 

balanced randomized order. Two different approaches were carried out for the hedonic 

sensory evaluation. On one side, the AHP technique was used by pairwise comparisons of the 

three products for each relevant sensory egg attribute. On the other side, a 9-point hedonic 

scale was also used to assess the same sensory attributes among the three types of eggs. 

Consumers in both cases were instructed to evaluate egg samples according to similarities or 

dissimilarities. Results were later statistically contrasted between the AHP technique and the 

9-point hedonic scale. 

For the hedonic evaluation of the eggs, we defined the main sensory attributes and 

levels to be included. We relied on prior research to identify the most used attributes in egg 

sensory studies (Sheideler et al., 1997; Parpinello et al., 2006; Sedoski et al., 2012; Caston et 

al., 1994; Lawlor et al., 2010). The selected attributes were: egg odour, yolk colour and egg 

flavour. 

For the hedonic scale application, levels were defined for egg odour (from 1: non-

typical egg odour to 9: typical egg odour), yolk colour of eggs (from 1: non-typical yolk 

colour to 9: typical yolk colour), egg flavour (from 1: non-typical egg flavour to 9: typical egg 

flavour), and for global acceptance of eggs (from 1: dislike extremely to 9: like extremely). 

In the case of the AHP application, pairwise comparisons between the three egg types 

were applied for the same sensory attributes. Respondents were asked to indicate which of the 

two compared egg types better fit the different sensory attributes using a 9-point scale 

proposed and validated by Saaty (1980) to measure the strength of the attribute description by 



10 

means of verbal judgments ranging from 1 to 9 where; “1” means that the sensory attribute 

has the “same” intensity in describing one egg compared to another one, “3” means that the 

sensory attribute has a “slight” intensity in describing one egg compared to another one, “5” 

that the sensory attribute has a “moderate” intensity in describing one egg compared to 

another one, “7” that the sensory attribute has a “strong” intensity in describing one egg 

compared to another one, and “9” means that the sensory attribute has an “absolute” intensity 

in one egg compared to another one. The values “2”, “4”, “6” and “8” are intermediate scores 

between the two adjacent judgments (Saaty, 1980). An example of the pairwise comparisons 

between the three types of eggs for the flavour attribute is shown in Table 2. 

To mitigate the order effect, we followed a design based on ordering change between 

techniques (i.e. the sensory AHP and the sensory hedonic scale). We used a quota sampling 

procedure by allocating 50% of the sample to start with the AHP and the other half with the 

hedonic scale. In all other aspects, such as wording of questionnaire, the two versions were 

identical. 

 

2.4. The Analytical Hierarchy Process technique 

The basic idea of the AHP is to analyse individuals’ preference for the attributes and 

their levels of a product by eliciting the relative importance ( ) through pairwise 

comparisons. In a survey, participants are asked to carry out all possible one way pairwise 

comparisons between attributes and between levels obtaining their weights ( , 
.

 

respectively) where; m (1, ... , M) is the number of attributes and n (=1, ... , N) is the number 

of levels of each attribute. In addition, pairwise comparisons may be also carried out between 

the products s (= 1, …, S) to analyse how a specific attribute m or level n describe  two or 

more products s. 



11 

From the answers of the pairwise comparisons, a matrix with the following structure 

can be generated for each individual k (1, ... , K). This matrix is known as Saaty matrix 

(Saaty, 1980): 





















NNkkiki

ijk

jkkk

jkkk

k

aaa

a

aaa

aaa

S

...

.........

...

...

21

22221

11211

   (1) 

where aijk (the judgments) represent the value obtained from the pairwise comparisons 

between attribute/level/product i (iM / iN / iS) and attribute/level/product j; (jM / jN / 

iS) for each individual k. The fundamental properties of this comparison matrix are: a) 

reciprocal comparison: if aijk=x then ajik=1/x; b) homogeneity: if the element i and j are 

judged, they have an equal relative importance, thus, aijk = ajik = 1; and c) all the elements of 

its main diagonal take a value of one (aiik=1  i). 

In perfect consistency, any two judgments obtained from any two pairwise comparisons 

that have a common element to be compared, will automatically allow to obtain the third 

judgment. This means it should hold that aihk  ahjk = aijk for all i, j and h (i, j, hM / i, j, hN 

/ i, j, hS). This condition implies that values given for pairwise comparisons represent 

directly the relative importance by a perfectly rational individual: aijk= wik/wjk for all i and j. 

Therefore, in this case the previous matrix can also be expressed in relative importance terms 

as follows: 































Nk

Nk

k

Nk

k

Nk

jk

ik

Nk

k

k

k

k

k

Nk

k

k

k

k

k

k

w

w

w

w

w

w
w

w
w

w

w

w

w

w
w

w

w

w

w

w

S

...

.........

...

...

21

2

2

2

1

2

1

2

1

1

1

   (2) 



12 

Under such circumstances, K weights (wMk) for each attribute, for each level (wNk) and 

for each product (wSk) can be easily estimated from the M×(M-1)/2, N×(N-1)/2 and S×(S-1)/2 

values for aijk, respectively. Therefore, in the case of perfect consistency it should hold the 

verification that: Sk × W= M × W (for attributes), Sk × W= N × W (for levels) and Sk × W=S 

× W (for products), where W is a column vector in each case (W = [w1,…, wm/n/s]). However, 

in surveys it is usual to obtain some degree of inconsistency because the personal subjectivity 

plays an important role in the pairwise comparison. Therefore, the original verification can be 

redefined to: Sk × W=max × W, where max is the maximum eigenvalue of matrix Sk that is 

determined by max ijk ik
i j

a w     where the quantity max – M (attribute), max – N (levels) 

and max – S (product) is an indicator about the degree of inconsistency within the Sk. In this 

context, the Consistency Index (CI) can be defined as  (for attributes), 

 (for levels) and  (for products). The Consistency Ratio (CR) then is 

defined (Saaty, 1980) as CR=CI/RI 4 

Values of CR ≤ 0.1 are acceptable. 

The Row Geometric Mean (RGM) prioritization method (Saaty, 1980) is applied as a 

valid procedure to estimate the real weights. Using this approach, weights assigned by the 

subject to each attribute and level are obtained using the following expression: 

M,N,SM,N,S
1

i

ik ijki
w a




     i, k  (3) 

From the individual weights (wik) we need to aggregate the values across subjects to 

obtain a synthesis of priorities (wi) for the whole sample. The aggregation process is carried 

out following Forman and Peniwati (1998), who consider that the most suitable method for 

aggregating individual weights (wik) in a social collective decision-making context is that of 

the geometric mean. Once the weights are estimated, the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test is applied 

to test for normality of the distribution. If the normality do not held, the Wilcoxon non-



13 

parametric test is used to test for differences between weights, otherwise the ANOVA test is 

applied. 

To summarize the application of the AHP approach to analyse the consumers’ 

acceptance for the three types of eggs, an example of the pairwise comparisons matrix 

construction, the data collection and the relative importance estimation are presented in the 

complementary data file provided in the following link: Data collection and AHP estimation 

(http://dom.cat/w73). 

 

3. Results and discussion 

3.1. Relative importance of egg attributes in purchasing decisions 

Results (Figure 1) showed that the egg type and price had similar and higher importance 

than the origin, which had higher importance than the egg size in purchasing decisions. The 

Wilcoxon non-parametric test indicated that the egg type and price did not differ between 

them, while the origin and size of eggs differed from the other attributes.  

Focusing on the levels of the attributes, for the egg type, consumers showed a 

preference for the free-range type followed by the enriched with n-3 and conventional eggs. 

As in the case of the attributes, the Wilcoxon test showed that the differences were 

statistically significant between the free-range and the other types of eggs. However, revealed 

data in Spain have shown that consumers purchase conventional eggs most frequently 

(KANTAR, 2012). To better understand these results, it is relevant to take into account the 

price importance in the purchasing decisions of eggs. The divergence between the stated and 

revealed preferences in this case is likely to be associated with the price effect between both 

types of eggs. Statistical data regarding food price in Spain showed that on average the free-

range eggs are at least two times more expensive than the conventional ones (Mesías et al, 

2011), bringing consumers to choose the conventional eggs over other types of eggs. 



14 

Regarding the preferences for egg size, results confirmed what we expected. Consumers 

prefer medium and big egg sizes compared to the small size. The Wilcoxon test showed 

statistical difference between the small size and the other egg sizes. These results are in 

accordance to the results obtained by Mesías et al., (2011) where the highest utility (most 

preferred) of the attributes was for the extra-large size egg (>73 g) against the standard size 

(53–73 g). Finally, analysing the origin attribute and levels, results agreed with literature data 

showing a preference for the local origin of eggs for Spanish consumers (Gracia et al., 2013), 

similar to other food products such as beef (Realini et al., 2014). Thus, consumers preferred 

the local origin followed by the regional origin, and finally the other Spanish regions. This 

preference pattern is especially pronounced in Catalonia where the feeling of belonging and 

the value of locality is rooted in the society in general. 

 

3.2. Hedonic evaluation of egg attributes: The AHP and 9-point scale results 

The results of comparing the three egg types according to the selected sensory attributes 

using the AHP are shown in Figure 2. For the typical egg odour, results showed that the 

conventional eggs received the highest weight, which means that it had the best score on this 

attribute than the other egg types. However, the statistical Wilcoxon test showed no odour 

differences between the conventional and the free-range eggs, which had higher odour scores 

than the n-3 enriched eggs. These results reflect consumers’ unfamiliarity with the odour of 

the n-3 enriched eggs, which is probably associated to its low frequency of consumption as 

well as the possible oxidation and subsequent development of off-odours and off-flavours as 

previously reported in this type of eggs. Parpinello et al. (2006) indicated that the off-flavours 

and off-odours that are usually present in this type of enriched eggs are considered to be a 

major undesirable side-effect when incorporating high n-3 levels in diets fed to hens. 



15 

Regarding the yolk colour attribute, results showed that the conventional eggs had the 

most typical yolk colour score followed by the free-range and enriched with n-3 eggs. Results 

showed statistical differences between conventional eggs and both free-range and enriched 

eggs, which were not significantly different. These results reflect consumers’ habits towards 

the familiar yolk colour they face when consuming conventional eggs. Finally, for the flavour 

attribute, results indicated that the conventional and the free-range eggs had similar and 

higher scores than the n-3 enriched eggs. Flavour scores were significantly lower for the 

enriched eggs with n-3 than the other egg types in agreement with results reported in 

literature. Karahadian and Lindsay (1989) indicated that the enrichment with n-3 may cause 

off-flavours in eggs, mainly due to the oxidative damage of yolk lipids which may affect the 

sensorial quality of eggs (Caston et al., 1994). 

Results of the sensory egg valuation using the 9-point hedonic scale are shown in Table 

4. Analysing the odour attribute, results show that conventional eggs had higher typical odour 

score than free-range and n-3 enriched eggs, however, non-significant differences were found 

among the three types of eggs for the odour attribute. In contrast, results from the AHP 

approach (Figure 2) showed significant differences between conventional and free-range eggs 

and the n-3 enriched eggs. This discrepancy may show the capacity of the AHP, and thus the 

comparative technique, to better detect differences in the odour attribute between the different 

egg types in the hedonic evaluation in comparison to the 9-point hedonic scale in our 

exploratory study. 

Regarding the yolk colour attribute, significant differences using the 9-point scale were 

found among the different egg types (Table 4). As expected, the yolk colour of the 

conventional eggs was perceived as a more typical yolk colour, followed by the n-3 enriched 

eggs and finally the free-range eggs. Yolk colour results are associated to the different feeding 

regimes, as it is well known that the free-range hens have in general the opportunity to eat 



16 

more pigmented foods and the pigment is then transferred to the yolk, conferring its more 

orange colour. This tendency was also found in the n-3 enriched eggs but with a relatively 

lower incidence. This is due to some ingredients used for the egg enrichment with n-3, which 

are natural sources of carotenoids and thus the yolk shows greater pigmentation (Barbosa et 

al., 2011). Comparing these results with those obtained from the sensory test using AHP 

regarding the yolk colour attribute, both methods showed higher scores for the conventional 

eggs compared with the free-range and the n-3 enriched eggs. However, the AHP was not 

able to detect major differences in the yolk colour between the free-range and n-3 enriched 

eggs, showing the superiority of the 9-point scale in this case. 

For the flavour attribute, results (Table 4) showed that the free-range and the 

conventional eggs received higher scores with more typical egg flavour than the n-3 enriched 

eggs. These hedonic results using the 9-point scale are in agreement with those obtained using 

the AHP technique that also found significant differences between the flavour of the 

conventional and the free-range eggs and the flavour of the n-3 enriched eggs. Finally, in line 

with literature data regarding the sensory valuation of enriched eggs with n-3 (Lawlor et al., 

2010), results showed that there are still some potential adverse effects on the sensory 

attributes of enriched eggs that are currently being commercialized in the Catalan market. The 

global acceptance scores assigned by consumers using the 9-point scale also indicates that the 

n-3 enriched eggs have a lower sensory rating than the conventional and the free-range eggs. 

The lower flavour and global acceptance scores of the enhanced egg with n-3 in 

comparison to the other egg types, indicate that the production of n-3 enriched eggs 

negatively affect its sensory hedonic evaluation. The presence of non-typical flavour of egg is 

considered the major undesirable side effect of substituting conventional with n-3 enriched 

feed in the hens’ diet (Parpinello et al., 2006). This effect might be related to the flaxseed 

preparation in the hens’ feed. Thus, egg producers are advised to carefully prepare and revise 



17 

the feeding mixture for laying hens to minimize the negative impact that the enrichment 

process may have on the sensory properties of eggs, including the use of antioxidants such as 

the Vitamin E among other approaches as proposed by Leeson et al. (1998). 

 

4. Conclusions 

Regarding consumers’ hedonic evaluation, results showed agreement between the AHP 

technique and the 9-point scale showing that n-3 enriched eggs had lower flavour acceptance, 

conventional eggs had higher yolk colour acceptance, and conventional and free-range eggs 

had similar and higher odour acceptance than the other egg types. The AHP technique 

detected significant odour differences, while the 9-point scale detected significant yolk colour 

differences among egg types.  

Empirically, the most important cue driving the majority of consumers’ egg purchase 

decisions were the egg type and price, followed by origin and finally the egg size. Consumers 

showed preference for free-range, medium and big sizes, and local origin of eggs. 

The AHP approach seems to be a potential tool to evaluate consumer acceptance and 

preferences. However, further testing of the technique should be carried out with other food 

products and using larger sample sizes in order to validate the AHP as a discriminative 

method adapted to sensory analysis. 

 

References 

Adams, R.L., Pratt, D.L., Lin, J.H. and Stadel-Man, W.J. (1989). Introduction of omega-3 

polyunsaturated fatty acids into eggs. Poultry science, 68, 16. 

Ares, G., Giménez, A. and Deliza, R. (2010). Influence of three non-sensory factors on 

consumer choice of functional yogurts over regular ones. Food Quality and Preference, 

21(4), 361-367 



18 

Barbosa, V., Gaspar, A., Calixto, L. and Agostinho, T. (2011). Stability of the pigmentation 

of egg yolks enriched with omega-3 and carophyll stored at room temperature and under 

refrigeration. Revista Brasileira de Zootecnia, Vol. 40 No. 7, pp. 1540-1544. 

Brent, A.C., Rogers, D.E., Ramabitsa-Siimane, T.S., & Rohwer, M.B. (2007). “Application of 

the analytical hierarchy process to establish health care waste management systems that 

minimise infection risks in developing countries”. European Journal of Operational 

Research, Vol. 181 N. 1, pp. 403-424. 

Carlsson, F., Frykblom, P. and Lagerkvist, B.J. (2005). “Using cheap talk as a test of validity 

in choice experiments”. Economics Letters, Vol. 89 No. 2, pp. 147–152. 

Caston, L.J., Squires, E.J. and Leeson, S. (1994). “Hen performance, egg quality and the 

sensory evaluation of eggs from SCWL hens fed flax”. Canadian Journal of Animal 

Science, Vol. 74 No. 2, pp. 347-353. 

Christensen, R.H.B. (2015). Statistical methodology for sensory discrimination tests and its 

implementation in sensR. CiteSeerX - Penn State University. 

EC (2012). “Health claim regulation in Europe Nº 432/2012. European Commission, the 

European Food Safety Authority- EFSA”- available at: 

Forman, E. and Peniwati, K. (1998) “Aggregating individual judgments and priorities with the 

Analytic Hierarchy Process”. European Journal of Operational Research, Vol. 108, N. 1, 

pp. 165-169 

Giri, S. and Nejadhashemi, A. P. (2014). “Application of analytical hierarchy process for 

effective selection of agricultural best management practices”. Journal of environmental 

management, Vol. 132, pp. 165-177. 

Govindan, K., Rajendran, S., Sarkis, J. and Murugesan, P. (2015). “Multi criteria decision 

making approaches for green supplier evaluation and selection: a literature review”. 

Journal of Cleaner Production, Vol. 98, pp. 66-83. 

Gracia, A., Barreiro‐Hurlé, J. and Galán, B.L. (2013). “Are Local and Organic Claims 

Complements or Substitutes? A Consumer Preferences Study for Eggs”. Journal of 

Agricultural Economics, Vol. 65 No. 1, pp. 49-67. 

Gutiérrez-Nieto, B., Serrano-Cinca, C. and Camón-Cala, J. (2016). “A credit score system for 

socially responsible lending”. Journal of Business Ethics, Vol. 133 N. 4, pp. 691-701. 

http://ec.europa.eu/food/safety/labelling_nutrition/claims/health_claims/index_en.htm  (accessed 

14 January 2016). 



19 

Jones, L.V., Peryam, D.R. and Thurstone, L.L. (1955). “Development of a scale for 

measuring soldiers ‘food preferences”. Journal of food science, Vol. 20 No. 5, pp. 512-

520. 

Kallas, Z. and Gil, J.M. (2012). “Combining contingent valuation with the analytical 

hierarchy process to decompose the value of rabbit meat”. Food quality and Preference, 

Vol. 24 N. 2, pp. 251-259. 

KANTAR (2012). Data base of ©Kantar World panel for Spanish consumers. Madrid, Spain. 

Karahadian, C. and Lindsay, R.C. (1989). “Evaluation of compounds contributing 

characterizing fishy flavours in fish oils”. Journal of the American Oil Chemists' Society, 

Vol. 66 No. 7, pp. 953-960. 

Kim, I.A., Yoon, J.Y. and LEE, H.S. (2015). “Measurement of consumers’ sensory 

discrimination and preference: Efficiency of preference-difference test utilizing the 3-point 

preference test precedes the same-different test”. Food Science and Biotechnology, Vol. 24 

No. 4, pp. 1355-1362. 

Lawlor, J.B., Gaudette, N., Dickson, T. and House, J.D. (2010). “Fatty acid profile and 

sensory characteristics of table eggs from laying hens fed diets containing 

microencapsulated fish oil”. Animal Feed Science and Technology, Vol. 156 No. 3-4, pp. 

97-103. 

Leeson, S., Caston, L. and Maclaurin, T. (1998). “Organoleptic evaluation of eggs produced 

by laying hens fed diets containing graded levels of flaxseed and vitamin E”. Poultry 

Science, Vol. 77, pp. 1436–1440. 

Lim, J. (2011). “Hedonic scaling: A review of methods and theory”. Food Quality and 

Preference, Vol. 22 No. 8, pp. 733-747. 

Lim, J.,Wood, A. and Green, B.G. (2009). “Derivation and evaluation of a labelled hedonic 

scale”. Chemical senses, Vol. 34 No. 9, pp. 739-751. 

Lusk, J.L., Roosen, J. and Fox, J.A. (2003). “Demand for beef from cattle administered 

growth hormones or fed genetically modified corn: A comparison of consumers in France, 

Germany, the United Kingdom and the United States”. American Journal of Agricultural 

Economics, Vol. 85 No. 1, pp. 16–29. 

Maehle, N., Iversen, N., Hem, L., and Otnes, C. (2015). “Exploring consumer preferences for 

hedonic and utilitarian food attributes”. British Food Journal, Vol. 117 No. 12, pp. 3039-

3063. 

Meilgaard, M.C., Carr, B.T. and Civille, G.V. (2006). Sensory evaluation techniques. CRC 

press, Abingdon, United Kingdom. 



20 

Mesías, F.J., Martínez‐Carrasco, F., Martínez, J.M. and Gaspar, P. (2011). “Functional and 

organic eggs as an alternative to conventional production: a conjoint analysis of 

consumers' preferences”. Journal of the Science of Food and Agriculture, Vol. 91 No. 3, 

pp. 532-538. 

Mintel (2015). “Global New Products Database (GNPD), Food and Drink Category for 

Spain”. Available at: http://www.gnpd.com/sinatra/home/ (accessed 14 January 2016) 

Moskowitz, H.R. (1980). “Psychometric evaluation of food preferences”. Journal of Food 

Service systems, Vol. 1 No. 2, pp- 149-167. 

Ness, M.R. and Gerhardy, H. (1994). “Consumer preferences for quality and freshness 

attributes of eggs”. British Food Journal, Vol. 96 No. 3, pp. 26-34. 

Nikou, S. and Mezei, J. (2013). “Evaluation of mobile services and substantial adoption 

factors with Analytic Hierarchy Process (AHP)”. Telecommunications Policy, Vol. 37 N. 

10, pp. 915-929. 

Norwood, F.B. and Lusk, J.L. (2011). “A calibrated auction-conjoint valuation method: 

valuing pork and eggs produced under differing animal welfare conditions”. Journal of 

environmental Economics and Management, Vol. 62 No. 1, pp. 80-94. 

Parpinello, G., Meluzzi, A., Sirri, F., Tallarico, N. and Versari, A. (2006). “Sensory 

evaluation of egg products and eggs laid from hens fed diets with different fatty acid 

composition and supplemented with antioxidants”. Food Research International, Vol. 39 

No. 1, pp.47–52. 

Peryam, D.R. and Girardot, N.F. (1952). “Advanced taste-test method”. Food Engineering, 

Vol. 24 No. 7, pp. 58–61. 

Peryam, D.R. and Pilgrim, F.J. (1957). “Hedonic scale method of measuring food 

preferences”. Food technology, Vol. 11, Supl. pp. 9-14. 

Qi, G.H. and Sim, J.S. (1998). “Natural tocopherol enrichment and its effect in n-3 fatty acid 

modified chicken eggs”. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry, Vol. 46, No. 5, pp. 

1920–1926. 

Realini C.E.; Kallas, Z.; Pérez, M.; Gómez, I; Olleta, J.L., Beriain, M.J.; Albertí, P. and 

Sañudo, C. (2014) Relative importance of cues underlying Spanish consumers’ beef choice 

and segmentation, and consumer liking of beef enriched with n-3 and CLA fatty acids. 

Food Quality and Preference, Vol. 33, pp. 74–85. 

Saaty, T. (1980). The Analytic Hierarchy Process. McGraw-Hill, Nueva York, United States. 



21 

Scheideler, S.E., Froning, G. and Cuppett, S. (1997). “Studies of Consumer Acceptance of 

High Omega-3 Fatty Acid-Enriched Eggs”. The Journal of Applied Poultry Research, Vol. 

6 No. 2, pp. 137-146. 

Sedoski, H., Beamer, S., Jaczynski, J., Partington, S. and Matak, K. (2012). “Sensory 

evaluation and quality indicators of nutritionally-enhanced egg product with ω-3 rich oils”. 

Food Science and Technology, Vol. 47 No. 2, p.p. 459–464. 

Sloan, A.E. (2008). “Consumer Trends-Little Bites, Big Business”. Food Technology-

Chicago. Vol. 62 No. 3, pp. 9-19. 

UNE-ISO 8589 (2010). Sensory analysis. General Guidance for the Design of Test Rooms. 

Villanueva, N.D. and Da Silva, M.A. (2009). “Comparative performance of the nine-point 

hedonic, hybrid and self-adjusting scales in the generation of internal preference maps”. 

Food Quality and Preference, Vol. 20 N. 1, pp. 1-12. 

 



1 

Table 4: Consumer scores for typical odour, typical yolk colour, typical flavour, and 

global acceptance of the different egg types using a 9-point hedonic scale. 

Egg types 
Sensory 
attributes 

Average 

Regular egg 
Typical 
odour 

6.97a 
Free-range egg 6.55a 

Enriched egg with n-3 6.61a 
Regular egg 

Typical yolk 
colour 

7.32a 
Free-range egg 4.79c 

Enriched egg with n-3 5.73b 
Regular egg 

Typical 
Flavour 

6.87a 
Free-range egg 6.89a 

Enriched egg with n-3 6.04b 
Regular egg 

Global 
acceptance 

7.14a 
Free-range egg 7.25a 

Enriched egg with n-3 6.15b 
a,b,c: Differences among participants at 95%. 



1 

Table 3: Random index values (RI) 

Number of elements, n 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 

Random index (RI) 0,00 0,00 0,58 0,90 1,12 1,24 1,32 1,41 1,45 1,49

 



1 

Table 2: Example of pairwise comparisons for the flavour attribute using the AHP approach  

Typical flavour 
Sample of egg 1 
(3 digit number) 

Sample of egg 2 
(3 digit number) 

9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 

 

Sample of egg 1 
(3 digit number) 

Sample of egg 3 
(3 digit number) 

9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 

 

Sample of egg 2 
(3 digit number) 

Sample of egg 3 
(3 digit number) 

9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 

 



1 

Table 1: Example of pairwise comparisons for the attributes considered in consumers’ purchasing 

decisions  
 

Egg type Egg size 

9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 
 

Egg type Origin 

9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 
 

Egg type Price 

9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 
 

Egg size Origin 

9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 
 

Egg size Price 

9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 
 

Origin Price 

9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 
 
 

 



1 

 

a,b,c: Differences among participants at 95%. Variances are between brackets. 

Figure 2: Results of the hedonic valuation of the different types of eggs using AHP 

Consumers' acceptance of the three types of eggs 

(regular, free-range and enriched with n-3)

Typical odour 
(WA1)

wL1.1
35.4%a

(6.3%)

wL1.2
33.7%a

(5.4%)

wL1.1: Conventional egg

wL1.2: Free-range egg 

wL1.3: Enriched egg with n-3

wL1.3
30.9%b

(5.1%)

Typical yolk colour

(WA2)

wL2.1
39.8%a

(7.0%)

wL2.2
32.4%b

(6.0%)

wL2.1: Conventional egg

wL2.2: Free-range egg

wL2.3: Enriched egg with n-3

wL2.3
27.8%b

(6.2%)

Typical flavour 

(WA3)

wL3.1
36.5%a

(6.1%)

wL3.2
36.9%a

(5.8%)

wL3.1: Conventional egg

wL3.2: Free-range egg

wL3.3: Enrched egg with n-3

wL3.3
26.6%b

(4.8%)



1 

 

a,b,c: Differences among attributes and levels at 95%. Variances are between brackets. 

Figure 1: Results of the hierarchical structure of the attributes when purchasing eggs. 

 

 

Relative importance of  the attributes 

when purchasing eggs

Egg type (wA1)

31.8%a

(4.0%)

wL1.1
22.6%b

(3.6%)

wL1.2
52.6%a

(4.9%)

wL1.1: Conventional

wL1.2: Free-range

wL1.3: Enriched with Omega-3

wL1.3
24.7%b

(3.1%)

Egg Size (wA2)

16,7%c

(1.6%)

wL2.1
12.9%b

(1.5%)

wL2.2
44.8%a

(4.2%)

wL2.1: Small (S)

wL2.2: Medium (M)

wL2.3: Large (L, XL)

wL2.3
45.5%a

(5.0%)

Origin (wA3)

21,8%b

(4.0%)

wL3.1
50.9%a

(4.5%)

wL3.2
38.3%b

(3.3%)

wL3.1: Local

wL3.2: Catalonia (Regional)

wL3.3: Outside Catalonia (in Spain)

wL3.3
14.2%c

(2.6%)

Price (wA4)

29,7%a

(4.7%)




