















































MOODLE, WEB 2.0 & “IFRAME” 

César Ornat, Kallas, Zein  
Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya, Departament d'Enginyeria Agroalimentària i 

Biotecnologia, Projecte RIMA (Recerca i Innovació en Metodologies d’Aprenentatge) 
GIUM-A research Group in Moodle-Atenea (SPAIN) 

cesar.ornat@upc.edu, zein.kallas@upc.edu 

Abstract 
It is increasingly important to use the web 2.0 tools in teaching activities. This poster aims to show the 
usefulness of linking and embedding Web 2.0 tools with Moodle, specifically Google apps through a 
simple HTML element:"iframe". Moodle is a LMS without connection out of platform. With this HTML 
element you can display external content on the platform, without leaving Moodle. It is even possible 
to publish and edit documents from the restricted access Moodle platform. The steps to embed the 
tools begin with a choice of the desired tool, then generating its corresponding code. Finally, the 
“Iframe” code is prepared for publication inside Moodle. The "Iframe" allows using within Moodle 
different external applications. Some of these allow published information inside Moodle course via 
emails, allowing posting images by mobile phone, updating and collaborate in documents and 
including external calendar. 

Keywords: Innovation, technology, research projects, etc. Moodle Web 2.0 iframe. 

1 INTRODUCTION 
In the context of the revolution of information technology, there is going awareness toward its impact 
on the future of teaching activities especially for higher education. Information and Communication 
Technology (ICT) plays an important role in learning and teaching as inevitable tools supposed to help 
educators in developing their activities. By Technology we refer to the capabilities, given by the 
practical application of knowledge, in carrying out their subjects a) more efficiently, b) more precisely 
and c) more thoroughly. Among the ICT, several Social computing applications (i.e. web 2.0 tools) are 
being increasingly used in the educational contexts [1]. However, the main educational platform 
(Moodle) devoted to education still having some limitation to embed application within its structure in a 
simple way.  

Several universities and educators consider that Moodle can make significant improvement in 
teaching activities. They seek to allow Moodle (the world wide educational platform) to have some 
effective “assistance” for both teachers and students. In this context, the idea behind this document is 
to comment briefly how to link some of the web 2.0 tools as assistance to the main function of Moodle. 
Specifically we explain how to embed some application using the iframe html syntax. We have chosen 
three applications due to their relevance in teaching activities; Picasa, Blog and Google Documents. 

The document is structured as follows: the next section discusses the new technologies that are 
increasingly applied in teaching activities. It is followed by a short explanation of the Moodle platform 
and a short definition of the web 2.0 applications. Section 2 explains how to embed web 2.0 tools 
within Moodle and what are the main utilities they could provide to teacher. The document ends with 
some concluding remarks. 

1.1 New technologies applied to teaching 
New technologies are changing modes of learning, collaboration and expression. ICT afford a suite of 
opportunities that meet the challenge of the knowledge. They enable new communication structures 
that radically reduce constraints of distance and time, and enable novel environments for research, 
teaching and engagement [2]. Among ICT technology, the Web 2.0 tools are of high relevance in 
developing educational activities and a way to involve student in different task. From the different 
resources on the web, we highlights the relevant tools used for collaborating offered by Google 
applications such as Picasa, Blogs and documents among others. As commented by [1], social 
computing applications are primarily conceived of as communication tools among students or teachers 
and between students and teachers. They support the exchange of knowledge and material; facilitate 
community building, providing teachers and learners with social environments that offer assistance 
and provide platforms for collaboration, allowing teachers and learners to jointly develop.  

Proceedings of INTED2012 Conference. 
5th-7th March 2012, Valencia, Spain.

ISBN: 978-84-615-5563-5
1200



1.2 Moodle 
Moodle (Modular Object-Oriented Dynamic Learning Environment) is a free source e-learning software 
platform. The design and development of Moodle is guided by a “social constructionist pedagogy" [3], 
emphasizing that learners can contribute to the educational experience. This software package is 
spread around word in more than 200 countries and more than 70.000 registered sites. 

Moodle shows good management courses and classes, allowing control of a subject within the space 
of this. Moodle has several features and activities, and you can increase these activities by installing 
modules. But some of his activities are limited, e. g. management of documents and images, you must 
manage file uploads and images one by one into the platform with a poor design. It's hard to 
collaborate on a document, and edit more than one person at a time. In sum, Moodle has a set of 
interesting activities for teaching, but in many cases are too basic. This problem could be solved if 
Moodle is well connected with the "world" that exists outside of Moodle, where we can find tools that 
allow us to strengthen the activities in Moodle. 

1.3 Web 2.0  
Moodle is a web 2.0 platform, defining a Web 2.0 site as a web that allows users to interact and 
collaborate with each other generating content in a virtual community. It has been widely used many 
web 2.0 tools from Google company, and that allows students, who use these tools in their daily lives, 
learn to use many of them. Therefore, the use of these tools is an advantage for teacher student 
interaction and student-student. 

2 EMBBEDING WEB 2.0 APPLICATIONS WITHIN MOODLE 
Several steps to allow an effective and correct use of the web 2.0 tools within Moodle. The idea 
behind embedding the application is based on the use of the “iframe” syntax, after selecting the 
required tool it is important to generate the iframe syntax. The Iframe element (inline frame) is an 
element in HTML language that allows inserting a frame within a block of text or embedded HTML 
documents in other HTML documents (You can also embedded HML documents with the OBJECT 
element) [4]. With this simple element can connect with the outside Moodle, "apparently" inside the 
Moodle application. You need the address of the page that you want to embed in Moodle, and width 
and height of the new window. Fig. 1 represents a summary of the syntax. 

 
Figure 1: the Iframe syntax 

Summarizing, the different stages to link the application to the the Moodle frame can be seen in Fig. 2. 

 
Figure 2: Steps to embed web 2.0 application into Moodle 

<iframe width="100%" height="100%" src=“http:/www.yoursite.com">; </iframe> 

Opening 
the 

syntax 

The width 
of the page 
embedded 

The height 
of the page 
embedded 

The source of the web 2.0 toll or of 
any other web page 

Closing the 
syntax 

Selecting the Web 2.0 
tool 

Generating the Iframe 
syntax 

Moodle preparation to 
receive Iframe 

Embedding the web 
2.0 tool within Moodle 

Visualization of the 
application 

Momentary and 
automatic update 

Interaction without 
leaving Moodle 

1201



2.1 Applications 
There are a lot of web 2.0 applications that can be embedded within Moodle using an iframe. 
However, we focused only on three tools from Google applications due to their relevance and 
increasingly use in teaching activities. These are Picasa, Blog and Google Docs. 

2.1.1 Picasa: publishing images in Moodle by e mail. 
As it is well known, Picasa is an image organizer and viewer for organizing and editing photos 
integrated within a photo-sharing website belonging to Google. The utility of this tool is that it allows 
embedding a slideshow from an existing album in Moodle. It'll be automatically updated when any 
changes is done in the Picasa album. The real utility in the teaching activities is allowing student to 
submit and share photos related to any concept explained in the class. In addition, it allows them to 
publish any photo in Moodle by just sending it as attached file in an e-mail. It is relevant mentioning 
that this tool provides directly the ifirame syntax as can be seen in Figure 3. 

 
Figure 3: Iframe syntax generated automatically by Picasa 

Among the potential use of this tool we highlight these utilities: 

 Pictures in the laboratory especially for the experimental studies… 
 Pictures in the field especially for the classification of plants, plant diseases, taxonomies in 

general… 
 Images of structures and construction… 
 Images for related event with class room activities.  
 Images for agricultural markets such as wholesalers, farm auctions… 

2.1.2 Blogs: publishing text, images or files in Moodle by e mail   

We can use the Blogs sites of Google, or other blogs, to interact with students [Fig. 4a]. Then you can 
insert this blog in a window inside your Moodle course, after setting up the blog with the desired 
characteristics [Fig 4b]. This system allows an open publication on the web (Internet), made from 
Moodle while keeping the management within Moodle group class, Moodle does not allow easily an 
open publication. 

  

Figure 4 a) Google blog site b) The same blog site inside Moodle 

As in the case of Picasa, one characteristic of the Google Blog is that it also allow to configure it (with 
a secret word in the emails address) in order to publish content through an email, in which the subject 
of the message, will be the title of the new post, and message content, will be the new post.  

 

 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

Iframe syntax 
provided to embed 

the slideshow directly 
within moodle 

1202



You can add attached files and even if we add an image as an attachment, this will also be posted on 
the blog. This system allows to update the blog content, and therefore Moodle easily eg photographing 
the result of a practice in the lab, and sending the image with a comment by email. 

2.1.3 Google Documents: Collaborative work 
Also, with same system, you can use another application of Google, Google Docs. Google Docs not 
only allows sharing documents (spreadsheets, texts, presentations…) remotely (cloud) but also allows 
a group working at the same time (synchronously) on the same document (Fig. 5). This allows 
students work in group without limitations of having a space where carry out the activity, with fewer 
limitations on the agenda, but should not exclude face discussions on the work previously done. 

 
Figure 5 More than one user working in the same document at the same time (red arrows:  

green and black cursor) 

3 CONCLUSIONS 
The rapid growth of social computing or web 2.0 applications is driving historic changes in teaching 
and learning. The number of tools available and the number of users increases every day. However, 
both students and teachers are always asked to focus on few of them in order to avoid confusion with 
the basic education platform (Moodle).  Thus our main idea is to always embed the most relevant tools 
(in our case Picasa, Google Docs and Blogs) within Moodle without leaving its main frame, by doing 
that student are always perceiving the tools as a part of the whole structure.  

 Very often we discuss about the consequences of the works that make innovations on the educational 
environment around us. We should introduce the web 2.0 tools to students or it would be enough with 
Moodle applications?. it is not the aim of this document to comment what is the better option but we 
believe that both are complementary. These applications are having a high impact on the human 
environment, human relations, with new forms of access knowledge about distributed among 
individuals in different ways, and more generally, of new forms of connection between people. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors gratefully acknowledge financial support from UPC ENDESA RED "Victoriano Muñoz 
Oms”: Humanitarian values in engineering to participate in the 6th International Technology, Education 
and Development Conference. 

REFERENCES  
[1] Redecker, C.; Ala-Mutka, K.; Bacigalupo, M.; Ferrari, A. and Punie, Y. (2009) learning 2.0: the 

impact of web 2.0 innovations on education and training in Europe. Eur 24103 en, Joint 
Research Centre Institute for Prospective Technological Studies, European Commission 

[2] Atkins, D. (2005) University Futures and New Technologies Possibilities and Issues, Discussion 
Paper, OECD/CERI Experts Meetings on “University futures and new technologies”. 

[3] Moodle. http://docs.moodle.org/22/en/About_Moodle. 24/1/2012.   

[4] W3C. http://www.w3.org/TR/html4/present/frames.html#h-16.5  24/1/2012 

1203




