

































Interdisciplinary experience in the teacher training college of Vitoria-Gasteiz: Teaching profession module


Journal of Technology and Science Education

TECHNOLOGICAL OR TRADITIONAL TOOLS FOR DOCUMENTS' CORRECTION? A CASE STUDY 
IN HIGHER EDUCATION

Zein Kallas, Cèsar Ornat

Escola Superior d'Agricultura (Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya, BarcelonaTech)
Spain

zein.kallas@upc.edu, cesar.ornat@upc.edu

Received July 2012
Accepted September 2012

Abstract

Information and Communication Technology is playing an important role in assisting teachers in their activities. 
They  became  a)  more  efficient,  b)  more  precise  and  c)  more  comprehensive.  The  “Audio”  ad  is  a  clear  
illustration for this trend. Students’ acceptance of the “Audio” tool has been analysed and compared with the 
“traditional” correction and the “track change”. 57 students have answered a structured questionnaire using a 
web 2.0  application  for  creating an  online  form.  Results  show a  high  relative  importance for  the “Audio”  
correction (42.02% of), followed by the “track change” and the “traditional printed document” with 33.02% and 
24.95% respectively.

Keywords  – Information  and  Communication  Technology  (ICT),  Audio  correction  tool,  Analytical  Hierarchy 
Process (AHP). 

----------

1 INTRODUCTION
Information and Communication Technology (ICT) is changing modes of learning, collaboration and expression 
(Atkins,  2005).  It  has  allowed  enhancing  and  transforming  information  to  be  better  assimilated.  Most  of  
teachers remain unaware of the high number of these non-traditional learning opportunities or are hesitant to 
use them (Bonk, 2009). These tools may play a significant role in helping teachers to improve the development  
of their subjects in an efficient and precise way (Lever-Duffy & McDonald, 2009). In this context, a rethinking of 
the use of communication technology in education by teachers is needed as a mean of a continuous adaptation 
to students’ preferences and a constant improvement of the transmitted information for learners (Raschke, 
2003). Spector (2001) mentioned the potential allowed by these technologies for education. However they still  
requiring  a  higher  acceptance.  This  study  may  represent  for  skeptical  towards  the  use  of  technology  in 
classrooms an indication that the student preferences are changing.
Among the ICT options, the Web 2.0 tools had arisen as great supporting elements in developing educational 
activities, helping learners and involving students continuously in different tasks (Bonk, 2009). Den Exter, Rowe, 
Boyd and Lloyd (2012) mentioned the need to develop, support and encourage strong interaction both between 
teachers and students, and amongst the students themselves using the Web 2.0 tools. These tools emerged as  
useful  utilities  in  educational  technology  (Churchill,  2009)  and  became  ubiquitous  with  sharing  and 
collaboration features (Grosseck, 2009). The ability of teacher to interact correctly with the students is one of  
the most determinants factors of success in his classroom (Mercer, Littleton & Wegerif, 2009). In particular the 
on-line communication is  recently receiving higher attention (Moller  & Huett,  2012) due to its  capacity  to 
facilitate deeper and more satisfying personal connections between learners and professors.
From the different resources on the web, different tools are being released constantly, each with its specific  
utility, advantages and disadvantages (for an interesting classification of these tools, you can consult among  

Journal of Technology and Science Education. Vol 2(2), 2012, pp x
On-line ISSN 2013-6374 – Print-ISSN 2014-5349 DL: B-2000-2012 – http://dx.doi.org/10.3926/jotse.48

mailto:zein.kallas@upc.edu
mailto:cesar.ornat@upc.edu


Jourrnal of Technology and Science Education – http://dx.doi.org/10.3926/jotse.48

other Churchill, 2009). Among them we highlights the collaborative presentation tools (Mindomo for mental 
maps,  Prezi  as  alternative  to  PowerPoint,  etc.),  for  collaboration  (Google  applications  such  as  documents, 
recently changed to Google drive, calendar, and sites, etc.), for storage and sharing (Dropbox, sugarsync and 
syncplycity, etc.) and for collaboration (Blogs, twitter, wikipedia, etc.). From the different utilities provided by  
the web 2.0 technology, the “Voxopop” tool is an interesting option due to its potential to be used as a voice 
based e-learning approach. It relies on message boards but using voice rather than text. The obtained recorded 
voices files can be shared between individuals in three ways: public, semi-private (do not need an account) and 
private  (need  a  Voxopop  account).  However,  this  application  suffers  from  the  restriction  of  including  the 
obtained audio files in other software such as the text processors which may limit its use to just a way of  
communication between teachers and students.
The idea behind this work is to use the teacher recorded voice in the task of correcting documents. We consider  
that this may allow a better explanation of knowledge by including it directly within the students’ documents,  
allowing a large and better flow of information in a short time (i.e. by talking the number of words that can be 
transmitted in a minute is much larger in comparison to writing them). This fact may increase the teacher  
efficiency in using time and efforts. In this line, a text processor is needed that allow inserting voice within the 
document. To our knowledge, there are no web 2.0 tools that may facilitate this requirement. For instance, the  
Google drive tool does not allow (up to date) introducing voice within its text processor. However, both the free 
soft wares (OpenOffice) as well the licensed one (Microsoft-word office software) allow inserting and recording 
audio file within the text of a document. The main objective of this paper is to analyse students’ acceptance for  
the “audio/voice correction” tools in evaluating their works by introducing the teachers’ voice within the text.  
We seek also to compare this correction tool with the “traditional” correction method of printed document as  
well with the “track change” tool of any text processor. We used the office word text processor as it is the usual  
used software in our university and for students.

2 METHODOLOGY AND EMPIRICAL APPLICATION
To analyze the students' acceptance of a new correction tool, two specific objectives have been identified. The 
first  one  focus  on  analyzing  the  “relative  importance”  of  the  “voice  tool”  compared  to  the  “traditional  
correction” one (writing on printed document) and to the “track change tool” of a text processor. The second  
objective tries to analyze factors affecting the perception of difficulties that students could face when using it.  
To reach these objectives different techniques have been proposed. Table 1 summarizes the applied methods.

Technique applied Objectives
The Analytical Hierarchy Process Relative importance of correction tools according to student’s opinion 
The Logistic regression Factors affecting difficulty faced in using the voice correction tools

Table 1. The Methodological framework

The data used in this analysis was obtained from a survey using a structured questionnaire with students. We 
used the Google Form option to ensure students anonymity allowing them to comment freely their opinions  
and concerns. The questionnaires were carried out during April 2011. The questionnaire solicits information on  
student’s  characteristics  (age,  gender)  and  their  opinion  toward  the  different  correction  tools  and  their  
attitudes in  using laptops and smartphones.  Almost  all  the questions were designed as  open-ended ones,  
allowing a better quantitative analysis. However, we keep some open questions related the advantages and 
drawbacks of the audio correction. The final sample was about 57 students of agro-food marketing subject in  
their second year of the agricultural engineering grade. The questionnaire used can be found at:

http://bit.ly/UoHJsy

It  is  worth  mentioning  that  before  carrying  out  the  survey,  students  have  already  experiment  the  voice 
correction tools as it was used to correct some document in a work group’s task. This deliverable was dealing  
with a synthesis of a market analysis of an agro-food product. To insert a voice comment, the process starts by  
inserting an object (from the insert menu) and continue by selecting the option of voice file. In a subsequent  
step, we choose the “new file” option and we start to record our voice comment within the document for one 
minute as limiting time for each inserted audio file. Later the document was sent to student in order to hear the  
corrections and comments. Follows we explain very briefly the use of each technique in this study.

Vol. 2(2), 2012, pp xx

http://bit.ly/UoHJsy


Jourrnal of Technology and Science Education – http://dx.doi.org/10.3926/jotse.48

2.1 The Analytical Hierarchy Process-AHP
The AHP is a mathematical technique for multi-criteria decision-supporting method in discrete environments  
(Saaty, 1980). It enables decision makers in their planning, setting priorities, selecting the best product among a  
set of them, and allocating resources.  It  aims to decompose a complex decision problem in a hierarchy of 
smaller constituent sub-problems. Thus, determining the individually most preferred alternative from a set of  
elements is a decision problem where the hierarchy top level represents the individual elements (Figure 1).

Figure 1. Hierarchy of elements

In order to implement the AHP, alternatives should be compared in order to set the best and preferred one.  
Thus, one needs to carry out a survey where individuals are asked to make a pairwise comparison between  
elements. First, the respondent has to indicate which of the two elements the respondent prefers. Then a nine  
point scale is used to measure the strength of this preference by means of verbal judgments as can be seen in 
Table 2.

Importance rates Definition of the scale
1 Two characteristics are equally important
2 Between 1 and 3
3 The preferred characteristics are slightly more important
4 Between 3 and 5
5 The preferred characteristics are moderately more important
6 Between 5 and 7
7 The preferred characteristics are strongly more important
8 Between 7 and 9
9 The preferred characteristics are absolutely more important

Table 2. The AHP comparison scale

As mentioned before, a pair wise comparison exercise is needed in order to obtain judgments that estimate the 
relative importance for each alternative at individual level (students) as well at the whole sample. An example  
of a pair wise comparison used in our questionnaire can be shown in Table 3.

The “voice correction” tools The “traditional” correction of printed document
9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9

The “voice correction” tools Track change tool of text processor
9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9

The “traditional” correction of printed document Track change tool of text processor
9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
In your opinion, which correction tool do you prefer? Indicate the degree of superiority of the  

preferred element. In case of equality of tools, select the option “1”.
Table 3. Example of the AHP questions

From the answers provided, a matrix is generated for each student k and is known as the Saaty matrix:

Vol. 2(2), 2012, pp xx



Jourrnal of Technology and Science Education – http://dx.doi.org/10.3926/jotse.48

(1)

Where aijk  represents the value obtained from the pairwise comparison between element i  (i∈ N / i∈ P) and 
element  j;  (j∈ N / j∈ P) for each student k.  The fundamental properties of this comparison matrix are: a)  
reciprocal comparison: if aijk=x then ajik=1/x); b) homogeneity: if characteristics i and j are judged to be of equal 

relative  importance then,  aijk =  ajik =  1;  and c)  all  the  elements  of  its  main diagonal  take a value of  one  

(aiik=1 ∀ i).

If perfect consistency in preferences holds for each student, it should also hold that aihk × ahjk = aijk for all i, j 
and h (h∈N / h∈P). This condition implies that values given for pairwise comparisons represent weights given to 
each element (correction alternatives) by a perfectly rational student aijk= wik/wjk for all i and j. Therefore, the 

Saaty matrix can also be expressed as follows:

(2)

Under such circumstances, K weights (wNk) for each alternative (N) can be easily determined from the N(N-1)/2 

values for aijk. However, perfect consistency is seldom present in reality, where subjectivity plays an important 

role in the pairwise comparison. Thus in the case of perfect consistency it should hold that:  Sk×W=N×W (for 

alternatives)  where W =(w1, w2, …, wN). However, in Saaty matrixes (Sk=aijk) some degree of inconsistency is 

present. Therefore, Saaty proposed the redefinition: 

Sk×W= λmax×W, where λmax is the maximum eigenvalue of matrix Sk which is determined by:

(3)

AHP was originally conceived for individual decision-making, but was rapidly extended as a valid technique for  
the analysis of group decisions. Thus, we aggregate corresponding individual weights (wik) across students to 

obtain a synthesis of weights for each correction alternatives (wi).  The geometric mean can be used in the 

aggregation process for the whole sample as follows:

(4)

2.2 The Logistic Regression
Logit models are a basic tool for analyzing problems with a binary variable (yes / no, agree/disagree, like/dislike  

Vol. 2(2), 2012, pp xx



Jourrnal of Technology and Science Education – http://dx.doi.org/10.3926/jotse.48

treatments. The acceptance (1) or not (0) of the students of the voice correction tool fits perfectly in the same  
regression model. For this reason the logistic model has been considered in this paper to analyse this response 
variable  (Y).  The  purpose  of  the  logistic  regression  is  to  obtain  a  multiple  relationship  between  different  
variables with the following characteristics:

• The response variable (Y) is discrete, usually formed of a true (1) or false (0) values.

• The explanatory variables are the personal characteristics.

• The starting model is not linear but exponential, but with the logit transformation is represented as  
linear.

The Logistic regression tries to express the probability pi to accept the “voice correction” tool in front of not  
accepting it (1-Pi) according to the following exponential model:

(5)

This model analyse the probability of occurrence of a success in the response variable (Y = 1, i.e. the acceptance 
of the voice tools) as a linear function of the explanatory variables (student characteristics; X ki). To interpret the 
relationship between variables, the odds ratio is calculated (ORi=eβi) which expresses the change that originates 
in  the  probability  a  unit  change  in  the  considered  explanatory  variable,  i.e.  increasing  or  decreasing  the 
probability of accepting the new voice correction tools. For more detailed information on the logit regression  
technique, the interested reader can consult Hosmer and Lemershow (1992) among other authors.
For the application of the logistic regression, the dependent variable (y) used was the technical difficulty that  
faced student in using the "voice correction" tool. This variable was initially created using an 11 point scale  
(from 0 to 10) where 0 “did not face any technical difficulty” and 10 “I face several technical difficulties”. In 
order to adapt this scale for a logistic regression, we have created a new variable that take the value of “0” if for  
the scale value is from 0 to 5 (26.3% of the responses) and take the value of “1” if the scale value is from 6 to 10  
(73.7% of the responses). The explanatory variables proposed for the realization of the logistic model were: 

• IDEA: What did you think of the idea of the correction voice option?

• GEND: Gender of the student

• LAP: Do you have a laptop?

• PC: Do you have a desktop computer?

• SMRT: Do you have a smartphone or similar with Internet connection?

• AVRG: What is the average grade you usually get in a course?

The final constructed relationship is: 

(6)

3 RESULTS
Results demonstrate that the idea of the “voice correction” has been positively perceived by students with an  
average valuation of (8.58) on a scale from 0 to 10 points. However, students stated that they faced some 
technical difficulty in hearing the corrections (7.04). This is because some of the desktop computers in the  
University (for students) do not contain “sound card hardware” and therefore it was difficult for students to  
realise this task in the University. In addition, using their personal computer was also in some cases difficult.  
They  state  that  they  do  not  usually  use  earphones  and  thus  hearing  the  correction  in  a  public  space  is  
restrictive. In this context students were asked to mention 3 main advantages and three main disadvantages of 
the “voice correction”. Results are summarized in the Table 4.

Vol. 2(2), 2012, pp xx



Jourrnal of Technology and Science Education – http://dx.doi.org/10.3926/jotse.48

Disadvantages Advantages

• You cannot  get  a  piece  of  the  recording,  but  
you have to hear all of it.
• Obligation to have headphones or speakers.
• If  you're  in  a  public  place  and  do  not  have  
headphones, you can annoy other people.
• File  Size  become  huge  with  many  voice  
corrections
• Problems  in  compatibility  of  versions  for  the  
text processor.

• The corrections are clearer.
• It is a quick and easy way to understand what  
should be corrected.
• You can edit  the  document  while  listening to  
the voice.
• It is fast, clear and concise.
• It is a useful and innovative method.
• You do not need to print the corrections.
• You have always the corrections for the future  
(low probability to lose a file than a paper).
• It  is  a  more  ecological  method  (less  use  of  
papers and ink)
• Allows the teacher to better express his ideas.
• It is closer to student. It's more like a face to  
face correction.
• Allow for much information in little time.

Table 4. Advantages and disadvantages of “voice correction” as stated by students

For  the  AHP,  results  allow  us  to  identify  the  relative  importance  of  the  three  analyzed  alternatives  of 
corrections. Figure 2 shows a graphical illustration of the obtained weights. As can be seen, the proposed “voice  
correction” tool was the most preferred one by students with an average weight of 42.02% compared to the 
other alternatives (24.95% for the traditional correction and 33.023% for the track change). This result sows  
high acceptance toward the voice correction method as a new tool adapted to student’s concerns. They stated  
that they prefer correction method that allows them to feel closer to teacher and to obtain concise and better  
information in correction within a few part of time.

Figure 2. The relative importance of alternatives tools of corrections to be valuated

In analyzing the factors that affect technical difficulties faced by students when using the voice correction,  
significant relationships are shown in Table 5.

Variable codes coefficients Wald p of Wald ORi=eβii

GEND 1.368 3.875 .076 3.927
SMRT 1.296 3.320 .068 3.655
AVRG -1.242 3.785 .052 0.289

Global predicted percentage =76.4% 
GEND: Gender of the student = 0 for female and 1 for male. SMRT: Have you a Smartphone or  

similar with Internet connection; 0 = No, 1 = Yes. AVRG: The average gotten in the courses.
Table 5. The logistic regression model

As can be seen,  the model  was significant  for gender (GEND),  having or not  a smart  phone with internet  
connection  (SMRT)  and  the  average  grades  of  the  course  (AVRG).  The  relationship  of  these  variables  is  
significant (p of Wald less than 0.1), which indicate that these relationships are statistically different from zero  

Vol. 2(2), 2012, pp xx



Jourrnal of Technology and Science Education – http://dx.doi.org/10.3926/jotse.48

and justify a significant contribution of facing technical difficulties.
Results show an OR = 3.927 for the gender variable (GEND) showing that the probability that male students face 
technical difficulties increase in front of females by 3.927 times. In this same line, student with smartphone  
with internet connection (SMRT) are more likely to face problems in using the voice correction than the other  
students by 3.655 times. This result seems to be unexpected as it is known that more “technological” students  
are used to face to face less technical difficulties. However it seem that the smartphone is becoming more  
associated  with  lifestyle  and  individual  images  than  behaviour  toward  technology.  Finally,  for  the  average  
variable (AVRG) the OR is 0.289. We can state that for a 1 point increase of the students’ grade, the probability 
that the student face technical problem in using the voice correction decreases 0.289 times. Thus, results show  
that more successful students are prone to accept this new form of introducing voice correction.

4 CONCLUSIONS
This paper focuses on assessing and comparing student’s preferences among different alternatives of correction  
tools  for  documents.  On  the  basis  of  a  nine-point  scale  pair  wise  comparison,  we  obtained  the  relative  
importance (weights) of the analysed alternatives. Moreover, we use the logit  regression model to analyse  
factors affecting technical difficulty in using the voice correction. Data was collected from 57 students of agro-
food market subject in their second year of the agricultural engineering grade during April 2011.
Results have shown a relative acceptance of the voice correction method. It seems to be an efficient way of  
work taking into consideration the quantity  and quality  of  the information transmitted to students  in  few 
minutes in comparison to writing or typing corrections. However, improvement of such procedure is needed by 
allowing the edition and time control of the created audio file. This is because the system force student to hear 
entirely the audio file even if they need to hear only the last part of the voice comment. It seems to be essential  
that the computers in the education centre to be compatible with playing voice and at least with earphones. 
The voice correction tools support the need of such investment in the computers laboratories in the ESAB 
(Escola Superior d'Agricultura,  Universitat  Politècnica de Catalunya,  BarcelonaTech)  school  where the study 
have been done. Finally, our results also make an insight for the decision makers of the educational program to 
integrate  technological  tools  in  the  evaluation  process  of  the  students  as  an  essential  part  to  make  the 
correction more efficient and more pleasant.
Our analysis is based on a small sample in a specific university case study. Therefore, results should thus be  
interpreted  carefully.  In  this  context,  more  empirical  application  should  be  carried  out  allowing  us  to  set  
definitive conclusions on the acceptance of this correction method. In addition, it is also highly relevant for  
future research to introduce the smartphone as a tool to hearing the teacher comment and correction from 
documents attached to the Moodle-mobile platform.

REFERENCES
Atkins, D. (2005). University futures and new technologies possibilities and issues. Discussion Paper, OECD/CERI  
Experts Meetings on University futures and new technologies.
Bonk, Curtis. J. (2009).  The  world  is  open: How Web technology is revolutionizing education. Jossey-Bat, San 
Francisco.
Churchill, D. (2009). Educational applications of Web 2.0: Using blogs to support teaching and learning. British  
Journal of Educational Technology, 40(1), 179–183. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-8535.2008  .00865.x   
Den Exter, K., Rowe, S., Boyd, W., & Lloyd, D. (2012). Using web 2.0 technologies for collaborative learning in 
distance  education—Case  studies  from  an  Australian  university.  Future  Internet  2012,  4(1),  216-237. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/fi401  0216   
Grosseck,  G.  (2009).  To use or not  to use  web 2.0 in  higher education?.  Procedia -  Social  and Behavioral  
Sciences, 1(1), 478–482.
Hosmer, D., & Lemershow, S. (1992). Applied logistic regression. New York: John Wiley.
Lever-Duffy, J., & McDonald, J. (2009). Teaching and learning with technology. Lavoisier.
Mercer,  N.,  Littleton,  K.  &  Wegerif,  R.  (2009).  Methods  for  studying  the  processes  of  interaction  and 
collaborative activity in computer-based educational activities. In: Kumpulainen, K., Hmelo-Silver, C.E. & César, 
M. (Eds.). Investigating Classroom Interaction: Methodologies in Action. Rotterdam: Sense, pp. 27–42.

Vol. 2(2), 2012, pp xx

http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/fi4010216
http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/fi401
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-8535.2008.00865.x
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-8535.2008


Jourrnal of Technology and Science Education – http://dx.doi.org/10.3926/jotse.48

Moller,  L.,  &  Huett,  J.  (2012).  The  Next  Generation  of  distance  education.  USA:  Walden  University. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4614-1785  -9   
Raschke, C. (2003).  The digital revolution and the coming of the postmodern university. London, New York: 
RoutledgeFalmer. x, 129.
Saaty, T. (1980). The analytic hierarchy process. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Spector, M. (2001). An overview of progress and problems in educational technology. Interactive Educational  
Media, 3, 27-37.

Citation: Kallas, Z., & Ornat, C.  (2012).  Technological or traditional tools for documents' correction? A case 
study  in  higher  education. Journal  of  Technology  and  Science  Education  (JOTSE),  2(2),  xx-yy.  
http://dx.doi.org/10.3926/jotse.48

On-line ISSN: 2013-6374 – Print ISSN: 2014-5349 – DL: B-2000-2012

AUTHOR BIOGRAPHY

Zein Kallas

Doctor in Agriculture Economics and Policies and professor at the ESAB-UPC (Escola Superior d'Agricultura – 
Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya, BarcelonaTech, Spain). He is developing his research activity in Agro-food  
Marketing at  CREDA (Center  for Agro‐food Economy and Development)  & DEAB (Department of  Agri-Food  
Engineering  and  Biotechnology-UPC).  Also,  he  belongs  to  GIUMA-RIMA  (Moodle  group  of  Research  and  
Innovation in Learning Methodologies).

Cèsar Ornat

Doctor in Biology and professor at the ESAB-UPC (Escola Superior d'Agricultura – Universitat Politècnica de 
Catalunya,  BarcelonaTech,  Spain).  He  is  developing  his  research  activity  in  Plant  Protection  at  DEAB 
(Department of  Agri-Food Engineering and Biotechnology-UPC).  Also,  he belongs to GIUMA-RIMA (Moodle  
group of Research and Innovation in Learning Methodologies).

Published by OmniaScience (www.omniascience.com)

  

Journal of Technology and Science Education, 2012 (www.jotse.org)

Article's contents are provided on a Attribution-Non Commercial 3.0 Creative commons license. Readers are 
allowed to copy, distribute and communicate article's contents, provided the author's and Intangible Capital 

journal's names are included. It must not be used for commercial purposes. To see the complete licence 
contents, please visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/3.0/es/

Vol. 2(2), 2012, pp xx

http://www.jotse.org/
http://www.omniascience.com/
http://dx.doi.org/10.3926/jotse.48
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4614-1785-9
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4614-1785
file:///C:/Users/Irene_2/Dropbox/3OMNIA%20treballant/JOTSE%20treballant/www.omniascience.com

	TECHNOLOGICAL OR TRADITIONAL TOOLS FOR DOCUMENTS' CORRECTION? A CASE STUDY IN HIGHER EDUCATION
	1 Introduction
	2 methodology and empirical application
	2.1 The analytical hierarchy process-AHP
	2.2 The logistic regression

	3 results
	4 conclusions
	References
	Author biography


