
















































Marketing Channels for Small Wineries: 
a Means – End Chain approach
Cristina Escobar* and José María Gil
CREDA – UPC – IRTA
Center for Agro-food Economy and Development
C/ Esteve Terrades, 8, 08660, Castelldefels, Barcelona, Spain.
Tel. +34 935 521 124
Fax. +34 935 521 121
*corresponding author: cristina.escobar@upc.edu

Abstract
The wine sector in Catalonia (Spain) is clearly dual: there are some big companies that contrast with the many small wineries that face difficulties to remain profitable. For these wineries, gaining access to the markets is of paramount importance. Our work explores the distributor’s main business motivations, and the possibilities to pursue these in their business relationships with the wineries. To tackle this issue we carried out a vertical differentiation of the service “wine supply” by means of the Means-End Chain approach. Results show that a trustful relationship with the winery is the main central issue for wine distributors, while wine quality is the winery’s key attribute. Furthermore, the winery’s own will to access the market and to develop marketing strategies is also of great importance for the wine distributor. 

Résumé 
Le secteur vinicole en Catalogne (Espagne) est clairement dual: il y a des grandes entreprises qui contrastent avec les nombreux petits vignobles qui font face à des difficultés pour rester rentables. Pour ces caves, accéder aux des marchés est d'une importance primordiale. Notre travail explore quelles sont les motivations commerciales principales du distributeur et sa manière de les atteindre à travers de leurs relations commerciales avec les établissements vinicoles. Pour aborder ce thème, nous avons réalisé une différenciation verticale du service "approvisionnement du vin" en utilisant l'approche de la chaîne Moyens-End. Les résultats montrent qu'une relation de confiance avec le producteur est la question centrale principale  pour les distributeurs de vin, tandis que la qualité du vin est l’attribut clé du producteur. En outre, la détermination du producteur pour accéder au marché et développer ses propres stratégies du marketing est également d'une grande importance pour le distributeur du vin.

Jel codes: Q13, L81, R10
Key words: wine distributor, small wineries, marketing channels, Means-End Chain (MEC) 

1. INTRODUCTION
Worldwide, Spain usually ranks as the third wine producing country after Italy and France. Furthermore, it has recently become the largest world exporter in volume, with 22.6 million hectoliter in 2014, which represented 21.8% of the world’s wine exports (OIV, 2015). 
Catalonia produces up to 7.53% of the Spanish wine, which is more than 3.2 million hectoliters (average 2011-15) (MAGRAMA, 2015). The wine sector in Catalonia accounts for an important fraction of the agriculture and the food industry of the country, while it contributes to the economy, to the territorial balance and to the maintenance of the landscape (Kallas, Z. et al. 2012). Its main specialized areas are located in the provinces of Barcelona and Tarragona, which produce more than 90% of the Cava (sparkling wine) produced in Spain (PDO Cava). 
From a business perspective, the wine sector in Catalonia is clearly dual: on one hand, there is a small group of large companies following differentiation strategies and enjoying economies of scale while, on the other hand, there are many small wineries who suffer a situation of economic losses at the end of the period and during several fiscal years (Vine, Wine and Cava Observatory, 2015). 
Traditionally, Spanish wineries have not been very concerned about developing marketing strategies, while concentrating their efforts on producing grapes and wines of good technical quality (Castillo M., 2015). This is also valid in Catalonia, where the wine sector has been defined (from the standpoint of marketing) as fairly uncoordinated (Costa-Font M. et al., 2009). The need of coordination of the food supply chain in Europe has been also highlighted in the CAP (Common Agricultural Policy). For this reason, in order to create newer and better vertical relationships in the food chain, the creation of integrated supply chain projects (IPFs) was introduced as a measure in the Rural Development Program since the RDP 2007-2013. 
On the recent years, a vast majority of companies have recently experienced some exposure to international markets. However, most of the smaller wineries primarily reach the local markets, where either their brands or the PDOs in which they are located support their market penetration (Castillo M., 2015). 
Another characteristic of the Catalan wine sector is a relatively low market share of the Catalan PDO wines in the retailer channels and in the HORECA[footnoteRef:1] sector: The Catalan PDO wines only account up to 33.7% of all the quality wine consumed in Catalonia (INCAVI, 2014). This shows that the demand for Catalan quality wines in Catalonia is still low. This situation also contributes to the difficulty that some small Catalan wineries have to access into a market which is defined as highly saturated and competitive (Gil and Sánchez, 1997; Angulo et al., 2000; Barrena and Sánchez, 2009; Bernabéu et al., 2012). Therefore, small wineries need to establish good marketing channels with wine distributors, who represent strategic agents to access the market. These agents play a key role in production environments characterized by high fragmentation (Contó F. et al., 2013).  [1:  HORECA is the acronym for Hotels, Restaurants and Cafeterias. ] 

Keeping in mind that the wine distributor is the winery’s customer, it is of our interest to explore which are the distributor’s main business motivations and which are the means to fulfill them through their business relationship with the wineries. To tackle this issue we carried out a vertical differentiation of the service provided by the wineries (wine supply) by means of the Means-End Chain (MEC) approach. This analysis identifies the linkages that the wine distributor establishes between the attributes of the service, the benefits they symbolize and the personal values they try to realize through them. Thus, the distributors will assess which are the most wanted winery’s attributes in order to achieve their desired end states. In other words, the distributors will point out which winery’s attributes provide a greater success in their relationship. Thus, our goal is to determine ways to develop stable relationships among stakeholders along the supply chain that can help small units in the wine sector in gaining competitive advantages in front of the wine distributor.
While research focused on wine distributors is relatively rare, there is an extensive body of literature on marketing channel relationships to form a basis for this research (Thach and Olsen, 2006). Besides, there is also few literature that approaches suppliers’ choice structure in a business to business relationship, and this is one of the contributions of this study. Furthermore, the MEC approach is especially interesting to explore highly saturated markets for which achieving a proper distribution has an added difficulty. 
The paper is structured as follows: section 2 examines our theoretical framework, which is subdivided into business relationships and the means-end chain theory. The methodology and the data collection are discussed in section 3. Results are discussed in Section 4 and, finally, some conclusions are outlined.



2. THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK
2.1. Business relationships
The Manufacturer and the distributor working partnership has been defined as “the extent to which there is mutual recognition and understanding that the success of each firm is in part dependent upon the other firm, and where because of this, each firm takes actions so as to provide a coordinated effort that is focused upon jointly satisfying the requirements of the customer marketplace” (Anderson and Narus, 1988). 
Maintaining a good working relationship between the suppliers and the distributors is critical for success in almost any industry, as so it is for the wine industry. A good partnership with the right distributor will help to achieve a better profitability, by helping out promoting a brand (Prichard, 2004) and, in the long term, by a better understanding and servicing of the customer’s needs (Kalwani and Narayandas, 1995). 
The wine sector faces highly competitive marketing challenges and, for this reason, it is critical that wineries focus on effective marketing strategies (Felzensztein et al., 2004). A crucial aspect for building and sustaining a good working relationship is to be cognizant of providing its partner firm with some advantage relative to the alternative and the potential partners (Anderson and Narus, 1988). A firm pursuing a relationship marketing strategy will attempt to create more value for its customers than that which is provided by the core product itself (Batt and Wilson, 2000).
Building trust between suppliers and distributors is the key to develop successful long-term relationships (Anderson and Narus, 1990; Beaujanot et. al., 2005; among others). However, there are other important points for a successful partnership, such as profit. Gronroos (1994) defines the marketing relationship as a way of establishing, maintaining and enhancing a relationship with a customer at a profit, so that the objectives of the parties involved in the relationship are met. According to Thach and Olsen (2006), profit can be met with better prices, and fewer shortages and delivery delays. Another issue that arises from the literature is that in a business relationship one party will desire some degree of exclusivity from the other (Fein and Anderson, 1997).  
Nevertheless, as a first step, and to start a relationship between a winery and a distributor, a wine has to be included in the distributor’s portfolio. The main factors determining whether to include a wine in a distributor’s portfolio are: wine quality, dependability of the producer, price and personal relationship. Furthermore, portfolio fit is also relevant, which means that a wine has to stand out from the wines already included in the portfolio. Moreover, wine prestige is also considered when the portfolio includes a wide range of wines (Thach and Olsen, 2006).
Some of the abovementioned characteristics are also potential determinants of partnership advantage (Anderson and Narus, 1988). It is noteworthy that while the price is identified as a relevant factor, the offering of discounts and bonuses is not. A good personal relationship is also of great importance in business relationships (Contó F. et al., 2013). Furthermore, the wine distributor expects the winery’s support, which will also be provided by having a positive and fun attitude (Thach and Olsen, 2006). 
A closer relationship and an understanding of how to satisfy the needs of the customer can develop into greater customer loyalty and higher sales (Evans and Laskin, 1994). Moreover, it has to be considered that although the acquisition of new customers is important, keeping existing customers is important too (Beaujanot et al., 2005). Another characteristic that helps sustaining business to business relationships is a high standard of professionalism (Pomarici et al. 2012).
Furthermore, offering support to channel members is a basic facet to encourage and motivate the distribution channel to do a more effective selling job for the manufacturer (Rosenbloom, 1978). Field and promotional support provided to the distributor enhances his/her performance in the customer marketplace (Anderson and Narus, 1988). In the U.S. wine sector, moreover, the distributor expects that the winery will have a customer service available and, that it will offer sales support. In this line, the winery must be willing to regularly train the distributor’s sales staff about the wine, accompany the staff on visit to retail accounts, and conduct tastings and other trade events (Thach and Olsen, 2006). 
The assistance to the distributor can be fulfilled by the winery’s implementation of other marketing strategies. For instance, the power of telling the personal story of the wine and the winery cannot be over-emphasized. It will help out building the brand in the consumer’s mind and remembering what is unique about the wine (Thach and Olsen, 2006). Participating in wine fairs (Kovacic and Randman, 2003), inviting the distributors to visit the winery and providing wine samples (Thach and Olsen, 2006) are also other examples of marketing strategies that can be developed.

2.2. The Means-End Chain (MEC) theory
Consumers do not buy a product for the product’ sake, but for what the product can do for them (ter Hofstede et al., 1998). The main premise of the Means-End Chain (MEC) theory is that consumers learn to select those products (or services) that feature the attributes that allow them to achieve their desired consequences (Gutman, 1982; Reynolds and Gutman, 1988; ter Hofstede et al., 1998). 
In 1982, Gutman introduced the MEC theory into the field of marketing and consumer research. Based on the vertical differentiation of a product or a service, the MEC theory seeks to determine the cognitive structures that relate the knowledge of the product (or service), with consumer’s personal knowledge. The theory proposes that consumers’ knowledge of a product is organized hierarchically[footnoteRef:2] in different levels of abstraction: attributes, consequences and values (ter Hofstede et al., 1998; Leppard et al., 2004; among others). [2:  Note that although most of the literature assumes the hierarchical structure of the MEC theory, this has been challenged by some authors such as Van Rekom and Wierenga (2007). Our study assumes the hierarchical structure as it is the most widely accepted.  ] 

According to ter Hofstede et al. (1998), attributes are the concrete, tangible characteristics of the product (or service), while consequences refer to what the product does or provides to the consumer at the functional or psychosocial level. Values are intangible, higher-order outcomes or ends, being cognitive representations of consumers’ most basic and fundamental needs and goals. 
In the consumer’s mind, a product attribute will start up a chain that will establish a sequence of links with personal values through the consumer’s perceptions of the consequences or benefits to be derived from certain attributes of the product, service or behavior (Barrena and Sánchez, 2010). A detailing and a subsequent understanding of these higher level distinctions provides a perspective on how the product information is processed from what could be called a motivational perspective, into the underlying reasons that define why an attribute or a consequence is important (Reynolds and Gutman, 1988). 
The Means-End Chain methodology has been used in many studies that pursue to understand consumer behavior. Most of these studies aim to determine consumer’s choice structure for goods (ter Hofstede et al., 1998; Chen and Wei, 2012; Poppy et al., 2014; among others). However, the Means-End Chain has also been employed to ascertain consumer’s choice structure for services. Some examples are the identification of the motives behind E-consumers loyalty (Koo D-M, 2006), consumer satisfaction for hotel services (Orsingher C. and Marzocchi J.L., 2003); student value and quality in education (Veludo-de-Oliveira and Akemi-Ikeda, 2004; Bolat et al. 2015) and, motivation-based values for museum visitors (Thyne M., 2001), amongst others. Another application of the Means-End chain methodology is related to consumer’s choice structure for environmental services, like the citizen’s valuation of peri-urban green spaces (López-Mosquera and Sánchez, 2011), consumer recycling goals (Bagozzi and Dabholkar, 1994) and recreational cyclist’s motivations (Ho et al. 2015). In the field of animal welfare there are also examples of the application of the MEC methodology, as pictured in Hansson and Lagerkvist (2015). However, there is few literature that approaches suppliers’ choice structure in a business to business relationship, and this is one of the contributions of this study. 

3. METHODOLOGY
3.1. The Laddering interview
The MEC is usually measured by means of a qualitative interviewing technique known as Laddering (Reynolds and Gutman, 1988; ter Hofstede, 1994; among others). Laddering refers to an in-depth, one-on-one interview technique, aimed at detecting the consumers’ associations from a product (or a service) attribute with respect to themselves, while following the Means-End Chain theory (Reynolds and Gutman, 1988). 
Laddering involves a tailored interviewing format using primarily a series of directed probes, typified by the “Why is that important to you?” question. The express purpose of the interviewing process is to elicit the reasons, in terms of the associated consequences and values, for their selection of perceived relevant attributes. In other words, to elicit ACV (Attributes – Consequences – Values) associations, networks or ladders (Reynolds and Gutman, 1988). 
In order to obtain consumer’s choice structure, the laddering data is firstly summarized by its key elements, following a standard content-analysis procedure (Reynolds and Gutman, 1988). Once the concepts (or contents) are identified, the linkages between them can be entered on an implication matrix from which a Hierarchical Value Map (HVM) can be then constructed (ter Hofstede et al., 1998). The HVM is structural in nature and shows the main relationships (or ladders) among all elements identified (Reynolds and Gutman, 1988). This approach is also known as soft laddering. Soft laddering respects the respondent’s natural flow of discourse throughout the interview and the ACV associations have to be reconstructed afterwards. It is recommended when respondent’s cognitive structures are very weak or very elaborate, according to respondent’s level of knowledge about a product (Grunert and Grunert, 1995). The use of soft laddering may be also advisable when the researched area is not well known and when problems in the reconstruction of meanings could arise (Veludo-de-Oliveira and Akemi-Ikeda, 2004).
Nevertheless, soft laddering has its limitations. The in-depth interviews are time-consuming, costly and require highly trained interviewers. Consequently, it is difficult – if not impossible – to use them to obtain large-scale representative samples (ter Hofstede et al., 1998). In order to overcome these limitations several techniques can be applied to modify the laddering interview into what is labeled as hard laddering. Such techniques can embrace computerized data collection and self-administered questionnaires (paper-and-pencil version) (Veludo-de-Oliveira and Akemi-Ikeda, 2004). According to the Means-End Chain theory, the subjects are required to generate or verify associations between elements on individual ladders in sequences showing increasing levels of abstraction (Barrena and Sánchez, 2010). It is, thus, a variation of the laddering technique with greater structuring in data collection, which allows the application in large-scale samples. Therefore, it demands less skill of the researcher during the interview and minimizes his/her influence on the responses (ter Hofstede et al., 1998). 
A very widely used alternative when applying hard laddering is the Association Pattern Technique (ATP), introduced by ter Hofstede et al. (1998). The APT uses a fix format, and measures the links between attributes and consequences and the links between consequences and values separately. Therefore, in the APT an AC-matrix (Attributes – Consequences) and a CV-matrix (Consequences – Values) are distinguished. The technique is much cheaper and faster than laddering, can be used in mail questionnaires, and allows the researcher to collect data among a representative sample of consumers (ter Hofstede et al., 1998). 
Once the linkages are identified, they can be entered on an implication matrix, which depicts the number of times each attribute (consequence) leads to each consequence (value). From the implication matrix a HVM (Hierarchical Value Map) can be then constructed (ter Hofstede et al., 1998). When showing a HVM, however, a cut-off point needs to be determined. Leppard et al. (2004) defined the cut-off point as the number of linkages to be allowed on the map and proposed the “top-down ranking” method in order to determine it. This method is based on the notion that the most important linkage is that associated with the largest entry in the implication matrix. The approach begins obtaining a HVM at the largest cut-off level, which will create a simple HVM although losing a great deal of the information. Successively, other HVM are created by use of smaller cut-off levels (Leppard et al., 2004), which will complicate the map interpretation while adding information. 
In our work, soft laddering was used as a pilot study in order to elicit ACV of the service. Results from the in-depth interviews together with an extended literature review, helped us out to build an AC-matrix and CV-matrix in order to apply the APT for our survey. The APT was considered to be the easiest and least time-consuming method for eliciting ladders from wine distributors; taking into account that larger methodologies would have been difficultly fulfilled because of respondents’ nature.
3.2. Data collection
Data were collected in Catalonia (Spain) by means of a personal survey of a 50 wine distributors, from a total universe of 353 (Camerdata, 2009). This size of sample is consistent with those observed in most of the previous research in which this technique has been employed[footnoteRef:3]. Interviewing was conducted face to face. Each of them took an average of 60 minutes. Table 1 shows the sampling technical details. [3:  Although APT (Association Pattern Technique) was designed for use with large samples, it is approved for samples of 50+. Some examples of published works in which this methodology has been used with relatively small samples include Russell et al. (2004), where the APT technique is applied to a sample of 45; Ter Hofstede et al. (1998), where a sample of 50 subjects are surveyed for their attitudes towards olive oil and vegetable oil using this hard laddering technique.] 

Insert Table 1
This study used a three-part questionnaire. The first section questioned was addressed to elicit respondents’ business characteristics (location, size…). The second section was focused on business strategies, especially those related to their wine purchase behavior. The final section contained the laddering interview to elicit the MECs produced by the respondents. Data collection for the laddering interview was obtained by means of the APT (Association Pattern Technique). Tables 2 and 3 show the Attributes – Consequences matrix and the Consequences – Values matrix that were used in our empirical application. The order of the items was randomly modified to avoid an order effect in the responses. 
The attributes, consequences and values were drawn from the reviewed literature, the in-depth interviews performed for the pilot survey, and the consultation with experts from the wine sector. This resulted in 14 attributes, 10 consequences and 6 values which are listed in tables 2 and 3. The values were primarily taken from the List of Values (LOV) proposed by Kahle et al. (1986), and later modified according to the results of the pilot survey and adapted to a business situation (Table 3). 
Some of the attributes included in the survey exemplify marketing strategies to support the distributor’s work. These are the winery’s believe in its wines, providing tours for clients, being present in trade fairs and events and a good image as a winery (Table 2). This latter attribute was portrayed by a well taken care portfolio, well taken care facilities, and illustrating to the public the winery’s own story. 
As it was previously stated, the market share of Catalan wine in Catalonia is relatively small (INCAVI, 2014). Therefore, the Catalan origin of the wine was also added among the winery’s attributes. In order to measure the competitive advantage of the Catalan wines compared to the rest of the Spanish wines, the Spanish origin was also considered[footnoteRef:4].  [4:  Spanish wines are the main competitors of the Catalan wines in Catalonia (INCAVI, 2014)] 

Furthermore, it is known that the large retail sector gains every time more market power, which allows the purchase of a great volume of goods at very low prices. For this reason, these market channels prefer to deal with strong brands that have more market clout, more money to invest in their brand development, provide an extensive advertising and promotion support, and have the common ability to pull, rather than push, product through the marketing chain (Lapsley and Moulton, 2001). Large retailers tend to exclude too small suppliers (Pomarici et al., 2012) and, it is therefore, that the winery’s size (or volume) was also introduced as one of the attributes to be taken into account by the distributor. The measurement of this attribute will help to detect the distributors’ preference towards wineries that are capable of delivering big wine volumes or not. 
Insert Table 2 

Insert Table 3 

4. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
The most important descriptive statistics of the sample are defined on Table 4. Most of the distributors do not belong to any business group and are operating in the market for a considerable period of time (an average of 29.4 years). The average annual turnover and the total amount of workers are within the consideration of SMEs (Small and Medium Enterprises), according to European Commission Recommendation 2003/361/EC of 6 May 2003, concerning the definition of micro, small and medium-sized enterprises[footnoteRef:5]. Furthermore, the proportion of the annual turnover provided by the wine sales is high (82.8%), which shows a great specialization in the business. This is also shown by the amount of wine references displayed in the portfolio (188.4), which is considerably large for such small companies. [5:  Respondents can be classified as small enterprises. However, many of them could belong to the category of microenterprise, which are defined as enterprises which employ fewer than 10 persons and whose annual turnover and/or annual balance sheet total does not exceed EUR 2 million.] 

Insert Table 4 
Table 5 shows the importance given to several wine attributes in order to include a specific wine into the distributor’s portfolio. This was measured on a Likert scale ranging from 0 to 10. Results show that the price is the most important attribute, followed by achieving exclusivity for the wine distribution. The third most important wine characteristic is a Catalan origin. Therefore, small wine distributors in Catalonia show a preference for distributing Catalan wines. It is also noteworthy that these distributors do not take into account the size of the winery. This shows that small wine distributors do not require particular volumes in order to operate, which could be explained by their own small size. Portfolio fit is not a key element for the wine distributor. The great amount of references included in their portfolios, which determines a great variability of wines, could therefore make portfolio fit a difficult issue to be required.
Insert Table 5
From the 50 personal interviews, a total of 2,053 ladders representing attribute-consequence links or consequence-value links were revealed. Graph 1 represents the Hierarchical Value Map (HVM), which shows the ladders created by the distributors. The selected cut-off level equals 14, which provides an interpretable map and retains 71.6% of the variance in the original data. This level of variance remains above the recommended 70% by Gengler and Reynolds (1995). The map includes 17 content codes from the 29 that were available (14 attributes + 9 consequences + 6 values). The percentage of the subjects that mentioned each code is also represented in the HVM. 
Results show that “To trust the winery” is the main central issue for the distributors, being mentioned by almost the whole sample (96% of the participants). The importance of trust in the business relationship is in accordance with the results obtained from the literature. The distributor strongly associates the trust in the winery with “Respect from my clients”. This personal value is the most selected across respondents (82% of the participants). “To trust the winery” is also related to the distributor’s “Professional fulfillment” and “Acknowledgment” (selected by 70% and 68% of the participants, respectively). These are the three most important personal values selected by the wine distributors. 
The main winery’s attribute that generates a trustful relationship is the “Excellent quality of the wine”. This is the key attribute that the winery has to offer, as it is the most selected across respondents (70% of the participants). According to Thach and Olsen (2006), the taste quality of the wine is a must for the distributors’ selection of wines. 
Furthermore, a trustful relationship can also be achieved by the winery when offering a “Friendly dealing” and, when showing “Professionalism fulfilling what it is agreed upon” (timings, contract conditions, availability, etc.). These results are in agreement with Thach and Olsen (2006). 
Other winery’s attributes that lead to a trustful relationship are related to the distributors’ support. As it was previously mentioned, this was portrayed in the questionnaire by the following winery’s attributes: 1) A believe in their wine; and 2) A good image as a winery. This latter attribute was characterized by having well taken care facilities, by a well taken care portfolio, and by illustrating to the public the winery’s own story. As it was previously stated, the power of communicating the personal story of the wine and the winery cannot be over-emphasized (Thach and Olsen, 2006). Therefore, the winery’s determination to access the market, which would be part of the distribution support, is a very important attribute in the eyes of the wine distributor. In this sense, small wineries could benefit from the fact of being small by presenting themselves in a personal story that enhances this fact for its uniqueness.
A consequence that also occupies a central positioning in the Hierarchical Value Map (HVM) is “To offer quality”. Wine distributors associate this consequence to the most important personal values: “Respect from my clients”, “Professional fulfillment” and “Acknowledgment”. In order to offer quality, wine distributors will naturally seek for wineries that can offer them a quality product. This shows again that an “Excellent quality of the wine” is the paramount attribute to be offered. When a winery offers a quality product, the distributors also relate it to “Satisfy my clients’ taste” which, in turn, is related to “Respect from my clients” and “Professional fulfillment”. 
It is also noteworthy the association of providing “Exclusivity” and “Tradition in the sector” with the achievement of “Respect from my clients”. As it was noticed, exclusivity is also of the distributor’s interest when deciding for a wine to include in their portfolio (Table 4).
The HVM shows another relevant ladder that reveals that the distributor also values his/her “Financial security and stability” in the business. This is achieved by the purchase of wines at “Reasonable prices”, which yield into “I can be more competitive”. However, the desired end states of the small distributors in Catalonia show that the respondents are not mainly business driven. The survey included other business-oriented values, such as “Maximize profit” and “Success and Prestige” as distributors, which do not appear on the HVM. This is an important finding for small wineries that cannot compete in the market with low(er) prices. In the same line, a “Reasonable price” is not the most prioritized attribute, while “Offering discounts” does not appear on the HVM, which is in agreement with Anderson and Narus (1988). 
Regarding the origin of the wine (Catalan and/or Spanish), the distributors do not show any particular preference when they build their linkages for their desired end state. The Catalan wines are preferred by the distributor when deciding for a wine to include in their portfolio (Table 4). However, once the distribution job is on the run, the origin of the wine seems not to play a role anymore for the distributor’s business goals. This is easily understood when taking into consideration that Spanish wines are the most consumed in Catalonia, especially those from La Rioja. Another issue that is not taken into account is that the winery can provide “a volume enough to meet my requests”. The size of the winery was also shown not to be relevant when introducing a wine in their portfolio, which could be related to their own small size as distributors.

Insert Graph 1

5. CONCLUSIONS
The wine sector in Catalonia (Spain) is clearly dual: there are some big companies that contrast with the many small wineries that face difficulties to remain profitable. For these wineries, gaining access to the markets is of paramount importance. Therefore, a winery that can draw the distributor’s attention will increase its business opportunities. Taking this into consideration, our work explores the distributor’s business motivations, and the possibilities to pursue these in their business relationships with the wineries. To tackle this issue we carried out a vertical differentiation of the service provided by the wineries (wine supply), by means of the Means-End Chain approach. 
Results show that, while wine quality is the key attribute that the winery has to offer, a trustful relationship with the winery is the main central issue for wine distributors. Furthermore, the most important personal values for the distributors are not business driven. This is an important finding for small wineries that cannot compete in the market with low(er) prices. Thus, small wineries have non-economic ways to draw the distributor’s interest, such as a friendly dealing, professionalism in fulfilling what it is agreed upon, and a strong profiling in the creation of their identity and/or image. 
The winery’s sales support to the distributor is of great importance for the wine distributor. Our findings report that the winery can show its support by their own will to access the market and to develop marketing strategies. An example would be promoting their smallness as a personal choice instead of as a circumstantial factor. This and similar strategies would emphasize the contrast between wines from big and prestigious wineries and those produced by the smaller ones, using their particular uniqueness as a marketing tool. 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors want to express their gratitude to the Catalan Vine, Wine and Cava Observatory, for their financial support and their orientation in our research. 

REFERENCES
Anderson J. and Narus J.A., 1988. Partnership advantage and its determinants in manufacturer and distributor working partnerships. Journal of Business Research, 17(4): 327-347.
Anderson J. and Narus J.A., 1990. A model of distributor firm and manufacturer form working partnerships. Journal of Marketing, 54(1): 42-58.
Angulo A.M., Gil J.M., Gracia A. and Sánchez M., 2000. Hedonic prices for Spanish red quality wine. British Food Journal, 7: 481-493.
Bagozzi R.P. and Dabholkar P.A., 1994. Consumer recycling goals and their effect on decisions to recycle: A means-end chain analysis. Psychology and Marketing, 11: 313–340. 
Barrena R. and Sánchez M., 2009. Connecting product attributes with emotional benefits: Analysis of a Mediterranean product across consumer age segments. British Food Journal, 111(2), 120-137.
Barrena, R. and Sánchez, M., 2010. Frequency of consumption and changing determinants of purchase decision: from attributes to values in the organic food market. Spanish Journal of Agricultural Research, 8(2), 251-272.
Batt P.J. and Wilson H., 2000. Exploring the Nature of Buyer-Seller Relationships in the Western Australian Wine Industry. ANZMAC 2000 Visionary Marketing for the 21st Century: Facing the Challenge.
Beaujanot A.Q., Lockshin L. and Quester P., 2005. Distributors' business characteristics, buyer/seller relationship and market orientation. Journal of Marketing Channels, 12(1): 79-100.
Bernabéu R., Díaz M., Olivas R., and Olmeda M., 2012. Consumer preferences for wine applying best-worst scaling: a Spanish case study. British Food Journal, 114, 1228-1250.
Bolat S., Fairhurst A.E., Kim Y-K. and Solak S. 2015. PhD Students’ Value Perceptions of Their Education: An Application of Means-End Chain Model. In Spotts H.E. (ed.). Revolution in Marketing: Market Driving Changes. Proceedings of the 2006 Academy of Marketing Science (AMS) Annual Conference. Springer International Publishing. Cham,192-198. 
Camerdata, 2009. Databases from the Spanish Chambers of Commerce.
Castillo M., 2015. Vino: Buscando atraer a un consumidor global. Alimarket. November, 20th. 
Chen N-H. and Wei S., 2012. Ends Justify Means? Organic Cotton Products’ Purchasing Motivations. Agribusiness, 28(4): 440–450.
Contó F., Fiore M. and La Sala P., 2013. The Wine Chain in Puglia: A Cluster Analysis. Journal of Agricultural Science and Technology, B(3): 696-716.
Costa-Font M., Serra T., Gil J.M. and Gras A., 2009. Explaining low farm-gate prices in the Catalan wine sector. International Journal of Wine Business Research, 21(2): 169-184.
Evans J.R. and Laskin R.L., 1994. The Relationship Marketing Process: A Conceptualization and Application. Industrial Marketing Management, 23: 439-452.
European Commission Recommendation 2003/361/EC of 6 May 2003, concerning the definition of micro, small and medium-sized enterprises. 
Fein A.J. and Anderson E., 1997. Patterns of Credible Commitments: Territory and Brand Selectivity in Industrial Distribution Channels. Journal of Marketing, 61(2): 19-34.
Felzensztein C., Hibbert S. and Vong G., 2004. Is the Country of Origin the Fifth Element in the Marketing Mix of Imported Wine? Journal of Food Products Marketing, 10(4): 73-84.
Gengler C.E. and Reynolds T.J., 1995. Consumer understanding and advertising strategy: analysis and strategic translation of laddering data. Journal of Advertising Research, July-Aug. 1995.
Gil J.M. and Sánchez M., 1997. Consumer preferences for wine attributes: a conjoint approach. British Food Journal, 99: 3-11.
Gronroos C., 1994. From marketing mix to relationship marketing: Towards a paradigm shift. Management Decisions, 32(2): 4-20. 
Grunert K.G. and Grunert S.C.,1995. Measuring subjective meaning structures by the laddering method: Theoretical considerations and methodological problems. International Journal of Research in Marketing, 12: 209-225.
Gutman. J. 1982. A means-end chain model based on consumer categorization processes. Journal of Marketing, 46: 60-72. 
Hansson H. and Lagerkvist, C.J. 2015. Identifying use and non-use values of animal welfare: Evidence from Swedish dairy agriculture. Food Policy, 50: 35-42.
Ho C-I., Liao T-Y., Huang S.C. and Chen H-M. 2015. Beyond environmental concerns: using means–end chains to explore the personal psychological values and motivations of leisure/recreational cyclists. Journal of Sustainable Tourism, 23(2): 234-254.
INCAVI. Institut Català de la Vinya i del Vi. 2014. The market of wines with designation of origin. Catalan Institute of Vines and Wine with data from the Nielsen panel.
Kahle L.R., Beatty S.E. and Homer P., 1986. Alternative measurement approaches to consumer values: The List of Values (LOV) and Values and Life Style (VALS). Journal of Consumer Research, 13: 405-409.
Kallas Z., Escobar C. and Gil J.M., 2012. Assessing the impact of a Christmas advertisement campaign on Catalan wine preference using Choice Experiments. Appetite, 58(1): 285-298.
Kalwani M.U. and Narayandas N., 1995. Long-term manufacturer-supplier relationships: Do they pay off for supplier firms? Journal of Marketing, 59: 1-16.
Koo D-M., 2005. The fundamental reasons of e-consumers loyalty to an online store. Electronic Commerce Research and Applications, 5, 117–130.
Kovacic D. and Radman M., 2003. Farmers’ wine fair: a case study. British Food Journal, 105(3): 204-210. 
Lapsley J. and Moulton K., 2001. Successful wine marketing. Ed. Springer Science + Business Media. New York. ISBN 978-1-4757-6631-8 
Leppard P., Russell C.G. and Cox D.N., 2004. Improving means-end-chain studies by using a ranking method to construct hierarchical value maps. Food Quality and Preference, 15: 489–497.
López-Mosquera N. and Sánchez M., 2011. The influence of personal values in the economic-use valuation of peri-urban green spaces: An application of the means-end chain theory. Tourism Management, 32: 875-889.
OIV. International Organisation of Vine and Wine (2015). Elements de Conjoncture Mondiale. April 2015, Paris, France.
Orsingher C. and Marzocchi G.L., 2003. Hierarchical representation of satisfactory consumer service experience. International Journal of Service Industry Management, 14(2): 200-216.
Pomarici F., Boccia F. and Catapano D. 2012. The wine distribution systems over the world: an explorative survey. New Medit, 4: 23-32. 
Poppy A., Elton L., Bruwer J. and Lyons G., 2014. Exploring consumer motivations towards buying local fresh food products: A means-end chain approach. British Food Journal, 116(10): 1533-1549.
Prichard J., 2004. Time for wine? Distribution woes could put a cork in the Triad's wine industry. The Business Journal, June 14th 2004. 
Reynolds T.J. and Gutman J., 1988. Laddering theory, method, analysis, and interpretation. Journal of Advertising Research, February-March: 11-31.
Rosenbloom B., 1978. Motivating Independent Distribution Channel Members. Industrial Marketing Management, 7: 275-281.
Russell C.G., Flight I., Leppard P., van Lawick van Pabst J.A., Syrette J.A. and Cox D.N., 2004. A comparison of paper-and-pencil and computerized methods of ‘‘hard’’ laddering. Food, Quality and Preference, 15: 279-291. 
Ter Hofstede F., Audenaert A., Steenkamp J-B.E.M. and Wedel M., 1998. An investigation into the association pattern technique as a quantitative approach to measuring means-end chains. International Journal of Research in Marketing, 15: 37-50.
Thach E.C. and Olsen J., 2006. Building Strategic Partnerships in Wine Marketing. Journal of Food Products Marketing, 12(3): 71-86. 
Thyne M., 2000. The importance of values research for nonprofit organisations: The motivation-based values of museum visitors. International Journal of Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Marketing, 6(2): 116-130.
van Rekom J. and Wierenga B., 2007. On the hierarchical nature of means–end relationships in laddering data. Journal of Business Research, 60(4): 401–410.
Veludo-de-Oliveira T.M. and Akemi-Ikeda A., 2004. Student Value in Marketing Education. AMA Educators’ Proceedings, Ed. American Marketing Association. ISBN: 088757-311-5. Chicago, USA.
Vine, Wine and Cava Observatory, 2015. Barcelona, Spain. 


