












































Microsoft Word - Paper Stavanger_CREDA


 1

Consumer attitude and acceptance of boar taint 
 
 
 
Authors: Gemma Tacken, Maria Font, Nuria Panella-Riera,; Marta Blanch, Ma. Angels 
Olivier, Patrick Chevillon, Kees de Roest, Zein Kallas.; José Maria Gil 
 
 
Abstract 
 
From societal viewpoint, castration of pig meat is no longer acceptable in some countries in 
the EU. The goal of the ALCASDE project was to gain insight into (1) consumer attitude 
towards castration (2) consumer acceptance of meat with boar taint and (3) the potential 
impact of this acceptance on the behavioural intentions of pork.  
 
The test was done in 6 countries: the Netherlands, Germany, United Kingdom, France, Italy 
and Spain. In each country a representative sample of regular pork respondents was selected 
(n=130). Regular boar meat was used and qualified for the test as meat with boar taint if in 
melted fat: Androstenone > 1 µg/g, Skatole > 0.2 µg/g or Androstenone > 0.5 µg/g and 
skatole > 0.15 µg/g. Boar meat was qualified as meat without boar taint if in melted fat: 
Androstenone < 0.5 µg/g and skatole < 0.15 µg/g. Fat of all boars used was tested chemically 
before. For each country at least 20 boars in each group are used. Per boar the pork loin is 
used for the test. 
 
 
Using a pre- and post-sensory questionnaire, the intrinsic quality cues of the meat (colour, 
odour, freshness and shelf life) were found to be the most important aspects for purchasing 
fresh pork meat while the hedonic or the extrinsic quality factors (brand, origin, package type 
and the type of the production) were not important. Respondents consider themselves not very 
well informed on pig welfare. Within welfare, castration is less important than most other 
factors as housing and feed. 
 
An individually sensory test revealed that only in France, Italy and the Netherlands significant 
differences were found between the consumer perception of tainted boar pork loin and gilt 
pork loin. This result can be explained by relatively low androstenone and skatole levels in 
the regular meat used in Spain and United Kingdom.  
 
To gain insights in odour perception during preparation, respondents were invited in the 
kitchen during preparation of boar meat. Afterwards they filled in a questionnaire on their 
behavioural intention. Despite perceived abnormal odour, still a large group of the 
respondents in Italy, the Netherlands and Spain, would serve the meat to family members. 
50% of the respondents that smell an abnormal taste indicate to stop buying pork for a while. 
Around one third to three quarters of the respondents would not visit the store again, that sold 
this meat. 


