



















































87_ESCOBAR_GIL


CC OO II MM BB RR AA   &&   VV II SS EE UU   
22001122  --  PPOORRTTUUGGAALL  

ID=87 

©www.vdqs.net/2012Coimbra 

Marketing Channels in the Wine Sector:  

Wine Distributors in Catalonia as a Case Study  

ESCOBAR, Cristina; GIL, José María 
CREDA (Center for Agro-food Economy and Development), ES 

cristina.escobar@upc.edu; Chema.Gil@upc.edu 

The wine sector in Catalonia is clearly dual: on one hand, there is a small group of large companies 

following differentiation strategies and enjoying economies of scale while, on the other hand, there are 

many small companies and growers who have suffered a situation of surplus and decreasing prices, 

resulting in negative outcomes for the last recent financial years (OVVC 2007; 2011). From the standpoint 

of marketing, the wine sector in Catalonia is fairly uncoordinated (OVVC, 2007). Cooperatives could play a 

key role in marketing agricultural products by achieving economies of scale and thus, lowering marketing 

and promotion costs (Costa-Font M. et al., 2009). Nevertheless, wine cooperatives in Catalonia, in spite of 

controlling half of the Catalan grape production, show low market shares coupled with an overall lack of 

marketing contracts within the wine sector (Costa-Font M. et al., 2009).  

Distribution channels are critical for success. Achieving good partnership with the right distributor 

can have a significant effect on profitability, by helping out promoting a brand (Prichard, 2004). In this 

sense, it becomes necessary to take into account the wine wholesaling sector as a key element to enter 

into the appropriate marketing channels. This issue is especially strategic for those small wineries that do 

not enjoy economies of scale and that have difficulties to market access. However, so far, there are no 

studies examining the position of Catalan wines in the wholesale distribution channel. Our study aims at 

exploring which are the main motivations of wine distributors when buying and selling wines and which 

winery attributes can provide greater success in their relationship. In this sense, we aim at communicating 

to wineries what wine distributors are looking for in order to be more appealing for their businesses. 

To tackle with this issue we perform a vertical differentiation analysis of the wine supply service for 

wine wholesaler distributors. Methodologically, we have applied the means-end chain (MEC) analysis to 

identify the linkages that wine distributors establish between service attributes, the benefits they 

symbolize and the values they try to reach through them. In other words, wine distributors will assess 

which are the main attributes they are seeking in a winery to achieve their desired end states.  

Results obtained show that a trustful relationship with the wineries is the key strategic factor of 

success for wine distributors. The most important winery’s attribute to establish a trustful relationship with 

a wine distributor is to provide an excellent product. Furthermore, trust in the relationship can also be 

achieved by offering a friendly dealing and being professional accomplishing what was agreed upon 

(timings, contract conditions, availability, etc.). Another interesting attribute that provides trust in the 

relationship is the winery’s own self-esteem, which has been stated as believing in their own product and 

providing a good image as a cellar (facilities, portfolio, history…). Results obtained from this study could 

help wineries to design more effective marketing strategies. 


