














































Determinants of the Adaption of Organic Agriculture in Egypt Using a 

Duration Analysis Technique 

 

 

Amr Radwan *
,
**, José M. Gil*, Yaser A. A. Diab*** and Mohamed A. Abo-

Nahoul*** 
 

*Centre de Recerca en Economia i Desenvolupament Agroalimentaris (CREDA)-UPC-IRTA, 

Parc Mediterrani de la Tecnologia Edifici ESAB, C/Esteve Terrades, 8 08860 Castelldefels,  

Barcelona, Spain. 

** Department of Agricultural Economics, Faculty of Agriculture, Cairo University, Cairo, Egypt. 

*** Department of Agricultural Economics, Faculty of Agriculture, Assiut University, Assiut, Egypt.  

Contact emails: amr.radwan@upc.edu, chema.gil@upc.edu, yasereco@yahoo.com, 

AboNahol@aun.edu.eg 
  

 

 

 
Abstract 

 
A very important pillar of the modernization of the Egyptian agriculture depends upon the exportation of 

the high value added products such as organic products. In spite of the importance of the organic 

agriculture within the Egyptian agriculture sector and up to our knowledge, it does not exist in Egypt until 

now any study that try to determine and analyze the determinant factors of the adaption of the organic 

agriculture within the Egyptian farms. In this study, we focus on this issue. A survey with a representative 

sample of organic and non-organic farms in Upper Egypt area was carried out. Using obtained data set we 

apply duration analysis techniques to assess the effect of different explanatory variables on both the 

adoption of organic agriculture farming and the timing of this adoption. Our results suggest that the 

maximum hazard of adopting organic agriculture takes place during the first few years after the 

construction of the farm and Manager characteristics such as his education level and Risk behaviour 

together with the farm size seem to be the most significant factors affecting the likelihood of organic 

agriculture adoption in Egypt.. These results could be helpful in designing the suitable policies and 

strategies to support the extension of organic agriculture within Egypt. 

 

Key words: organic agriculture, duration analysis, Egypt. 
 

JEL classification: C41, Q1 

mailto:amr.radwan@upc.edu
mailto:chema.gil@upc.edu
mailto:yasereco@yahoo.com
mailto:AboNahol@aun.edu.eg


1. Introduction 

 

A very important pillar of the modernization of the Egyptian agriculture depends upon 

the exportation of the high value added products such as organic products. In spite of 

the importance of the organic agriculture within the Egyptian agriculture sector and up 

to our knowledge, it does not exist in Egypt until now any study that try to determine 

and analyze the determinant factors of the adaption of the organic agriculture within the 

Egyptian farms. 

The main objective of this paper consists of determining and analysing the most 

important factors in the adaption of organic agriculture and the duration of this decision 

in Egypt, which will be helpful in designing the suitable policies and strategies to 

support the extension of organic agriculture within Egypt. 

In order to achieve the aforementioned objective we carried out a survey with a 

representative sample of organic and non-organic farms in the Upper Egypt area namely 

in Suhag, Assiut and Fayum governorates, which considered as the main production 

area of organic products.  

The methodological approach is based on the use of different survival or duration 

analysis techniques which allow controlling both for the occurrence of an event (i.e. 

whether a farm adopt the organic agriculture or not) and the timing of the event (that is, 

when the adoption takes place).  

Our results and consistent with previous literature suggest that the Maximum hazard of 

adopting organic agriculture takes place during the first few years after the construction 

of the farm. Manager characteristics such as his education level and Risk behaviour 

together with the farm size seem to be the most significant factors affecting the 

likelihood of organic agriculture adoption in Egypt. These results could be helpful to 



policy makers in designing the suitable policies and strategies to support the extension 

of organic agriculture within Egypt.  

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides a brief description on 

the Egyptian organic agriculture sector. The methodological approach applied in the 

analysis is explained in section 3. Our empirical application and the main results are 

discussed in sections 4 and 5, respectively. Finally, the paper ends with some 

concluding remarks. 

2. The Egyptian organic agriculture sector 

Although the contribution of agriculture has fallen, it still accounts for about 17 per cent 

of gross domestic product and 20 per cent of total exports and foreign-exchange 

earnings. In addition, industries related to agriculture, such as processing, marketing and 

input supplies, account for another 20 per cent of gross domestic product. Agriculture is 

therefore a key sector in the Egyptian economy, providing livelihoods for 55 per cent of 

the population (UNDP, 2004). 

Egypt's approximately 460 organic farms covered an area of 24 548 hectares , 0.72% of 

its total agricultural land in 2007, and almost half of the farms area located in the middle 

Nile, concentrated in the region of El Fayoum, 100 Km south of Cairo. More than half 

of the organic farms in Egypt are 4.5 to 20 hectars in size. There are only a few farm 

enterprises larger than 1000 Feddan (ca. 400 hectares), but they account for 20 percent 

of all organic farmland, and are located in reclaimed desert land in the Nile delta and in 

Upper Egypt. 

Certified Organic Agriculture started in Egypt 23 years ago in a small farm (SEKEM) 

of about 17 ha in the eastern desert to produce medicinal herbs for the export market. 

Expansion of this activity was quite slow until 1988. Thereafter a rapid growth occurred 

in the bio-dynamic production of vegetables, fruits, cereals, and cotton, beside the 



medicinal herbs. This rapid growth was initiated mainly by Sekem and some other 

growers in Fayum and Kalubia governorates. The expansion of Organic Agriculture 

activity in Egypt is growing very fast due to public awareness as well as the increasing 

demands for organic food and fibres in both local and export markets.  

The main issues facing the progress of organic agriculture in Egypt can be summarised 

in: 1. Some regulatory aspects concerning the long conversion period (three years) in 

the EU rules. EU conversion requirements set as in most European countries the 

growing season is no more than 4 – 5 months per year. In Egypt there are three growing 

season a year. Also the manure limits per unit area is quite low for the desert soils 

which is very poor in organic matter contents, (less than 0.1%). In addition to some 

other regional differences related to the desert climate prevailing in the country. 2. The 

availability of organic seeds is not assured always, sometimes not found and If available 

are very expensive. There are no local organic seed production for many products 

particularly vegetables. 3. Disease and insect control still not easy, biological control 

agents are imported and expensive. Local practices need to be developed through 

intensive research programmes. 4. Nitrogen requirements still not fulfilled according to 

the allowed rates of application in all national and international rules and regulations. 

More research activities are needed for soil fertility conservation in the desert 

environment. 

3. Methods: Duration analysis 

Our methodological approach is based on the use of different survival or duration 

analysis (DA) techniques which were originally applied in biometrics. Since the seminal 

paper by Lancaster (1978) on the duration of unemployment, its use in economic 

analysis has spread out. In the field of agricultural economics, the implementation of 

this approach has focused on production technology adoption or the adoption of organic 



farming (see Burton et al., 2003, de Souza et al., 1999 and Kallas et al., 2010, among 

others). However, to our knowledge, this is the first attempt to apply duration analysis 

to assess the adoption of organic agriculture in Egypt. 

Survival or duration analysis techniques allow controlling both for the occurrence of an 

event (i.e. whether a farm adopt the organic agriculture or not) and the timing of the 

event (that is, when the adoption takes place). Therefore, these methods take into 

account the evolution of the adoption of organic agriculture and its determinants over 

time. Moreover, duration analysis techniques are appropriate to account for right 

censoring (when we only know that the farm did not adopt organic agriculture at least 

up to a given period t), and easily handle time-varying covariates. The latter allows 

overcoming the limitation arising from considering farm’s characteristics previous to 

the sample period or at the time of starting as the unique determinant of farm survival 

over time. Furthermore, the specification of these models may be made flexible enough 

so as to allow testing the different predictions derived from the theory. 

The central concept in survival analysis is the hazard rate. Following Kalbfleisch and 

Prentice (1980), this is defined as the probability that a farm adopt organic agriculture in 

a moment t given that it has survived until this period t and conditional on a vector of 

covariates Xit , which may include both time varying and time-constant variables, 

0

\ ,
; lim

it

it
dt

prtTtdtTtx
tx

dt  

where T is a non-negative random variable (duration), which we assume continuous, so 

that λ (t) is an instantaneous reduction rate. 

In order to examine the effect of the explanatory variables on the adoption of organic 

agriculture we follow two approaches. First, we carry out univariate non-parametric 

tests of equality of hazard (or survival) functions across the r-groups of farms obtained 



according to the values of each explanatory variable (Cleves et al., 2004). These tests 

are extensions for censored data of non-parametric rank tests used to compare two or 

more distributions. Under the null hypothesis, there is no difference in the hazard rate 

for each of the r groups at any of the failure times and this statistic distributes as a χ2 

with r −1 degrees of freedom.  

Secondly, a multivariate analysis is undertaken estimating a semiparametric survival 

model in order to unravel the effect of each of the explanatory variables on the adoption 

rate (alternatively, the probability of survival) controlling simultaneously for the effect 

of the other variables considered. The estimation is performed using the semi-

parametric CPHM, Cox (1972): 

λ (t ;Xit ) = λ0(t) . exp (Xitβ) 

where λ0 (t) represents the baseline function obtained for values of covariates equal to 0 

(Xit = 0). In this specification, the effect of the independent variables is a parallel shift 

of the baseline function, which is estimated for all those firms that survive up to a 

particular period. The baseline function is left unspecified and the model is estimated 

maximizing a partial likelihood function with respect to the vector of coefficients β 

without the need to estimate the baseline function (although it may be recovered non-

parametrically). 

The CPHM has some desirable properties that make it suitable for our analysis. First, 

the baseline function is left unspecified. Hence, the potential problem of unobserved 

heterogeneity that may rise when the baseline unction is not properly specified is 

overcome (Dolton and Van-der-Klauw, 1995). This problem worsens in presence of 

time-varying covariates. Second, it is only the ordering of the adoption times what 

matters for the estimation of the CPHM, and not the actual times by themselves.  

 



4. Empirical application 

Our data set comes from a survey designed and conducted in Upper Egypt, Specifically 

in Suhag, El Fayum and El Minya Governorates during the year 2010 for 60 

representative organic and non organic farms.  

The analysed event is the adoption of organic agriculture by a farm in a specific year. 

And we considered the construction of each firm as our time origin.  

Regarding our estimation procedure, first we conduct univariate non-parametric tests of 

equality for hazard (or survival) functions across r groups of households obtained 

according to the values of each explanatory variable. Secondly, a multivariate analysis 

is undertaken by estimating a semiparametric survival function in order to unravel the 

effect of each explanatory variable on the likelihood of reduction, controlling 

simultaneously for the effect of the other variables considered. 

Table 1 represents a description of the explanatory variables used in our analysis and the 

average value for these variables in the case of organic and non-organic farms. 

Table 1 Descriptive statistics of the Duration analysis explanatory variables 

Variable Description 
Conventional farms Organic farms 

Mean St. Dev. Mean St. Dev. 

Size Farm size in Fedan  39.6 40.3 11.4 18.8 

Age
2
 The age of the farm manager squared   44.2 10.55 45.6 9.5 

Family member 
Number of the member of the family 

of the farm manager  
4.7 1.7 5.4 2.2 

Education 

Dummy variable equals one in the 

case of having at least university 

education and equals zero otherwise  

0.36 0.09 0.47 0.31 

Training 
Number of training courses the 

manager has during last three years  
3.3 4.7 2.2 2.7 

Risk 
Degree of risk that the manager is 

willing to undertake  
1.48 1.7 4.7 2.9 

Accident 

Dummy variable equals one in the 

case of having accident using 

agrochemicals and equals zero 

otherwise  

0.21 0.41 0.30 0.47 

 

 



5. Results 

Our results indicates that conventional farmers consider the low prices of organic 

products and high investment needed as the most important constraints of the adoption 

of organic agriculture while marketing problems and the un availability of information 

are considered the least important. In the case of organic farms the saturated market 

with conventional products and the low revenue are the most important constraint while 

the least one are the marketing problems and the long transformation period. 

For conventional farms the most important motivation to cultivate organic products are 

the positive expectation regarding the exportation market and to avoid health problems 

related to using agrochemicals while the least important motivation is the self 

satisfaction cultivating healthy products. In the case of organic farms the least important 

motivation is the high cost of conventional agricultural inputs while the most important 

are the positive demand expectation in both domestic and international market together 

with avoiding health problems related to the use of agrochemicals.  

Figure 1 shows the survival function from our data set. As can be observed, the highest 

probability of adopting organic agriculture takes place during the very first few years of 

the farm construction then this probability goes down until become stable and low from 

the tenth year approximately and thereafter. 

 

 

 

 

 



Figure 1 The survival function 

 

The CPHM was estimated with the selected explanatory variables, taking into account 

both that our data are right censored and the tied data problem
1
. Estimated parameters 

are shown in Table 1. As can be observed, the null hypothesis that all coefficients are 

equal to zero can be rejected with a 99% confidence level.  

Our results suggest that Manager Characteristics such as his education level and Risk 

behaviour together with the farm size seem to be the most significant factors affecting 

the likelihood of organic agriculture adoption in Egypt. The farm size seems to be the 

most important determinant of the organic agriculture adoption where the null 

hypothesis regarding the impact from farm size can be rejected with 99% confidence. 

The hazard ratio is around 1, indicating that farm size decrease lead to increase organic 

agriculture adoption hazard of about the same magnitude. This negative effect of the 

farm size on the organic agriculture adoption may be owing to the high cost of the 

organic agriculture comparing to conventional agriculture this may make the farmer 

able to pay this high cost only in the case of small farm size. The other significant two 

                                                 
1
 As the duration model was originally designed for biometric data, where the event occurs for each 

individual in a different point of time, tied data is a problem that appears when applying duration models 

to economic data, where the event occurs for many individuals at the same point in time. In this study we 

have controlled for this problem to derive unbiased results. 



variables are the education level of the farm manager and his risk behaviour which are 

significant at 95% and 90% confidence level respectively. Both variables have an 

positive effect on the organic agriculture adoption. In both cases this positive effect is 

expected and consistent with previous literature. Normally well educated people 

understand better the advantage of organic agriculture and are more willing to 

conducting it. Also as the organic agriculture, especially in the developing countries 

such as Egypt perceived as a risky activity so only risk takers managers will be willing 

to adopt organic agriculture.   

Table 1. Estimated parameters of the Cox proportional hazard model 

Variable Parameter St. Dev. P-value Hazard ratio 

Size -0.03* 0.02 0.07 0.96 

Age
2
 0.00 0.00 0.49 1.00 

Family member 0.04 0.13 0.76 1.04 

Education 0.419** 0.21 0.046 1.52 

Training 0.02 0.07 0.79 1.02 

Risk 0.30*** 0.09 0.00 1.34 

Accident 0.72 0.59 0.22 2.06 

Likelihood Ratio: 47.38 (0.000) 

    Wald test: 58.34 (0.000) 

    Lagrange Multiplier Test: 38.26 (0.000) 

    
*, ** and *** indicate significant at 90%, 95% and 99% level of significance respectively 

6. Concluding remarks 

This paper presents the first attempt of using Duration analysis approach to determine 

the main factors affecting both the occurrence and the timing of the adoption of organic 

agriculture within the Egyptian Farms. 

In this study a Duration Analysis approach, the Cox Proportional Hazard Model 

(CPHM), has been used to determine the main factors affecting both the occurrence and 

the timing of organic agriculture adoption between a representative sample of farms in 

upper-Egypt. To achieve this objective, a survey has been designed and conducted 

among 60 representative organic and non-organic farms.  



Our results and consistent with previous literature suggest that the Maximum hazard of 

adopting organic agriculture takes place during the first few years after the construction 

of the farm. Manager characteristics such as his education level and Risk behaviour 

together with the farm size seem to be the most significant factors affecting the 

likelihood of organic agriculture adoption in Egypt. These results could be helpful to 

policy makers in designing the suitable policies and strategies to support the extension 

of organic agriculture within Egypt.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



References: 

 

Burton, M., Rigby, D. and Young, T., 2003. Modelling the adoption of organic 

horticulture technology in the UK using duration analysis. The Australian 

Journal of Agricultural and Resource Economics, 47(1), 29-54. 

Cleeves, Mario A., Wiliam Gould and Roberto Gutierrez, 2004. An introduction to 

survival analysis using STATA, rev ed., College station, Texas: STATA press. 

 

Cox, D. R., 1972. Regression models and life tables. Journal of the Royal Statistical 

Society, Series B, 20: 187-220. 

 

De Souza, F., Young, T. and Burton, M., 1999. Factors influencing the adoption of 

sustainable agricultural technologies. Tehnological Forecasting and Social Change, 

60, 97-112. 

Dolton, P. and Von der Klaauw, W., 1995. Leaving Teaching in the UK: A Duration 

Analysis. The Economic Journal, 105(429), 431-444. 

 

Kalbfleisch, J. and Prentice, R., 1980. The statistical analysis of failure time data. 

Wiley, New York. 

 

Kallas, Z., Serra, T., Gil, J.M., 2010. Farmers' objectives as determinants of organic 

farming adoption: the case of Catalonian vineyard production. Agricultural 

Economics, Forthcoming 

Lancaster, T., 1978. Econometric methods for the duration of unemployment. 

Econometrica, 47(4), 939-956. 

UNDP Country Evaluation Egypt, 2004. 

 


