



















































Impacts from restoration


 1

Impacts from restoration strategies: assessment through valuation 

workshops 

 

Begoña Álvarez-Farizo* 
Economics Unit 
C.I.T.A. – Gobierno de Aragón 
Ctra. Montañana, 930 - 50059- Zaragoza - SPAIN 
 
José M. Gil 
CREDA-UPC-IRTA 
Parc Mediterrani de la Tecnologia 
08860-Castelldefels (Barcelona) - SPAIN 
 
& 
 
B.J. Howard 
Centre for Ecology and Hydrology 
Lancaster Environment Centre 
Library Avenue - Bailrigg 
Lancaster   LA1 4AP - UK 
 

 

 

 

 

*corresponding author: 
 e-mail: balvarezf@aragon.es; phone: ++ 34 976 71 63 54; fax num: ++ 34 976 71 63 35 

 



 2

Impacts from restoration strategies: assessment through valuation 

workshops 

 

Abstract 

Recent decades have seen a wide range of pollutant spills affecting natural, industrial, 

urban and rural areas (Exxon Valdez, Amoco Cadiz, Erika, Prestige, the Chernobyl 

nuclear power plant , and the Aznalcóllar mines in Spain, to name a few). The extent of 

damage covers both time and space. Therefore, in order to mitigate the effects of 

pollution, it is necessary to adopt integrated management of both productive and 

natural areas. However, to be effective it is necessary to consider not only the health or 

biophysical effects of the countermeasures, but also the response of individuals to these 

changes. The purpose of this study is to assess the potential social and environmental 

impacts derived from the implementation of restoration strategies resulting from spills. 

Our approach is based on a choice experiment applied within the context of a citizens’ 

valuation workshop or market stall in Cumbria (UK) and Zaragoza (Spain). The results 

highlight the advantages of this participatory technique versus traditional surveys. 

 

 

Keywords: Choice experiments, market stall, valuation workshop, impact assessment, 

community preferences. 

 



 3

1. Introduction 

Recent decades have seen disasters1 caused by well-known oil spills and other 

disastrous events that have affected not only natural spaces but urban, 

industrial, and rural areas (examples include the Exxon Valdez, Amoco Cadiz, 

Erika or Prestige tankers or the accidents at the Chernobyl nuclear power plant 

and the Aznalcóllar mines in Spain). The extent of damage is both on time and 

space, thereby resulting in the need to have integrated management of the 

areas dedicated to living, producing and supporting natural ecosystems in 

order to mitigate the impact of the pollutant.   

The application of restoration strategies have an immediate effect on the 

environment, which is generally recognized through changes in the surrounding 

landscapes. However, the implementation of similar strategies can lead to 

divergent results under differing conditions and environments. In order to 

effectively manage these situations, not only the health and the biophysical 

effects on humans and nature should be considered, but also the human 

response to these changes in the surrounding environment (Cropper and 

Sussman, 1990). Thus, even though a measure may have beneficial effects — 

such as decreasing toxic doses for humans — certain associated implications 

can reduce the quality of life of those affected. These effects, while considered 

secondary and not necessarily negative, are not intended when the 

countermeasures for environmental recovery are applied. Including these 

prospective impacts in a remediation plan can help to extend the scope of 

decision-making models (Cox et al., 2005). 

                                                 
1 Bonnieux et al.(1980), Bonnieux and Rainelli (1991, 1993, and 2001), Carson et al. 
(1992), Carson and Hanemann (1992), NOAA (1983) and White and Nichols (1982), 
among others, provide an economic perspective of disasters caused by pollutants. 



 4

Furthermore, it will always be difficult to justify the implementation of all 

available countermeasures, regardless of the cost, in order to mitigate the 

effects of contamination. Yet it is equally difficult to justify that remediation 

countermeasures should only be applied based on their effectiveness in 

reducing the doses. Considering these conflicting interests, how should a 

restoration plan be designed? How do we choose between the external effect 

to pursue and the one to avoid? How can we compare the secondary effects 

of the different measures that can be applied? There must be guides and 

methods for assessing the outcomes in order to avoid ad hoc decision making2. 

Usually this information is obtained by applying methods based on the use of 

both revealed and stated preferences, as well as utilizing a vast amount of 

literature that is available on the assessment of external effects (Álvarez-Farizo 

and Hanley, 2006; Hanley et al, 2001; Bennett and Blamey, 2001; Hanley et al, 

1997; NOAA, 1997, 1983; among others).  However, there has been limited 

research focused on the effects derived from the application of remediation 

strategies3.  

Along this line, the main objective of this paper is to assess some of the 

unintentional and intangible consequences (externalities), both environmental 

and social, derived from the application of remediation strategies that can be 

perceived through changes in the urban and natural landscapes. Specifically, 

we analyse the consequences of implementing strategies for the elimination or 

                                                 
2 For a review of the social and ethical aspects of decision making on selecting 
countermeasures, see Oughton et al (2002) 
3 It is worthwhile here to highlight the controversy on the need to assess externalities 
and, if so, how to do the assessment (Mazzotta et al., 1994; Unsworth and Bishop, 1994; 
Jones and Pease, 1997; Bonnieux and Le Goffe, 1997; Brans and Uilhoorn, 1997; Holl and 
Howarth, 2000; Bonano et al 2000; Navrud, 2003; Álvarez-Farizo and Gil, 2003). These 
studies suggest other approaches of environmental assessment. They propose measures 
other than economic valuation for compensating restoration, including measures that 
compensate economically when the damage cannot be repaired. 



 5

reduction of radioactive contamination to viable (or non-hazardous) levels for 

humans. These externalities were identified within the context of the STRATEGY4 

project, and they affect individuals, through both the direct and indirect use of 

their nearby environment, by just knowing about the damage.  

The methodological objective of this study has been to explore the possibilities 

of overcoming some of the criticisms of non-market valuation methods. These 

criticisms are based on the problem of providing information; on the ability of 

respondents to process the information and fully understand what they are 

trying to assess (Fishkin, 2003; Luskin et al, 2002); on the complexity of the 

valuation tasks (Swait and Adamowicz, 1996; Mazzotta and Opaluch, 1995); on 

the notion that people have or do not have certain, pre-formed preferences 

for environmental goods (Payne and Bettman, 1999); and on the notion of 

community rather than self-interested values (Sagoff, 1988).  

In recent studies, participatory approaches have been incorporated into 

valuation exercises to minimise these difficulties (Kenyon et al., 2001; Kenyon et 

al., 2003; MacMillan et al., 2003; Álvarez-Farizo and Hanley, 2006). This line of 

research seeks to use deliberative methods in which the public actively 

participates (Spash, 2000; O’Connor, 2000a and b; Kontoleon et al., 2001; 

Fishkin, 2003)5 and are supported institutionally. For example, the Aarhus 

declaration of 1998 states that better access to information regarding 

                                                 
4 Strategy: Sustainable restoration and long-term management of contaminated rural, 
urban and industrial ecosystems; Contract number: FIKR-CT-2000-00018. 
 
5 These studies include aspects that were highlighted during the concerted actions, 
“EVE” (Environmental Valuation in Europe), the purpose of which was to seek valuation 
methods of environmental goods and services, and VALSE (Valuation for Sustainable 
Environments), which endeavoured to demonstrate effective social processes for the 
valuation of environmental goods and natural capital for conservation purposes and 
for designing sustainable policies.  
 



 6

environmental issues and public participation in the decision-making processes 

improve both the quality and implementation of the decisions. 

We hereby attempt to explore the possibilities of applying stated preference 

methods in a deliberative and participatory environment. In the same exercise, 

we have combined a valuation method called choice experiments (CE) with a 

citizens’ workshop (CW) participatory technique, that is, we pretend to take the 

advantages of both techniques, aimed at different objectives: the citizens’ 

workshops are aimed at forming and developing the preferences while the 

valuation technique (CE) is to register and calibrate the changes and measure 

the values in monetary terms.  More explicitly, the citizens’ workshop is intended 

to circulate information and force individuals to deliberate as responsible 

citizens who have no particular or relevant self-interest and may represent their 

own community in making decisions on an issue of general interest (Sagoff, 

1988). Their opinions and decisions are collected in a questionnaire after 

deliberation, which also contains a choice experiment. This experiment is 

intended to inform us about the subject’s (i) preferences for restoration, (ii) 

willingness for trade-off on restoration impacts, and (iii) the relative importance 

of possible consequences from each measure. 

The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 broaches and justifies the 

methodological aspects of the approach herein proposed. Our approach 

combines the participatory method, the citizens’ workshop, with the valuation 

method, and the Choice Experiment. The next section outlines the exercise and 

scenario designs, followed by the discussion of the main results obtained. 

Finally, we conclude by acknowledging the limitations of the study and by 

proposing possible lines for future research. 

 



 7

2. Choice experiments and citizens’ workshop 

There is a wide variety of instruments that are used to incorporate public views 

in decision making (including surveys, referendum, citizen panels and juries). 

Each can be of use, depending on the objectives and circumstances of the 

study.  

However, most studies on environmental assessment collect information from 

surveys sent to the general public. The values obtained are based on individual 

preferences, revealed or stated, and they emulate studies made on market 

goods. However, Sagoff (1998) indicates that society decides on issues such as 

health, security, environment, and ethics based on community preferences 

(rather than on individual preferences).  When individuals are surveyed, do their 

answers reflect the community objectives as responsible members of the 

society or, conversely, do they reflect their personal objectives as self-interested 

individuals? Moreover, during a traditional valuation exercise of non-market 

goods, we wonder what individuals are being forced to show: consumer 

preferences or citizen preferences. 

The citizens’ workshop approach (CW) (Jefferson Centre, 2004) or the market 

stall approach (MacMillan et al., 2002) can help to clarify and identify roles in 

decision making. CWs gather the opinions of participants as lay individuals who 

have no relevant, particular interests, and are a balanced combination 

between deliberation, independence of opinion, access to information, use of 

available time and scrutiny of the process (Coote and Lenaghan, 1997). 

Participants (between 10 to 15) must be representative of their community, 

receive information from experts and stakeholders, and have the opportunity to 

pose questions and present views in order to be included in the analysis.  The 

main advantage of this technique is the “participatory” process, which is 



 8

receptive to feedback and allows for information to be added or the focus of 

the study to be changed, if necessary. Some versions of CWs form subgroups in 

order to design courses of action (see Coote and Lenaghan, 1997, for 

designing health policies; Aldred and Jacobs, 2000, for wetlands land use; and 

Kenyon et al, 2001, for alternatives for traffic reduction). Despite the fact that 

Brown et al. (1995) suggest that CWs can be used to estimate environmental 

damage, only a few studies have effectively applied it to impact assessment 

(MacMillan et al., 2002; Álvarez-Farizo and Hanley, 2006; Álvarez-Farizo et al, 

2007). We have opted to use CWs for this study6, since it allows for eliciting a 

social valuation of remediation measures after decontamination and, 

furthermore, considers the motivations and different perspectives of damage 

assessment. Moreover, this combined technique allows us to learn about the 

process of preference formation.  The selection of a “representative” group of 

citizens is crucial since all strata should be included unless properly justified. It is 

very important to avoid someone leading the arguments, avoiding or impeding 

the access to express an opinion or even to defend it. In environmental issues, it 

is easy to find passionate defenders of opposite positions in the same group, 

who “monopolize” the flow of ideas and opinions. It is very important to rely on 

an expert moderator to control the room without biasing the natural flow of 

ideas. 

With respect to the instrument for obtaining information about preferences, the 

choice experiments technique is probably the most widely applied today in 

environmental valuation (Hanley et al., 2005; Rodríguez and León, 2004; Hanley 

et al., 2001; Bennet and Blamey, 2001, among many others). Choice 

experiments are included among conjoint analysis techniques (Green and 

                                                 
6 In section 3 we explain how all the “rules” for selecting a representative group, and having a productive 



 9

Srinavasan, 1978; Hair et al., 1995; Blamey et al., 1996, 1997). They all obtain 

non-market based values by measuring the willingness to pay or accept 

compensation in order to improve the environment, to avoid damage, or to 

avoid a secondary effect as a result of removing a pollutant. This method is 

based on stated preferences, given that individuals are required to declare 

their preferences regarding a hypothetical situation. 

Choice experiments contain elements from the theory of value (Lancaster, 

1966) and consumer behaviour, which fundamentally include rational choice 

and preference theory. Following the theory of value, individuals get utility from 

the characteristics of goods, services, and ideas... more than from the good as 

a whole. Lancaster’s theory states that the relevant features must be defined 

not in terms of the individual reactions towards the good but in terms of 

objective measures — the intrinsic proprieties of the good. With respect to our 

research objective, the external effects derived from remediation measures, we 

endeavour to break down these effects into relevant aspects based on 

objective measures and not based on individual reactions to a 

countermeasure. Our interest, therefore, focuses on reactions to the objective 

consequences, both individually and considered as a whole. 

Interviewees tend to apply a variety of choice strategies7. The most common 

and direct one is optimization: individuals are required to choose the option 

that maximizes their own welfare.  This means that individuals must compare the 

options in terms of expected costs and gains and then choose the option that is 

the most satisfying. In this case, a certain restoration strategy (or 

countermeasure) will be preferred over another if the utility derived from the 

positive consequences or if the (negative) impacts derived from the preferred 

                                                                                                                                               
workshop where followed. 



 10

strategy are greater (less) than those derived from the one not chosen. This 

assumes additive utility models. However, if we assume that there are certain 

lexicographic elements in the preferences for environmental goods, additive 

utility models will not be valid, since in this case utility is derived from each 

consequence-level and will be independent from the utility derived from the 

rest. 

The basis of behaviour in choice experiments, regardless of the decision 

strategy, is random utility theory (RUT). Under RUT, the choice can be broken 

down into a deterministic part (a function of the observable characteristics of 

the goods and individuals) and another unobservable part — the error term.  

We therefore start with the expression of an individual’s indirect utility function 

(U), 

( ) ijijijij eXVU +=       (1) 
where Vij is a deterministic function of Xij, which are vectors containing both 

individuals’ characteristics (socio-economic and demographic) and 

characteristics describing the relevant aspects of the object under study; and 

eij, is the unobservable, stochastic term of utility. The assumptions made on this 

error term determine the model to be estimated (logit, mother logit, probit, 

mixed logit, etc.). The general practice is to consider that this error term follows 

a Gumbel or Weibull distribution, which leads to the multinomial (MNL) or 

conditional logit (CL) model8, which is the most widely used decision model. 

Therefore, according to equation (1), the probability of choosing a certain 

combination of impacts or consequences will depend not only on the 

                                                                                                                                               
7 See Blamey et al. (1997) regarding choice strategies. 
8 MNL models require the propriety IID to be fulfilled, which means that each error term 
is distributed identically and independently from the rest. The consequences of this 



 11

characteristics of the impacts themselves, but also on an individual’s personal 

characteristics. Thus, certain combinations will have higher probabilities of 

being selected as the beneficial consequences increase and/or the negative 

impacts and costs decrease. This probability will offer an indicator of the 

relative satisfaction derived from the restoration strategy (Louviere et al., 2000). 

Thus, option m will be preferred from the choice set j, if the probability that the 

utility produced by the mentioned option is higher than that generated by any 

other alternative j. Therefore,  

( )[ ] ( ) ( )[ ]imijijimijim eeVVPmjUUP −>−=≠∀〉       (2) 
where subscript i refers to the i-th individual. Assuming the usual Weibull 

distribution error term (IID), the probability of choosing any alternative m can be 

expressed as (McFadden, 1974): 

( ) ( )
ij

j

im
ijim

V

V
mjUUP

µ
µ

exp

exp
,

Σ
=≠∀>

           (3) 

where µ represents the scale parameter, which can not be estimated 

independently from the other parameters. This is the simplest model that can be 

applied to estimating parameters for choice experiments. The willingness to pay 

for a marginal improvement in the impacts considered can be obtained from 

the ratio between the estimated parameter of the corresponding attribute and 

the cost parameter: 

j

m
β

β−            (4). 

This willingness to pay elicited on the workshops will differ from what is obtained 

in a conventional survey, since preferences have had the time and opportunity 

                                                                                                                                               
restriction as well as the implications of alternative models are shown in Louviere et al. 
(2000). 



 12

to be formed and matured. Maturation is derived from a process in which the 

combination of deliberation and enough time to think will allow doubts and 

thoughts to emerge, which can be incorporated into the analysis (Whittington 

et al 1992). In particular, if there were relevant characteristics or relevant 

impacts that may have been overlooked in the initial analysis, there would be 

no way to amend the problem in a conventional valuation exercise with 

choice experiments. Moreover, deliberation allows for a multidirectional flow of 

ideas, provided that all important matters reach all participants, thereby 

feeding back to the discussion and enriching the perspectives.  

Clearly, some elements may be positive for some individuals, but negative for 

others. An example would be an industrial landscape or a natural landscape 

with integrated industrial elements, such as a wind farm. While for some people 

wind turbines degrade the scenery, for others they represent technological 

modernity and the path to sustainability. Among the former, this degradation 

may not leave any possible room for negotiation, but others could be willing to 

accept some degradation of beauty when it guarantees the substitution of a 

polluting energy source for a green one (for example). Under a traditional 

survey format, these connotations and (reasoned) trade-offs would be 

unknown, given that there are interrelated elements that are being examined 

simultaneously, even if they do not form part of the study. 

Another aspect we would like to highlight here is the different evaluation 

perspective resulting in a different orientation of the willingness to pay. In a 

traditional approach, we obtain just the individual and self-interested value, but 

when the valuation exercise is implemented during a citizens’ workshop, we 

assume it is possible to get the responsible and committed value of a citizen 

(Sagoff, 1998; MacMillan et al, 2003; Brown, et al 1995 ; Álvarez-Farizo and 



 13

Hanley, 2006; Álvarez-Farizo, et al, 2007). Thus, the willingness to pay will contain 

elements of the discussions held among different members of society, while 

private interests will be inhibited by the surrounding environment9.  

In traditional surveys, an individual is required to state what amount of money 

he or she would contribute or accept, but only considering what they can 

afford. In the citizens’ workshop context, participation will elicit relevant 

collective aspects that may not directly affect private individuals, but they will 

affect them indirectly as a member of a local society. Thus, the willingness to 

pay will not only include those things that favour individuals, but also those that 

favour the community. 

Finally, as previously stated, there is an absence of clearly defined preferences 

for most non-market goods, and in the case of traditional surveys, preferences 

are constructed ad hoc during a short interview, while there is no opportunity to 

review choices, among other things. Choice experiments during jury sessions 

are completed after a number of tasks, such as deliberation on certain issues. 

Thus, based on the generic preferences10, participants will build their own 

preferences based on a process of maturation and based on their personal 

principles relating to the subject of study. Throughout this process, and before 

making the final choices, participants’ attitudes, thoughts, feelings, 

experiences, etc., will come out during the exercise, thereby allowing them to 

take the role of spokespersons for their relatives and friends. 

At the end of the process, the participants will have a clear, overall view of the 

problem, they will know the implications of various options, and they can 

                                                 
9 In an environment where the common good and welfare are discussed, private 
interests do not come out easily, since they will be considered inappropriate. However, 
collective interests, such as those of farmers, business associations, etc., are backed up 
by the common interests of the group itself, and this will be elicited during a citizens jury. 



 14

weight the pertinence of adopting a certain attitude when making decisions, 

given that their preferences will have been clearly defined during the valuation 

exercise. 

We hereby endeavour to test if there are indeed changes caused by the 

elicitation method, or CWs. More specifically, we endeavour to test if the CWs 

allow for a change from individual to collective values and if they help to build 

well-defined preferences. Therefore, rather than using an MNL, we have 

applied a Random Parameters Model (RPL) or mixed logit choice model. This 

model overcomes some limitations of the MNL by allowing for taste variation, 

unrestricted substitution patterns and correlation in unobserved factors over 

time (Train, 2003), which is more conformable with our objectives. 

We continue to assume that individual i will consider all the offered alternatives 

in each choice situation t. The utility of each alternative j, as evaluated by each 

individual i in choice situation t, will be represented as  

ijtijt

K

k
iijtijtkikijt xxU εβεβ +=+=∑

=1

'       (5) 

where xijt is the vector of the explanatory variables which include those 

observed by the analyst, such as the individual socioeconomic characteristics, 

as in the previous model, those describing both the  decision context and the 

choice task itself in the choice situation t. Again, the β’s and ε’s are not 

observed by the analyst and are treated as stochastic influences, but unlike the 

previous model, the β’s are assumed to vary across individuals. If the IID 

assumption holds, errors of different alternatives cannot be correlated. 

However, in the case of environmental attributes, these are very likely to be 

correlated (Black et al., 2006), since it is easy to expect that individuals who 

                                                                                                                                               
10 By this term, we are referring to the sum total of attitudes, beliefs and experiences 



 15

want an improvement in an environmental attribute will also want an 

improvement in a related attribute. One way to deal with heteroskedastic and 

correlated errors is to estimate the following regression (Hensher et al., 2005), 

thus 

ikikiikik zvz ηδβδββ ++=Γ++=
''       (6) 

where: ηik is a random term whose distribution over individuals depends, in 

general, on the underlying parameters; zi is the observed data; and vi is a 

vector of uncorrelated random variables. βi may contain alternative-specific 

constants; δ and Γ are parameters to be estimated. Thus, ηik may also vary 

across choices and may induce correlation across choices (Hensher et al 

2005)11. 

3. Design of the exercise 

This study was performed during April and May of 2003 at two locations12, the 

county of Cumbria in the UK and the province of Zaragoza in Spain. The 

possible consequences of a nuclear accident were simulated for each 

scenario. For each of these two locations, deposition schemes where defined. 

A database was created with aspects such as soil characteristics, the size of 

towns, land use, farming practices, food production patterns, habits, 

population characteristics, etc. (Cox et al., 2005). Restoration strategies were 

designed by taking into account both the deposition scenario and the 

characteristics and expected effectiveness of the measures. Likewise, 

countermeasure effects on the landscape were simulated. At this point, we 

organised a group (the citizen jury, CJ) at each location. During recruitment, 

                                                                                                                                               
that are the basis for the preferences of all goods. 
11 For a detailed reference on mixed logit models see (Hensher et al., 2005, and Train, 
2003). 



 16

participants were told that they were selected in order to assess the 

consequences of damage restoration and that their decisions would be 

binding, such that a standard remediation protocol13 would be prepared from 

the results of the sessions. They were also instructed that the reports on the CWs 

would be open to everybody. This was done in order to make the exercise as 

true to life as possible. 

The design of the questionnaire was similar for both locations, except for the 

part referring to the participants’ knowledge and attitudes towards their own 

reality. In the case of Cumbria, for example, participants had already had 

experience with a radioactive pollutant (there are still restricted areas resulting 

from the Chernobyl deposition) and with an epidemic (foot and mouth 

disease), which required very drastic measures in certain areas.  

The central part of the questionnaire, the choice experiment itself, was 

common except for the currency. Individuals were shown different sets of 

alternatives from which they had to choose the preferred one, if any. 

The CJ participants met on two occasions, five to seven days apart, and 

meetings lasted for around three hours including a break for relaxation. There 

was a balanced representation of the population, with a final group of 25 

participants in Cumbria and 17 in Zaragoza14. 

During the sessions, various experts were available for consultation to explain 

the measures and their expected consequences. Furthermore, there was 

                                                                                                                                               
12 The locations were selected based on the researchers’ residences. However, 
Cumbria, the research coordinator’s residence, was affected by the accident at the 
Chernobyl nuclear power plant. 
13 At this point, we placed considerable emphasis on this point in order to make the 
situation as credible as possible and to avoid any free-rider position. 
14 The recruitment process was similar in both cases. After contact and pre-selection 
according personal characteristics, a random process was used to select the final 
members. The size of the groups was determined by budget restrictions and the 
possibility of equal participation. 



 17

sufficient material available, such as manipulated images and real 

photographs for illustrating the consequences of applying selected 

countermeasures of pollution removal. The questionnaire included socio-

economic-demographic information in order to establish choices and 

behaviour patterns, together with environmental and social attitudes, and to 

inform about the decision process. 

The central part of the questionnaire was the choice experiment itself. 

Alternatives were constructed as sets of environmental and social impacts 

derived, as a side effect, from the implementation of anti-pollution measures 

with two possible levels: minimum/none and existing15. Each option included 

five possible consequences, apart from the pursued removal of contamination, 

from applying the remediation strategy. Table 1 shows the impacts and levels 

considered in this exercise, which results in 160 possible combinations. Given the 

difficulty in evaluating all the combinations (Louviere et al., 2000; Montgomery, 

2001) and given the instrument used to collect the choices (CWs), we opted for 

a main effects design with two-way interactions (for the two extreme values of 

the cost attribute), thereby reducing the number of option sets containing the 

choices to 16 (with a fractional factorial design16). Each option set included two 

alternatives with a different combination of impacts as well as the possibility of 

choosing no option; meaning that the participant wanted no corrective 

measures after the pollutant was removed.  From the exercise, we determined 

                                                                                                                                               
 
15 Remediation strategies may simultaneously affect biodiversity (most of the measures 
apply treatments to the soil, vegetation, or crops) or animal welfare (with changes to 
both livestock management and longevity). In order to estimate these values, the 
implicated measures and the implied change must be described. This is why the 
collaboration of experts on the affected systems is needed; they help to provide an 
understanding of how these effects can be perceived by the non-expert public. 



 18

the trade-offs that the participants were willing to make; or, in other words, 

what they were willing to sacrifice in order to guarantee more (or less) of an 

attribute. For instance, they may have been willing to pay more in order to 

ensure that no animal suffered or for the restoration of unique buildings, or they 

may have been willing to sacrifice the beauty of the landscape to have a safer 

environment. By including cost as an attribute, it was possible to measure how 

individuals valued the impacts. It would thus be possible to infer the value of the 

change from the status quo (the situation in which the damage is not 

corrected) to a situation in which the damage is corrected; in other words, the 

willingness to pay to correct specific damage17.  

>>>>>>>>>>>> Table 1 about here <<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<< 

The monetary cost was focused differently at each location. In the case of 

Cumbria, it was designed as an increase in local taxes, while for Zaragoza, due 

to the risk of the exercise being rejected, we opted for an annual increase in 

the daily cost of living. This cost was explained it should be spread on the long 

term, such as 25 or 30 years time. 

4. Participants’ motivations and general attitudes 

A battery of questions was posed in order to ascertain the participants’ priorities 

and attitudes and thus to have a better understanding of their motivations. The 

appendix contains the phrases and results regarding attitudes.  

                                                                                                                                               
16 Regarding fractional factorial design, see Louviere et al., 2000, pp 90 and ff; 
Montgomery, 2001, pp 303 and ff; and the papers by Street et al., 2005, and Burgess 
and Street, 2004. 
17 The implicit prices were estimated in order to satisfy the information required for the 
STRATEGY project. They are not included here, since this paper is more concerned with 
the methodological aspects of combining techniques rather than specific assessment. 
The results are available at http://www.strategy-
ec.org.uk/output/reports/D7_Valuation%20of%20cms.pdf. 
 



 19

For priorities, participants were given a list of environmental and social issues. In 

general, the priorities seemed to be the same at both locations, with the 

exception of employment. In Zaragoza, employment was second in 

importance, and in Cumbria it was the least important. There are three possible 

explanations for this exception: (i) the priorities, in general, are different in each 

country (for the Spanish team, the priorities were in line with the results of 

sociological testing [CIS, 1999]); (ii) differences in group composition (the jury in 

Cumbria was, in average, ten years older than in Zaragoza; or (iii) the lower 

unemployment rate in the UK. 

The participants’ opinions about the effects of radioactive pollution were, in 

general, very similar. Results indicated that, from the participants’ perspective, 

future generations would be more affected than the present; aquatic animals 

would be more sensitive than land animals; while landscape would be the least 

affected. Cumbria’s group highlighted the effects on the local economy, while 

for the Spanish group, in the event of contamination, the local economy was 

ranked as the least important. 

A five-point Likert scale was applied to questions regarding attitudes towards 

both nuclear energy and other general issues, where 5 represented the highest 

degree of agreement and 1 represented fully disagreement. Statements varied 

by country, given that some issues, such as those referring to nuclear accidents, 

were unfamiliar to the Zaragoza group. 

In general, Cumbria’s participants were unanimous in rejecting products 

exposed to any source of pollution, even if harmlessness was guaranteed. They 

demanded better information regarding all aspects relating to the 

consequences of a spill, and they did not initially show any pre-established 

attitudes about paying for damage remediation. 



 20

Despite the differences regarding some of the questions, both groups showed 

similarities. Examples include the demand for better information, the rejection of 

any product when safety is questioned, a certain tendency towards altruism, 

and a general preference against nuclear sources for power production. In 

general, altruism is accented in younger participants and in those with young 

children. 

5. Collective and individual valuation 

Table 2 presents the estimates from the MNL models applied both to Cumbria 

and Zaragoza. The goodness-of-fit (Pseudo R2) in both models is relatively high, 

and most of the variables are significant and have the expected sign. Socio-

economic-demographic covariates were included in the first stage of the 

analysis. However, since they were not of interest in this analysis, even though 

they were significant, we opted for the versions with attributes only.  

>>>>>>>>>>>> Table 2 about here <<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<< 

The MNL estimates were very similar at both locations, with the exception of 

animal welfare, which was not important to Zaragoza’s jury, and heritage, 

which was not important for the Cumbria’s group. This does not mean that 

these attributes were not important to the groups, but rather they simply were 

less important for determining their choices at the time they were made. In 

other words, their decisions were guided by those impacts that they felt were 

fundamental. In the case of Zaragoza, there is a complete absence of tradition 

animal protectionism, which is stressed by the urban nature of participants. For 

Cumbria’s group, apart from the well known British protectionist tradition, they 

had the recent experience of foot and mouth disease a few months before this 

experiment took place, which might help to explain the significant valuation of 

this attribute. Moreover, during deliberation the participants showed real 



 21

concern, and the dramatic moments that were experienced in the area could 

be appreciated. Animal welfare was a subject of long discussion and 

deliberation.  

The MNL models do not allow for testing whether or not the CJ system has any 

influence on the heterogeneity of opinions. In other words, MNL models cannot 

show, as mentioned above, that CWs can be used to elicit community values 

as opposed to individual values. Community values are identified when 

heterogeneity in responses decrease from one session to the next.  Since 

private views are inhibited, it is easier to reach an agreement about what is 

good for the group as opposed to the individual. This may be possible with 

models such as the RPL or Latent Class, which can test if there is heterogeneity 

in certain attributes. Table 3 shows the estimates from the RPL model for the two 

sessions at both locations. At Cumbria (first column), in the first session there was 

heterogeneity for landscape and animal welfare (the two random parameters 

identified normally distributed), as shown by the significance of the standard 

deviation parameter, but correlation between both parameters was somewhat 

weak (0.25). In other words, those who exhibited a preference to prevent 

damage to the landscape also chose to prevent harm to animals.  The rest of 

the estimates were significant, even cultural heritage, which was not in the MNL 

model. Moreover, all parameter estimates had the expected sign. Participants 

preferred restoration strategies to be performed but paying the minimum cost. 

The most valued impact was landscape restoration, followed by animal 

welfare, as in the MNL model. During the second CJ session at Cumbria, 

impacts maintained the same relative importance, but there was a decrease in 

the heterogeneity of the two random parameters initially considered, given 



 22

that landscape was no longer significant. Heritage became more significant 

and the goodness of fit did not differ considerably from the previous session.  

>>>>>>>>>>>>>><Table 3 about here <<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<< 

For Zaragoza’s CJ, the random parameters identified were animal welfare and 

heritage (normally distributed too). Animal welfare was not significant as a 

mean value, but the standard deviation was. It can be explained as a 

controversial attribute with varying opinions; it was an important attribute for 

some participants while it was not for the majority. Heritage was significant and 

had the expected sign for both the mean and the standard deviation, thereby 

showing heterogeneity in preferences that disappeared during the next CJ 

session. The rest of the attributes selected were all significant, and the most 

valued one was the landscape, as in Cumbria’s case, followed by the attributes 

referring to water contamination and disruption of daily life. The alternative 

specific constant for Zaragoza (ASCZ) in all models refers to the mean effect of 

the unobserved factor on the error term (Ben-Akiva and Lerman, 1985), which, 

in this case, is related to the choice of any alternative, rather than the status 

quo. The inclusion of a constant means the assumption that the unobserved 

aspects of a respondent’s choices are the same across all options, which is 

likely in this exercise. ASCZ is significant in all models, which can be interpreted 

as the utility derived from choosing some remediation strategy rather than 

none. 

Positions converged during the second session within each group itself, except 

for animal welfare, which was still insignificant during the second session for 

Zaragoza. 

When comparing estimates, we need to consider that the estimated 

parameters are confounded with a scale parameter which is inversely 



 23

proportional to the variance of the random term. Therefore, as proposed by 

Swait and Louviere (1993) and applied by Black et al. (2005), we have 

performed a grid search technique by pooling the two datasets and rescaling 

one of them (Zaragoza’s) by 0.9, thereby implying that Zaragoza’s dataset has 

a lower variability than Cumbria’s. The LR test is -2*[-571.98 - (-319.31-196.38)] = 

112.58, which is above the critical Χ2 value for nine degrees of freedom at 5 

percent significance level of 16.92. As a consequence, the null of parameter 

equality is rejected. Thus, Cumbria’s and Zaragoza’s CWs do not get closer in 

their choices, at least during the second session.  However, it will be interesting 

to see what happens after a third choice experiment at both places.  

>>>>>>>>>>> Table 4 about here <<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<< 

During the third choice experiment, participants had to “vote” on the preferred 

option, and unless lexicographic preferences came out or there was strong 

opposition, the majority vote was what would be chosen through the sixteen 

choice sets. That is, participants had to choose over every choice set which 

option, as a group, they chose, in such a way that any opposition or rejection 

of a choice determined NONE OF THEM choice. Table 5 shows the parameter 

estimates for this “referendum”. The estimates have to be compared through 

the aforementioned scaling proposed by Swait and Louviere. A ratio of 0.9 for 

the Zaragoza set (as previously stated) turned out to be appropriate. The LR test 

was -2*[-28.6728 - (9.234+10.523)] = 8.9158, which, in this case, was well under 

the critical value, at the 5 percent significant level, of 16.92. The null of 

parameter equality can not be rejected. These numbers, however, should be 

considered with the appropriate caution, since the size of the experiment is 

modest. However, we think that this could be more valuable if implemented 

and improved in future research for obtaining community values as opposed to 



 24

self-interested values. Furthermore, we think that the comparison between 

different communities’ values can be facilitated through this approach. 

 

6. Conclusions 

In this study, we proposed the use of CWs as a useful tool for eliciting 

community preferences. We also demonstrated that participants’ views 

change when they are allowed to deliberate and are given enough time to 

think about and develop ideas. Moreover, we have shown that heterogeneity 

in responses diminishes over various sessions. However, the effects of 

deliberating on and discussing an issue, and the maturation of preferences 

through knowledge and understanding, are mixed in our database. Therefore, 

we cannot distinguish between them here. The only thing that can be asserted 

is that values are changed by giving people more time to think and by giving 

them the opportunity to enter into a discussion. Moreover, there is a move from 

individual to collective (citizen) values, a point raised by Sagoff (1988) in his 

seminal and famous study. 

Results from this study can be extended in further directions. First, more time and 

deliberation might help to find convergence in the position maintained by two 

or more different groups, which could be a good indicator for benefit transfer 

possibilities. Future work could also include experimental designs that separate 

the effects of information, group discussion, and collective choice and that 

compare alternative stated preference methods and workshop formats. The 

issue of how to aggregate value estimates from a valuation workshop setting to 

the wider population is an awkward one that also needs to be addressed, 

given that the preferences and values of a jury participant at the end of a 



 25

multi-session process are changed with respect to their “naive” 

preferences/values as pre-selected members of the sampling frame. 

Finally, the question emerges as to whether a combination between 

stated preferences and the jury method would provide more comprehensive 

answers for input into policy processes, as opposed to only consider one 

alternative. As previously stated, moving from a standard survey to the 

deliberative workshop procedure may change the consideration given to an 

attribute, as was the case for heritage in Cumbria’s group, and in general, it 

reduced the heterogeneity of opinions. In general, policy advice could well 

differ from valuation workshops, such as those in this experiment, compared to 

a standard stated preference approach. The search for citizen values versus 

self-interested values for social decision-making is, of course, not solved and 

should be a subject of further multidisciplinary research, but we consider that 

this approach offers a basis for an informed public voice. 



 26

References 

Aldred J and Jacobs M (2000). "Citizens and wetlands: evaluating the Ely 
citizens jury" Ecological Economics, 34 (2): 217-232   
 
Álvarez-Farizo, B., Gil, J.M., (2003). Valuing Side-Effects Associated With 
Countermeasures For Radioactive Contamination. Deliverable 7 of the Strategy 
Project.http://www.strategy-
ec.org.uk/output/reports/D7_Valuation%20of%20cms.pdf 
 
Álvarez-Farizo, B., Hanley, N., Improving the Process of Valuing Non-Market 
Benefits. Combining Citizens’ Juries with Choice Modelling. Land Economics, 82, 
3 (2006).            
    
Álvarez-Farizo, B., Hanley, N., Barberán., R.,  Lázaro, A., Valuing non-market 
benefits in valuation workshops: The choice of a citizen’s jury. Ecological 
Economics, 60, 4, 667-864 (2007) 
 
 
Bennett J and Blamey R (2001). The Choice Modelling Approach to 
Environmental Valuation. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar. 
 
Blamey, RK.,  Bennett, JW, Louviere, J.J.  (1996). A comparison of stated 
preference techniques for estimating environmental values. Choice Modelling 
Research Reports, no 1. 
 
Blamey, M.D., RK., Rolfe, J.C.,  Bennett, J.W. (1997) Environmental Choice 
Modelling: Issues and Qualitative Insights,  Choice Modelling Research Reports, 
no 4. 
 
Bonano EJ, Apostolakis GE, Salter PF, Ghassemi A, Jennings S., Application of risk 
assessment and decision analysis to the evaluation, ranking and selection of 
environmental remediation alternatives.  Journal of Hazardous Materials 71 (1-
3): 35-57 Sp. Iss. SI Jan 7 2000 
 
Bonnieux F., Daucé P. and Rainelli P. (1980), Impacts socio-économiques de la 
marée noire provenant de l’Amoco Cadiz, Rennes, Inra-UVLOE, rapport et 
annexes. 
 
Bonnieux F. y Le Goffe, P. (1997) Valuing the benefits of landscape restoration: 
a case study of the Cotentin in Lower Normandy, France, Journal of 
Environmental Management, 50:312-333.   
 
Bonnieux F., Rainelli P. (1991), Catastrophe écologique et dommages 
économiques : problèmes d’évaluation à partir de l’Amoco Cadiz, Inra, 
Economica, Paris. 
 
Bonnieux F., Rainelli P. (1993), Assessing marine resources damage and the 
clean-up cost of oil spills. The European Association of Environmental and 
Resource Economists, Fourth Conference June 30- July 3, Fontainebleau 
France. 
 



 27

Bonnieux F., Rainelli P. (2001), « L’évaluation des pertes d’aménité des pêcheurs 
à pied suite au naufrage de l’Erika », colloque Erika, Ifremer, Nantes, 6 
noviembre. 
 
Brans, E.H.P and Uilhoorn, M. (2001). Liability for damage to natural resources. 
Background Paper for EU White Paper on Environmental Liability 
 
Brown, T., Peterson, G., Tonn, B., (1995) The values jury to aid natural resource 
decisions. Land Economics 71, (2): 250-260. 
 
Brown, T., Barro, S.C., Manfredo, M.J., Peterson, G.,  (1995). Does better 
information about the good avoid the embedding effect. Journal of 
Environmental Management, 44:1-10. 
 
Burgess, L., Street, D., (2004) Optimal designs for asymmetric choice 
experiments. CenSoC Working Paper, No. 04-004. University of Technology, 
Sydney, Australia. 
 
Carson R., Mitchell R., Hanemann W., Kopp R., Presser S., Ruud P., (1992) A 
contingent valuation study of lost passive use values resulting from the Exxon 
Valdez oil spill , A report to the Attorney General of the State of Alaska, 
November 
 
Carson R., Hanemann W., (1992) A preliminary economic analysis of 
recreational fishing losses related to the Exxon Valdez oil spill, A report to the 
Attorney General of the State of Alaska. 
 
Gómez, C., Nova, F.J., Paniagua, A., (1999) Actitudes y comportamientos hacia 
el medioambiente en España. CIS 
 
Coote A. and Lenaghan J. (1997). Citizens' Juries: Theory into Practice. London: 
Institute for Public Policy Research. 
 
Cox G, Beresford NA, Alvarez B, Nisbet A, Oughton D, Kis Z, Eged K, Andersson K, 
Thørring H, Hunt J, Wright S, Barnett C, Gil J, Howard BJ, Crout NMJ. (2005). 
Identifying optimal agricultural countermeasure strategies for a hypothetical 
contamination scenario using the strategy model. Journal of Environmental 
Radioactivity, 83. 383-397.  
 
Cropper_ML, Sussman_FG, (1990) Valuing future risks to life Journal of 
environmental economics and management, 19, (2): 160-174. 
 
Fishkin, J, (2003) Consulting the public through deliberative polling. 
Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 22 (1): 128-133  
 
Green, P.E., Srinivasan, V., (1978) Conjoint Analysis in consumer research: 
issues and outlook, Journal of Consumer Research, 5, pp 103-123.  
 
Hair, J.F., Anderson, R.E. Tatham, R.L., Black, W.C., (1995) Multivariate 
data analysis with readings. Prentice Hall Int. Eds.  
 



 28

 
Hanley N., Mourato, S., Wright, R., (2001) Choice modelling approaches:a 
superior alternative for environmental valuation? Journal of Economic Survey, 
15: 433-460. 
 
Hanley N., Shogren J.F., White, B. (1997). Environmental Economics in theory and 
practice. Macmillan Press Ltd.  
 
Hanley, N., Wright, R., Álvarez-Farizo, B., (2005). Estimating the economic value 
of improvements in river ecology using choice experiments: an application to 
the water framework directive .  Journal of Environmental Management (en 
prensa)  
 
Harrison, G. W.,  Lesley, J., (1996). Must Contingent Valuation Surveys Cost So 
Much?  Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 31,  1: 79-95  
 
Hensher D., Rose, J., Greene, W. (2005). Applied Choice Analysis, Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge  
 
Holl KD, Howarth RB, Paying for restoration. (2000). Restoration Ecology 8 (3): 
260-267 Sep  
 
Howard, B.J. , Beresford, N.A. , Nisbet, A. , Cox, G. , Oughton, D.H. , Hunt, J., B. 
Alvarez, B., Andersson, K.G., Liland, A., Voigt, V., (2005). The STRATEGY project: 
decision tools to aid sustainable restoration and long-term management of  
contaminated agricultural ecosystems. Journal of Environmental Radioactivity, 
83. 275-295  
 
Jefferson Centre (2004) Citizens jury Handbook, Minnesota, Estados Unidos. 
Kenyon, W., Hanley, N. and Nevin C. (2001). Citizens’ Juries: An Aid to 
Environmental Valuation? Environmental Planning C: Government & Policy, 19, 
4: 557-566. 
 
Kenyon, W., Kevin, C. y Hanley, N. (2003) Enhancing environmental decision-
making using citizens’ juries. Local Environment, April 2003, vol. 8, no.2: 221-232 
(12). 
 
Kontoleon, A., Macrory, R. y Swanson, T. (2001) Individual preferences, expert 
opinion and environmental decision making: an overview of the issues. Paper 
prepared for the Symposium on Law and Economics of Environmental policy. 
 
Lancaster, K. (1966) A new approach to consumer theory, Journal of Political 
Economy, 74:132-57 
 
Louviere, JJ., Hensher, D.A., Swait, J.D. (2000) Stated Choice Methods. Analysis 
and Application, Cambridge University Press. 
 
Luskin, R., Fishkin, J., Jowell, R., (2002) Considered Opinions: Deliberative Polling 
in Britain. B. J. Pol S., 32 455-487. 
 



 29

McFadden, D. (1974). ‘Conditional Logit Analysis of Qualitative Choice 
Behaviour’, in Zarembka, P.(ed). Frontiers in Econometrics. Academic Press, 
New York. 
 
MacMillan D, Philip L, Hanley N and Alvarez-Farizo B (2003) "Valuing non-market 
benefits of wild goose conservation: a comparison of interview and group-
based approaches" Ecological Economics, 43: 49-59. 
 
Mazzotta, M,  Opaluch, J., (1995). “Decision making when choices are 
complex: A test of Heiner’s hypothesis”, Land Econom. 71: 500-515. 
 
Mazzotta, M.J., Opaluch, J.J., Grigalunas, T.A. (1994) Natural resource damage 
assessment: the role of restoration. Natural Resources Journal, 34: 153– 178 
 
Montgomery, D.C., (2001) Design and analysis of experiments. 5th Edition. John 
Wiley and Sons, Inc. 684 pp. 
 
Navrud, S. (2003) Methodologies and Results of Oil Spill Damage Assessments: 
Institutional Framework in the EU and the US, Seminario Científico Internacional 
Efectos economicos, sociais e ambientais da marea negra do Prestige, 7 y 8 de 
Marzo de 2003, Santiago de Compostela. 
 
NOAA, (1983) Assessing the social costs of oil spills: The Amoco Cadiz case 
study, US Department of Commerce NOAA. 
 
NOOA (1997) Natural Resource Damage Assessment Guidance Document: 
Scaling Compensatory Restoration Actions. Prepared by the Damage 
Assessment and Restoration Program, National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration, Silver Spring, MD. December. 
 
O’Connor, M. (2000a). The VALSE project: an introduction, Ecological 
Economics, 34: 165-174. 
 
O’Connor, M. (2000b). Pathways for environmental valuation: a walk in the 
(hanging) Gardens of Babylon, Ecological Economics, 34: 175-193. 
 
Sagoff, M. (1988). The Economy of the Earth. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press. 
 
Sagoff, M. (1998). “Aggregation and Deliberation in Valuing Environmental 
Public Goods: A Look Beyond Contingent Pricing.” Ecological Economics. 
24:213-230. 
 
Spash C L, (2000), “The concerted action on environmental valuation in Europe 
(EVE): an introduction”, Cambridge Research for the Environment, Department 
of Land Economy, University of Cambridge, Cambridge. 
 
Street, D., Burgess, L., Louviere, J., (2006) Quick and easy choice sets: 
Constructing optimal and nearly optimal stated choice experiments. Journal of 
Marketing Research (forthcoming). 
 



 30

Swait, J. & Adamowicz, W. (1996). The Effect of Choice Environment and Task 
Demands on Consumer Behaviour: Discriminating Between Contribution and 
Confusion. Working paper, Department of Rural Economy, Alberta. 
Unsworth, R.E.and Bishop, R.C. (1994). Assessing natural resource damages using 
environmental annuities. Ecological Economics, 11: 35–41. 
 
White I., Nichols J., (1982) Considérations pratiques concernant le coût des 
marées noires in OCDE, 1982, Le coût des marées noires: 77-96 
 
Whittington, D, Smith, VK, Okorafor, A, Okore A, Liu Jl, Mcphail A, (1992) 
Giving respondents time to think in contingent valuation studies - a 
developing-country application. J Environ Econ Manag 22 (3): 205-225 
 
 



 31

Table 1. Sets of environmental and social impacts derived from the 

implementation of anti-pollution measures considered in the two locations 

 Zaragoza Cumbria 

Cost in € and £ €  0-18-60-108-150  £ 0-12-50-85-110 

Loss of scenic 

landscape and 

biodiversity: Scenic 

Absence of plant cover: 

just dirt, no grouse, and 

reduced possibility of 

seeing birds of prey 

Covered by heather and 

grass, with the possibility 

of seeing grouse and birds 

of prey  

Water pollution: Water 

No recreational use 

possible  

 

Possibility of recreational 

use: swimming, fishing, 

canoeing 

Disruption in daily life: 

Disruption 

No independent 

monitoring, so you have to 

trust local inspectors, and 

no systems for checking 

radiation levels yourself 

Existence of independent 

inspectors and possibility 

of  checking for yourself 

the levels of safety in 

products, places, etc. 

Animal welfare: 

Animal 

Livestock slaughtered 

immediately by shooting in 

fields  

Scheduled slaughtering 

using the most humane 

method possible to try to 

avoid unnecessary 

suffering 

Heritage 

No restoration after 

cleanup 

Restoration of buildings 

(walls, surfaces, roofs) to 

their original appearance 

 

 



 32

Table 2. Parameter estimates from Multinomial Logit models 

 Cumbria Zaragoza 

Scenic 0.89 (6.05)iii 1.11 (5.97) iii 

Water 0.36 (2.79) ii 0.60 (3.44) iii 

Disruption  0.39 (3.03) iii 0.57 (3.67) iii 

Animal  0.68 (5.20) iii 0.22 (1,47) 

Heritage 0.18 (1.35) 0.31 (1.99) i 

Cost -0.01 (-1.89) iii -0.014 (-2,24) iii 

ASCs 1.26 (3.84) i 2.06 (4.62) iii 

Log-L -345.26 -226.05 

Pseudo R2 0.17 0.16 

t-values in parenthesis  iii significance at 1%; ii at 5%; i at 10% 



 33

Table 3. Parameter estimates from the Random Parameter Logit Models for the 

two sessions at Cumbria and Zaragoza  

 

 CUMBRIA 1 CUMBRIA 2 ZARAGOZA 1 ZARAGOZA 2 

Random parameters in utility functions 

Scenic 2.29 (2.71)iii 1.19 (6.29) iii   

Animal 1.70 (2.61) iii 1.04 (4.52) iii 0.22 (1.4) 0.23 (1.2) 

Heritage   0.31 (2.0) ii 0.37 (2.3) ii 

Non random parameters in utility functions 

Water 0.69 (3.07) iii 0.84 (3.93) iii 0.61 (3.35) iii 0.99 (3.3) iii 

Disruption 0.64 (2.74) iii 0.73 (4.12) iii 0.60 (3.44) iii 0.88 (3.4) iii 

Heritage 0.40 (1.77) i 0.42 (2.76) iii   

Cost - 0.03 (-2.79) iii -0.02 (-2.59) iii -0.014 (-2.2) -0.03 (-3.3) iii 

Scenic   1.13 (5.5) iii 1.75 (4.9) iii 

ASCZ 1.66 (3.16) iii -3.37 (-7.34) iii 2.08 (4.5) iii 2.16 (3.7) iii 

Standard deviations of parameter distributions 

Scenic 2.82 (1.92) ii 0.0005 (0.00)   

Animal 1.56 (1.6) i 1.22 (3.4) iii 0.21 (1.8) i 0.72 (1.2) 

Heritage   0.014 (2.1) ii 0.40 (0.8) 

Log-L -339.34 -319.31 -226.05 -195.68 

Pseudo R2 0.18 0.16 0.16 0.21 

t-values in parenthesis  iii significance at 1%; ii at 5%; i at 10% 

 

 



 34

Table 4. Results from testing estimated parameter equalities at both locations  

 

 CUMBRIA 2 ZARAGOZA 2 POOL 

Random parameters in utility functions 

Scenic 1.19 (6.29) iii  0.52 (6.3) iii 

Animal 1.04 (4.52) iii 0.26 (1.2) 0.01 (0.1) 

Heritage  0.37 (2.3) ii 0.50 (3.8) iii 

Non random parameters in utility functions 

Water 0.84 (3.93) iii 1.01 (3.5) iii 0.11 (1.3) 

Disruption 0.73 (4.12) iii 0.87 (3.4) iii 0.01 (0.1) 

Heritage 0.42 (2.76) iii   

Cost -0.02 (-2.59) iii -0.03 (-3.5) iii -0.02 (-4.4) iii 

Scenic  1.78 (5.5) iii  

ASCZ 3.37 (7.34) iii 2.14 (3.8) iii -1.15 (-3.9) iii 

Standard deviations of parameter distributions 

Scenic 0.0005 (0.00)  0.04  (0.1) 

Animal 1.22 (1.7) i 0.88 (1.7) i 0.69 (1.7) i 

Heritage  0.004 (0.01) 1.04 (2.5) iii 

Log-L -319.31 196.38 571.98 

Pseudo R2 0.16 0.21 0.15 

t-values in parenthesis  iii significance at 1%; ii at 5%; i at 10% 

 

 

 



 35

Table 5. Parameter estimates corresponding to the consensus session 

 

 CUMBRIA 3 ZARAGOZA 3 

Random parameters in utility functions 

Scenic 2.25 (2.2)ii  

Animal 2.14 (1.7)i 0.26 (1.6)i 

Heritage  0.37 (1.9) ii 

Non-random parameters in utility functions 

Water 1.5 (1.9) ii 1.22 (2.2)ii 

Disruption 0.68 (0.8) 0.55 (2.4)ii 

Heritage 1.16 (1.6)i  

Cost -0.05 (-1.8)i -0.01 (-1.9)ii 

Scenic  1.63 (2.6)ii 

ASCZ -5.4 (-2.4) ii -1.26 (-1.8)i 

Standard deviations of parameter 

distributions 

Scenic 0.003 (0.0)  

Animal 0.35 (0.0) 0.10 (0.0) 

Heritage  0.08 (0.0) 

Log-L -9.234 10.523 

Pseudo R2 0.44 0.30 

t-values in parenthesis  iii significance at 1%; ii at 5%; i at 10% 

 



 36

APPENDIX 

 

Priorities 

A good state education system 

Clean environment 

High quality National Health Service 

Moderate cost of living 

Good old age pension 

Low levels of criminality 

Low unemployment levels 

 

 

Effects of radioactivity 
The health of fish in the sea, lakes, and rivers 

Local wildlife  

Human health 

Scenic quality of the landscape 

Future generations 

Farming 

Economy 

 



 37

Attitudes 

Cumbria 

There is not enough understandable information about radioactive pollution 

for ordinary people. 
A 

The consumers in Great Britain were given too little information about how to 

act after the Chernobyl accident. 
A 

All products in stores should be labelled, clearly stating the amount of 

radioactivity they contain. 
A 

All products in stores should be labelled, stating clearly if the area where 

they come from has been affected by radioactivity. 
A 

In case of local radioactive contamination, I would prefer to eat imported 

food from another region or country free of radioactivity. 
A 

I would be willing to accept a payment to remediate the consequences of 

removing radioactivity after an accident. 
I 

I believe that the benefits to humanity from nuclear energy are greater than 

the disadvantages. 
I 

The health risk associated with radioactivity is considerably exaggerated. I 

I don’t mind if my family and I eat food which has been treated to remove 

all or most of the radioactive contamination. 
D 

Public authorities should withhold information about areas that could be 

severely affected by radioactivity after an accident in order to avoid scaring 

the population. 

D 

I would allow my family and myself to eat products that are said to be safe 

by experts but that have some radioactive contamination. 
D 

 

Zaragoza 



 38

 

All products should be clearly labelled to show the GMO contained and the 

origin. 
A 

There is not enough comprehensible information for the lay public about the 

pollutants in our local environment. 
A 

Future generations will inherit a more degraded environment than us. A 

I will be willing to contribute to remediate the consequences of a pollutant 

after a spill. 
A 

I buy bio products, even if they are more expensive, because they are 

healthier. 
I 

I think that the present environmental policy has substantially improved the 

preceding situation. 
I 

My family and I are willing to consume products with GMO. D 

Before we help developing countries, we should solve our own national 

problems. 
D 

I think that the gains for humanity from the generation of nuclear power are 

greater than the disadvantages. 
D 

The health risks associated with radioactivity are generally exaggerated. D 

Authorities spend too much on protecting and preserving the natural 

environment. 
D 

 

A: Agreement; D: Disagreement; I: No defined position 

 

 


