

























































Understanding the Relationship between Interactive Optimisation and Visual Analytics in the Context of Prostate Brachytherapy


Understanding the Relationship between Interactive Optimisation
and Visual Analytics in the Context of Prostate Brachytherapy

Jie Liu, Tim Dwyer, Kim Marriott, Jeremy Millar and Annette Haworth

Abstract—The fields of operations research and computer science have long sought to find automatic solver techniques that can
find high-quality solutions to difficult real-world optimisation problems. The traditional workflow is to exactly model the problem and
then enter this model into a general-purpose “black-box” solver. In practice, however, many problems cannot be solved completely
automatically, but require a “human-in-the-loop” to iteratively refine the model and give hints to the solver. In this paper, we explore
the parallels between this interactive optimisation workflow and the visual analytics sense-making loop. We assert that interactive
optimisation is essentially a visual analytics task and propose a problem-solving loop analogous to the sense-making loop. We explore
these ideas through an in-depth analysis of a use-case in prostate brachytherapy, an application where interactive optimisation may
be able to provide significant assistance to practitioners in creating prostate cancer treatment plans customised to each patient’s
tumour characteristics. However, current brachytherapy treatment planning is usually a careful, mostly manual process involving
multiple professionals. We developed a prototype interactive optimisation tool for brachytherapy that goes beyond current practice
in supporting focal therapy - targeting tumour cells directly rather than simply seeking coverage of the whole prostate gland. We
conducted semi-structured interviews, in two stages, with seven radiation oncology professionals in order to establish whether they
would prefer to use interactive optimisation for treatment planning and whether such a tool could improve their trust in the novel focal
therapy approach and in machine generated solutions to the problem.

Index Terms—Visual analytics, interactive optimisation, interactive systems and tools, prostate brachytherapy

1 INTRODUCTION

Visual analytics combines automatic analysis with interaction and vi-
sualisation techniques to gain knowledge from data [28]. It is now
an essential tool for decision support. Another widely-used tool for
decision support is optimisation. This aims to find the best solution to
a decision problem by modelling it mathematically using constraints
and objective functions and then using constrained optimisation to find
a solution [33]. Standard approaches to optimisation view the solution
process as a “blackbox”. However, driven by application requirements,
there is a growing realisation within the optimisation community of
the need for more interactive optimisation in which the user is actively
engaged in the solution process.

There are several compelling reasons for interactive optimisation.
Any mathematical model necessarily simplifies the real-world problem
and so may not capture all aspects of that problem [4, 18]. As a result,
solutions can be unsatisfying or even unrealistic. Involving the user al-
lows them to bring their additional knowledge into the solution process.
This is particularly important in multi-criteria optimisation as it allows
the user to guide the system on how to trade-off the various objectives.
A second reason is that the search space of candidate solutions may be
huge: the user can help to direct the solver to more promising regions.
Finally, involving the user allows them to build up trust and confidence
in the solver.

Both visual analytics and interactive optimisation aim to leverage the
complementary strengths of humans and computers to solve difficult
real-world problems. This similarity of intent leads us to believe that
there are opportunities to share and transfer experience and knowledge
between the two fields. In particular, creating effective visual interfaces

• Jie Liu and Kim Marriott are with Monash University and Data61.
E-mail: {jie.liu3|kim.marriott}@monash.edu.

• Tim Dwyer is with Monash University. E-mail: tim.dwyer@monash.edu.
• Jeremy Millar is with Monash University and Alfred Health.

E-mail: jeremy.millar@wbrc.org.au.
• Annette Haworth is with the University of Sydney.

E-mail: annette.haworth@sydney.edu.au.

Manuscript received xx xxx. 201x; accepted xx xxx. 201x. Date of Publication
xx xxx. 201x; date of current version xx xxx. 201x. For information on
obtaining reprints of this article, please send e-mail to: reprints@ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier: xx.xxxx/TVCG.201x.xxxxxxx

for humans to control and explore optimisation can be seen as an
application of visual analytics. Yet, as we discuss below, there is little
published research exploring it from this perspective.

The main contribution of this paper is to explore the relationship
between the fields of visual analytics and interactive optimisation to
identify their similarities and to understand the potential use of interac-
tive visualisation in optimisation (Sect. 3). Our second contribution is
an in-depth analysis of a use-case in prostate brachytherapy that allows
us to further explore the relationship between these fields (Sect. 4).
Current brachytherapy treatment planning is a careful, usually manual
process involving multiple professionals. We developed a prototype
interactive optimisation tool (Sect. 5) that goes beyond current prac-
tice by supporting focal therapy—which targets discrete tumour foci
directly—rather than conventional whole gland therapy which simply
seeks uniform coverage of the whole prostate gland. Interactive 2- and
3-D visualisations are core elements of the tool.

We conducted two studies, each involving semi-structured interviews
in conjunction with a treatment planning activity, with seven radiation
oncology professionals (eight, if we include our co-author who acted
as pilot). The first study (Sect. 6) explored current workflows and
the reasons why clinicians currently use manual rather than automatic
treatment planning for whole gland therapy. This study fed into the
development of a new theoretical framework for understanding the
high-level user goals and tasks in interactive optimisation that we call
the problem-solving loop (Sect. 7). It is analogous to the sense-making
loop commonly used to formalise the visual analytics process.

The second study (Sect. 8) introduced focal therapy and allowed the
professionals to compare manual, automatic, and interactive optimi-
sation for focal therapy planning. Our results suggest that interactive
optimisation did build trust in focal therapy and that professionals over-
whelmingly prefer to use interactive optimisation to create focal therapy
treatment plans.

2 BACKGROUND RESEARCH IN OPTIMISATION
Interactive optimisation has been used in a wide range of applica-
tions: facility layout [6, 11, 35], vehicle routing [4, 40, 41, 47], user
interface design problems [5, 49], animation design problems [12, 43],
radiotherapy treatment planning [45], vehicle scheduling and planning
problems [2, 10, 48], image segmentation [8, 39] and composition [1],
daylight performance problems [3], environmental management [29]
and many more.



Most of these interactive optimisation application papers are fo-
cussed on algorithm or system and tool designs. For instance, a recent
survey [31] focusses on the reasons and role of interactive visualisation,
solver techniques and user preference gathering but is almost com-
pletely silent about visualisation and interaction techniques, the user
experience or user studies evaluating systems. However, there are some
exceptions. An early review from Jones [26] looked at visualisation
usage in optimisation while Miettinen [32] surveyed visualisation used
in multi-criteria optimisation.

One area that has received attention is the use of visualisation when
debugging and profiling optimisation models. For instance, Goodwin
et al. [21] investigated requirements for visualisation in profiling of
search in constraint programming (a specific approach to optimisa-
tion), thus attempting to open up the ‘black box’ of the optimisation
search process. Closely related are interactive visualisation tools for
determining the best choice of parameters for image segmentation [46],
simulation-based design [15], animation [13], weather forecasting [19]
and sensitivity analysis for car engine design [7]. Sedlmair et al. [42]
provided a conceptual framework for visual parameter space analysis
for simulation and design.

A number of user studies have evaluated interactive optimisation
systems [4, 5, 12, 14, 18, 27, 35, 41, 43, 45]. In particular, Anderson et
al. [4] reported that better routes can be found by using the interactive
optimisation system HuGSS to solve a vehicle routing problem. Bailly
et al. [5] conducted a user study to compare the performance of man-
ual and interactive optimisation in menu design and found that using
interactive optimisation can reduce the editing effort to achieve equally
good menu designs. The study closest to ours is of an optimisation
system developed by Thieke et al. [45] that allows doctors to explore
the Pareto front for multi-criteria treatment plans. They concluded that
faster treatment planning is achieved.

However, virtually all user studies have evaluated interactive opti-
misation in terms of solution quality and time spent to find solutions
aspects: user satisfaction is not considered. An exception is a study
done by Patten and Ishii [35] evaluating the usability of their tangible
human-computer interface Pico to solve a cellular telephone tower
layout optimisation problem. An even bigger gap is that the possi-
ble effects of interaction on trust have, to the best of our knowledge,
never been explored in a user study for interactive optimisation. This
is in contrast to studies investigating user trust in recommendation
systems [17, 22], adaptive agent systems [20], information security
classification [36] and classification based on machine learning [38].

Another limitation of previous user studies is that very few use
experts from a particular problem domain. Exceptions are Butler et
al. [14] which asked professionals to develop flight-line maintenance
schedules and Thieke et al. [45] which used clinical planners to eval-
uate treatment plans for two clinical test cases: a paraspinal and a
prostate case. Also relevant to our application domain is Raidou et
al. [37] which proposed a visual tool for sensitivity analysis of tu-
mour control probability (TCP) models to compare different treatment
strategies for prostate cancer using radiotherapy. While we used a
TCP model in the second study our focus is on the use of interactive
optimisation to generate treatment plans for one particular treatment
strategy: low-dose-rate (LDR) brachytherapy. More loosely related are
Brecheisen et al. [9] which presented interactive visualisations for pa-
rameter sensitivity analysis in brain fibre tracking and Nunes et al. [34]
which presented an interactive tool to support image fusion of magnetic
resonance spectroscopy imaging (MRSI) with other medical images.

Compared to the past work, through exploration of interactive opti-
misation in the context of a concrete application (brachytherapy) we
propose a general model for interactive optimisation systems which
is analogous to the visual analytics sense-making loop. The studies
described in this paper are another significant contribution to the current
literature on interactive optimisation because of the use of experts and
because of the focus on trust and usability.

3 INTERACTIVE OPTIMISATION AND VISUAL ANALYTICS
Optimisation solves a real-world decision problem (real problem) by
building a mathematical model of the problem and using computational

techniques such as linear programming, simulated annealing or con-
straint programming to try and find the best (or at least a good) solution
to the model. The model has a set of decision variables for which
the optimisation technique will find values, an objective function for
measuring the quality of a solution, and a set of constraints that restrict
the values that the decision variables can take. Usually the model is
generic and problem data is needed to encode an actual instance of the
problem. For instance, in staff rostering the decision variables are the
names of the staff taking the various shifts, the objective function is to
reduce staff costs and satisfy staff preferences while constraints capture
work-force restrictions and skills required on each shift.

Improvements in optimisation solving technology and increased
computational power mean that optimisation is now routinely used to
solve a wide variety of decision problems in many different application
areas. The standard approach of the optimisation community has been
to build a fully automatic system in which the solver is a “black-box”
and the user simply provides the problem data and then waits for the
system to spit out a solution. However, for this approach to be prac-
tical it requires the model to adequately capture the actual real-world
problem and for the solver to be powerful enough to find a sufficiently
good solution in a reasonable time. For many, if not most, real-world
problems these are not reasonable assumptions. As a result there is now
a recognition by the optimisation community that in many applications
there is a need to directly engage the user in the optimisation process.
Such interactive optimisation (also known as semi-automatic optimisa-
tion or human-in-the-loop optimisation) has been used in practice for
many decades but has only recently been recognised as a topic worthy
of study in its own right.

A recent survey paper [31] clarifies the rationale for interactive
optimisation: “the main goal of interactive optimisation is to turn
efficient optimisation methods into effective decision tools.” They
identify the following reasons and roles for interactive optimisation:
Inherent limitations of mathematical models. A mathematical
model is almost always a partial approximation to the real problem. The
real problem may contain aspects that cannot easily be modelled math-
ematically [44], such as: multiple conflicting criteria whose complex
tradeoffs cannot be captured in an objective function; uncertainty or
probabilistic constraints; or constraints that model human preferences.
The mathematical model may also be simplified for tractability, for
instance by using linear approximations or a single weighted objective
function. Or it may just be too expensive or impractical to find the
necessary experts to properly understand and model the problem. In-
teraction allows the user to adjust the constraints or objective function
or to enrich the model by adding new constraints or objectives. A
particularly important case is for the user to guide how to trade-off
conflicting criteria in multi-objective optimisation.
Solver performance. The quality and efficiency of the solving process
are crucial to the use of optimisation tools. It is difficult for the design-
ers of the generic model to predict how efficiently the model will be
solved on real-world data and with incomplete heuristic methods, such
as simulated annealing. The solver may never explore that part of the
search space containing the best solution. Users can assist by providing
feasible starting configurations, guiding the search, or tuning solver
parameters for more efficient search.
Non-acceptance and misunderstanding of optimisation systems.
The opacity of the black-box approach to optimisation may lead users
to either lack trust or place too much trust in the quality of the solutions
produced by the system. Interaction allows the user to modify solutions
in order to better understand the quality of a solution as well as to
explore what-if scenarios allowing them to build an appropriate level
of trust in the system.

A key question is what are the appropriate visual representations
and interaction techniques to support interactive optimisation. As dis-
cussed in Sect. 2, this is a subject that has received little attention from
optimisation researchers. In contrast, the field of visual analytics (“the
science of analytical reasoning facilitated by interactive visual inter-
faces” [16]) focusses on the design and evaluation of interactive visual
interfaces and has many findings regarding how best to incorporate
the human analyst in the data sense making and knowledge discov-



ery process. We therefore believe there is considerable potential for
sharing and transferring knowledge from visual analytics to interactive
optimisation.

Both visual analytics and interactive optimisation aim to achieve
better decision making by bringing humans into the analytics-loop.
Visual analytics applications allow the analyst to interactively combine
automatic and visual analysis to gain knowledge from data [28]. These
are complementary. Automatic analysis allows analysts to fit mathe-
matical models built through data mining or machine learning while
visual analysis gives freedom to analysts to explore the data and model
through interactive visualisation. Interactive optimisation and visual
analytics share many similarities. In both disciplines the user may:
• interact with the system to bridge the gap between the inherent limits

of a mathematical model and the real world problem;
• guide the search, either for a solution or for the right model and

parameters;
• need interaction and visualisation to build their trust in the model or

solution;
• need to find patterns and to understand complex and large datasets

(in optimisation this is the solution space, fitness landscape or the
solver search space);

• need to communicate the result to managers, policy makers and
other stakeholders.

Thus, interactive optimisation can be seen as an application domain
for visual analytics. Conversely, model fitting and classification can
be regarded as a particular kind of optimisation problem and visual
analytics applications utilising machine learning or data mining may
therefore be regarded as a kind of interactive optimisation. We will now
explore the relationship between interactive optimisation and visual
analytics in more depth through an in-depth case-study.

4 APPLICATION CONTEXT
Our application context is the development of planning tools for the
treatment of prostate cancer using LDR brachytherapy in which ra-
dioactive sources are placed inside the patient’s body close to or in
tumours in order to control or kill the tumour cells. The radioactive
isotope is encased and sealed inside a tiny cylinder-shaped titanium
“seed”. Multiple seeds are connected by physical strand and assembled
into a needle. Using the needle, the surgeon implants seeds into the
patient’s prostate gland where they remain permanently, though the
radioactive strength decays exponentially over time. As shown in Fig. 1,
a template grid is used to guide needle placement.

Whole gland therapy is the current standard clinical treatment
method in LDR prostate brachytherapy. The aim is to give a good
dose coverage to the entire prostate by uniformly distributing radiation
to the prostate gland, while avoiding high doses to organs at risk (OAR).
In particular, such organs include the urethra, passing through the mid-
dle of the prostate, and the rectum, which runs below it (see Fig. 1).
Whole gland therapy has great success in prostate tumour control and
is supported by strong clinical evidence. However, whole gland therapy
has the danger of over-treating patients if the number of tumours in the
prostate is limited and the tumour size is relatively small.

For this reason, focal therapy has been proposed as an alternative
to whole gland therapy. Instead of delivering a high dose to the entire
gland, only those regions of the prostate with high likelihood of con-
taining tumour cells are targeted for high-dose radiation. The potential
benefit is a reduction of toxicity to other OAR especially the urethra
and rectum, while still maintaining effective control of the prostate
tumour cells. Approaches to focal therapy differ in the amount of radia-
tion applied to regions of the prostrate deemed to be low-risk. In the
‘focussed’ approach the entire prostate gland is irradiated by a small
but sufficient dose, while the tumour regions are irradiated with high
dose [30]. Our research is part of an on-going project investigating
the viability and effectiveness of focussed focal therapy. Our role is to
investigate how to best support radiation oncology professionals when
creating a treatment plan with this therapy.

Commercial treatment planning systems are used for treatment plan
creation for whole gland LDR brachytherapy. VariSeed (Varian Medical
Systems, Inc., Palo Alto, CA) is one of the most widely used. It provides

Fig. 1. Needle placement in LDR prostate brachytherapy. Note the
physical template grid used to guide needle placement.

manual planning of seed placement as well as a module for automatic
planning. The manual approach, often referred to as forward planning,
presents the treatment planners with an initial auto-seed-loading pattern
based on a simple template automatically generated from a pre-defined
planning protocol that specifies where seeds are placed on the grid
points and also defines forbidden areas for the seeds. The planning pro-
tocols often vary between clinical departments. The treatment planners
manually adjust the loaded template by adding extra seeds to increase
dosage coverage, or removing or moving seeds to avoid overdosing of
other sensitive structures. The automatic optimisation approach (also
named inverse planning) requires the treatment planner to set planning
criteria such as the dosage coverage and then automatically generates a
treatment plan. However, at least within Australia, the manual approach
is typically used for whole gland LDR brachytherapy planning. Auto-
matic optimisation is used for intra-operative LDR brachytherapy, i.e.,
the plan is re-optimised while the patient is undergoing the treatment
when the actual needle placement varies from the planned position.
Automatic optimisation is used because of the requirement to update
the plan in real-time making manual planning impractical.

Our approach to the development of treatment plans for focal therapy
is based on a new mathematical model of biological characteristics of
prostate tumour cells [23,25]. The model introduces TCP as a biological
planning objective that provides a relative measure of the likelihood of
disease control following radiation. The calculation of TCP takes into
account the radiation dose and the tumour cell density (TCD) within
the prostate volume as well as tumour characteristics such as tumour
aggressiveness and tumour hypoxia.

Because of the complex interaction between TCP and TCD, and the
lack of clinical expertise, manually creating focal therapy treatment
plans based on TCP had initially been regarded as impractical. As a
result, automatic optimisation software based on the TCP model has
recently been developed to produce focal treatment plans [24]. This
aims to reach a desired TCP level while providing a safe level of dose
to OAR. The optimisation software was effective, producing plans in a
few minutes. However, due to the limitations of unsupervised optimisa-
tion identified in Sect. 3 (i.e., limitations of the underlying optimisation
model, solving performance and lack of trust in automatically gener-
ated solutions) it was clear that an interactive-optimisation approach
potentially offered several benefits over a black-box approach:
• Treatment planning requires multi-criteria optimisation as high TCP
conflicts with low dosage to OAR. Human radiation oncology profes-
sionals are better able to manage this tradeoff by taking into account
additional knowledge, e.g. patient age or previous medical history.
• The model is not guaranteed to find an optimal solution as it uses an



Fig. 2. A sample treatment plan shown in presentation mode after Study
1 & 2 improvements. The white text is not part of the interface but added
for explanation purpose.

incomplete local search to find a solution above the desired TCP value.
Humans can help guide the search to find better solutions.
• Finally, when the consequences of a poor optimisation can be extreme,
clinicians are rightfully cautious in trusting the results of automatic
optimisation. This is compounded by the fact that focal therapy and
TCP are unfamiliar. Interaction potentially allows clinicians to build a
better understanding of TCP and confidence in the underlying biological
model as well as the underlying optimisation.

5 PROTOTYPE INTERACTIVE OPTIMISATION TOOL
FOR PROSTATE BRACHYTHERAPY

In order to evaluate whether interactive optimisation is superior to
manual or fully-automatic optimisation for TCP-based focal prostate
brachytherapy, we developed a prototype interactive optimisation tool.
The tool builds upon a local-search-based optimisation solver previ-
ously developed to test a fully-automatic (inverse planning) approach to
focal therapy using TCP. The user interface for this new interactive tool,
and the required interfacing to the algorithm, took more than a year to
develop using a participative design process with a medical physicist
and bioengineer.

The tool allows the user to generate and rank a set of candidate
solutions (the solution gallery). The tool has three modes: presentation
mode which allows the user to visualise a single candidate solution in
the gallery; compare mode which allows the user to compare candidate
solutions from the gallery; and plan mode in which the user can guide
the solver to generate a new solution or improve an existing solution.
Presentation Mode (Fig. 2): It took a number of attempts to produce
a satisfactory visualisation of a single solution. The initial visualisation
used two view ports: one for the 3D prostate model and the other for
axial views presented in small multiples. After discussion with our
collaborating medical physicist and bioengineer, sagittal and coronal
views (longitudinal and cross section views) of the prostate were added
to give a complete overview of a treatment plan. The eventual solution
was to provide an anatomical plane of the prostate (the axial, sagittal
and coronal views) and the 3D model in four linked view ports on a
single pane. Grids were added in all anatomical views to show the
physical grids (see Fig. 1) used for treatment delivery. As the axial view
is the primary view used by radiation oncology professionals when
planning treatments, we also included a complete gallery of axial view
slices on the left.

Contours are provided for the prostate, urethra, rectum and the plan-
ning target volume (PTV) defining the treatment margin around the
prostate. The user can choose to overlay this with TCD, TCP or phys-
ical dose. First we used pixel and voxel representations of dose in 2-
and 3-D views to show the different levels. After user feedback, we
settled on an isodose contour representation (implemented using march-
ing squares and marching cubes), similar to that used in commercial
prostate brachytherapy planning tools. We also provided histograms on
the right to summarise the dosage and planning objectives.

Fig. 3. The compare mode after Study 1 & 2 improvements. Top two
view ports show the axial view slices of the two plans to be compared.
Bottom two view ports show the difference map in 2D and 3D.

Fig. 4. The prototype interactive optimisation tool after Study 1 & 2
improvements. The prostate gland is divided by a grid with colour coding
representing the TCD in each grid cell. A Human Dummy is used to
indicate the patient‘s orientation.

Compare Mode (Fig. 3): Being able to review and verify a single
treatment plan is essential. However, we felt that it would also be useful
to be able to compare and rank candidate solutions. This is an activity
that is typically not well supported in optimisation tools. Our tool
provides a novel comparison mode in which the user can scroll through
synchronised axial view slices of two solutions, with a third view port
showing the difference between the two slices and a fourth showing a
3D visualisation of the difference. Like the presentation mode, the user
can choose to show TCD, TCP, physical dose or a combination.

Initially we designed two view ports: a solution gallery for brows-
ing all candidate plans and below a view of two candidate plans and
their absolute dose differences. Our collaborators were very excited
about this. However switching between slices caused significant delay
because of the colour-washed difference representation. We replaced it
with pixels to reduce the delay and keep the whole interface responsive.
Later we changed the layout to more closely resemble the presentation
mode, providing a more uniform interface and more flexible compari-
son with sagittal, coronal and 3D views as well as the difference in axial
views. We used a point cloud for the 3D visualisation of difference.
Planning Mode (Fig. 4): The ability to generate new solutions or
improve an existing solution must be supported by any true interac-
tive optimisation tool. In our tool this is supported by the planning
mode. Fig. 4 shows the planning mode before any plans have been
created. In the figure, the user is viewing the TCD. They can use the
pane on the right to generate a new solution. They can set values for



the minimum desired TCP and the maximum allowed dose to both the
urethra and the rectum, defined as three constraints (‘prescribed dose’
is declared as 145Gy, Gray (Gy) being the unit used to measure the
total amount of radiation a patient is exposed to):

1. UV125: Volume of the urethra receiving 125% of the prescribed
dose (145Gy×125% = 181.25Gy);

2. UV150: As above, but 150% of the prescribed dose (145Gy×
150% = 217.5Gy);

3. RV100: Volume of the rectum receiving the prescribed dose
(145Gy).

By varying these parameters they can guide the solver by forcing
it to generate solutions that have different tradeoffs between higher
TCP and less irradiation to OAR. When the solution is generated a
visualisation shows the solver’s progress: this provides an indication of
how difficult it is to find a solution meeting the specified criteria.

The planning mode also allows users to improve a solution by ad-
justing/suggesting changes to the placement of seeds and needles in
the solution. Our tool provides both manual and semi-automatic adjust-
ment of solutions as we were interested in finding out which techniques
would be preferred by radiotherapy team members. The following
adjustments are possible:
Add: Users can add a new seed to a grid point in the current slice. If
there is no needle at the target grid point a new needle is created.
Remove: Users can also remove seeds. If the seed to be removed is the
last in the needle, removing the seed also removes the needle.
Move: Users can select and move a needle which also moves the seeds
on the needle.
Lock & Re-optimise: Users can lock the position of seeds and needles
whose position they are happy with. They can then run the re-optimise
which starts from the current solution and tries to improve it by moving
the unlocked seeds. In combination with manual placement of seeds
this is a powerful way of steering/guiding the solver to generate better
solutions. By locking the position of some seeds the solver search space
is reduced, speeding up the search for better solutions.

After users perform any of these operations, the treatment plan
is refreshed and either physical dose or TCP contours are updated
immediately to give users instant feedback.

6 STUDY 1: WHOLE GLAND THERAPY

We conducted two exploratory, formative user studies with radiotherapy
team members to evaluate and inform the design of our prototype tool.
We had originally planned a single study but based on feedback from
our medical collaborators we decided to break the study into two parts
because participants would have been overwhelmed by the need to
understand focal therapy (recall from Sect. 4 that the current standard
whole gland therapy), TCP (proposed in [23] and not yet part of clinical
procedure) as well as our novel and therefore unfamiliar interactive
optimisation tool. The first study was designed to present the tool in the
context of treatment planning for whole gland therapy, a process they
were extremely familiar with. Based on feedback from this study we
could refine the design of the tool before conducting the second study
investigating use of the tool for focal therapy planning.

This meant that we needed to modify the tool for the first study as
traditional planning for whole gland therapy does not use TCP or TCD,
only physical dose. The underlying solver was modified to optimise
dose coverage rather than TCP and the interface of the tool was also
appropriately modified to consider only physical dose.

Study 1 was designed to achieve three main aims:
1. Build a better understanding of the workflow of treatment planning;
2. Understand why radiation oncology professionals use a manual

approach to create treatment plans rather than optimisation in whole
gland therapy;

3. Evaluate and improve the prototype interactive optimisation tool, in
particular the visualisations and interaction design.

6.1 Study Design

Apparatus & Materials: The modified interactive optimisation tool
was used throughout the study. Two whole gland treatment plans were

prepared for the study. The first was produced using automatic opti-
misation while the second was a plan created manually by a radiation
therapist (not part of the study).
Participants: Seven participants were recruited for the study: 3 ra-
diation therapists (RT), 2 medical physicists (MP) and 2 radiation
oncologists (RO) after we gave an introductory presentation about this
project at the Alfred hospital. All participants completed the study
except for one RO who did not do the plan improvement (due to time
constraints). An initial pilot was conducted with a radiation oncologist
who was a member of the research team. We have included the results
from the pilot study (indicated as such) where relevant.
Procedure: Interviews were conducted at the participants’ workplace.
The study took about one hour on average. It had four parts:
1. Introduction Activity: The participants were asked about their experi-
ence in LDR brachytherapy, their current roles and responsibility in the
brachytherapy team and the overall workflow, as well as their opinion
on manually produced and optimisation generated treatment plans.
2. Training Activity: Next, our prototype tool was presented to partici-
pants. The operations of the tool were explained and demonstrated and
participants were encouraged to ask questions and play with the tool
until they were familiar with its operations.
3. Planning Activity: In the main part of the study participants were
asked to evaluate two different types of treatment plan and to “think
aloud” to explain the reasons and the evaluation criteria. They were
not told how the plans had been produced. The two different types of
treatment plan were:

(a) A manually-produced plan by another radiation oncology profes-
sional using their usual procedure;

(b) An automatically-produced plan (without interaction) using our
solver software to optimise for dosage.

Then the participants were asked to improve the automatically pro-
duced treatment plan by using the operations introduced in the Training
Activity. As before, they were asked to evaluate it and to give their
reasons and evaluation criteria. The participants were also asked to
give a rank to each treatment plan after evaluation.
4. Recap Activity: Finally, the participants were asked open-ended
questions about the advantages and disadvantages of both manual and
optimisation approaches to producing a treatment plan and to provide
general comments about the prototype tool and suggestions for im-
provement. They were specifically asked to provide feedback on the
comparison mode and the difference map visualisation as this was the
most novel aspect of the tool.

6.2 Results & Discussion
Aim 1 (Understanding the treatment planning workflow) was investi-
gated by asking participants to describe their roles and responsibilities
in radiation treatment planning and to explain the process in the Intro-
duction Activity.

The first step is that an RO contours the prostate gland and its
surrounding organs and establishes the treatment margin based on the
patient’s ultrasound images. This is the ‘Volume Study’ process. The
initial plan is usually created by an RT and reviewed by an MP before
sending it to RO for the final review. However, to balance workload,
sometimes an MP will create the initial plan that is reviewed by an RT
before the final review. Both MPs mentioned they were in charge of
the treatment plan quality assurance process and indicated that it was
common to ask for revision or for another plan to be produced. On
occasion more than one plan is produced when it is unclear how best
to trade-off dose coverage and protecting OAR. What is striking about
the workflow is the importance placed on checking and validation of
the plan. This requires significant collaboration between the clinical
professionals. Fig. 5 summarises the treatment planning workflow and
the different roles.

Aim 2 (Understanding why radiation oncology professionals use
a manual approach to create treatment plans rather than optimisation
in whole gland therapy) was investigated through questions in the
Introduction and Recap Activities as well as the “think aloud” ranking
and planning in the Planning Activity.

Our study revealed a number of reasons why manually produced



Fig. 5. The workflow to create and approve a treatment plan.

plans were preferred. One unexpected reason was a desire for plans to
be symmetric. During the pilot the RO strongly criticised the automati-
cally produced plan for not placing seeds and needles symmetrically on
either side of the prostate gland. This was intriguing so we slightly mod-
ified the study procedure to further investigate symmetry. Subsequent
participants where asked ‘Do you like to keep the plan symmetric? If
so, why?’ and we modified the optimisation solver to produce more
symmetric plans. For the last 4 participants we added an additional
automatically produced plan that was more symmetric to the study
and asked the participants to rank four plans (the original asymmetric
automatically generated plan, the more symmetric automatically gener-
ated plan, the manually modified automatically generated plan and the
manually produced plan).

All participants agreed on the importance of symmetry and this was
reflected in the rankings with the manual plan (which was symmetric)
and the symmetric automatic plan receiving higher ranks by most
users. The importance of symmetry was also reflected in participants’
improvements to the optimisation plan with some participants replacing
existing seeds and needles with new ones placed evenly on both sides
of the prostate.

A number of reasons were given for preferring symmetric plans.
Aesthetic preference was one. Symmetry of the prostate was another:
“if it [the prostate] is symmetrical then it makes sense to have sort of the
same kind of needle placement on both sides of the prostate.” A third
reason was treatment speed and simplicity. It was felt that surgeons
liked symmetric plans because they were easier to remember, meaning
that treatment could be faster and less error prone. Symmetry was also
said to make the plan more robust. Finally, we suspect that symmetric
plans make it easier for planners to understand the plan and build a
mental model from the slices. It also reduces the search space when
creating a plan manually.

In addition to lack of symmetry, fully automatic generation of treat-
ment plans was criticised for a number of other reasons. One reason
reflects the multi-criteria objectives in whole gland therapy planning.
There is a conflict between delivering sufficient dose coverage to the
prostate gland and reducing the dose toxicity to OAR. Participants felt
this balance required human judgment and decision making. Another
reason is that different clinical centres can differ in the planning pro-
tocol for dose constraints as well as allowed placement of seeds and
needles. This makes it difficult for automatic optimisation to produce
acceptable plans for all clinical centres. Yet another reason was that the
underlying mathematical model restricts seed placement to grid points.
While needles are inserted through a grid template, in practice sur-
geons may insert them at an angle so as to steer seeds away from OAR
or to take into account physical constraints such as the pelvis. Thus
seeds may actually be placed off the grid. Other comments reflected
that participants were simply comfortable with the current processes.
“[Forward planning (manual planning) is] the robust way of planning.
[We’ve] got years of results behind it.”

The responses clearly show that the current preference for manual
planning over automatic planning in whole gland therapy is because
of the mismatch between the mathematical optimisation model used in
automatic planning and the actual real-world problem. This provides

strong support for using interactive optimisation rather than automatic
optimisation in focal therapy planning.

Aim 3 (Evaluating and improving the prototype interactive optimi-
sation tool, in particular the visualisations and interaction design) was
achieved by asking questions in the Recap Activity and from com-
ments made by participants during planning. Changes were made to
visualisations, interaction and to the underlying optimisation model.

We improved the visualisations as the study progressed in light of
participants’ feedback. The first change was to use the clinic-specific
colour scheme for treatment planning. Next, we rearranged the four
view ports in the presentation mode so as to accord with the layout pro-
vided in Variseed (the commercial prostate brachytherapy planning tool
used in the clinic). We also adjusted the grid labelling and alignments
of images in each view port to better fit with the current treatment
planning workflow as well as to synchronise with the alignment of the
physical template for treatment delivery.

One of the most novel aspects of our prototype tool is the compare
mode. Generally participants were positive: one participant said “I
think the comparison [where the difference map is used] could be really
useful actually. That’s one thing we are missing in VariSeed.” However
some participants found it initially confusing. “[It’s] hard because [I
have] never seen this before.” Another commented “I don’t think it’s
hard to understand. I think it takes a little bit of getting used to looking
at it.”

In response to user feedback we: moved the axial view slices of
the two plans to be side-by-side in the top two view ports for easier
comparison; replaced the pixel-based display of differences with isoline
contours because of participant familiarity with isodose line usage in
treatment planning and, for consistency, replaced the point cloud 3D
difference visualisation with isosurface contours. We also reduced the
use of colour and emphasised large differences in the 3D difference
model. However, while participants liked the 2D difference view they
did not make much use of the 3D difference model. In general we
found they relied on the 2D views much more than 3D models.

Responsiveness was an issue raised by several participants. We
removed the sliders along each anatomical view and replaced with
scrolling and key stroke to support faster browsing of anatomical slices
and improved responsiveness during planning by reducing refresh fre-
quency for the axial view slices gallery, as this was viewed less fre-
quently.

Finally, as discussed previously, we modified the underlying con-
straint model to produce more symmetric plans and also allowed the
user to manually steer a needle away from a grid point to allow fine-
tuning, better reflecting actual practice.

7 THE PROBLEM SOLVING LOOP

Another way to understand the differences and similarities between
visual analytics and interactive optimisation is to compare the high-
level processes and aims of the user in these two endeavours. Informed
by the first study we can now attempt this.

Sense-making is a widely used theoretical framework for under-
standing visual analytics tasks. It identifies the following steps in the
analytical reasoning process:
• Information gathering (or foraging) to find relevant information
• Reformulation of the data to aid analysis
• Development of insight by interactive exploration of the data
• Formalisation of this insight by fitting schema or models to the data
• Generating hypotheses based on these schema or models
• Presentation of the findings

For instance, Pirolli and Card’s sense-making loop (Fig. 6) captures
the processes employed by intelligence analysts when making sense
of information. An important observation is that at each step of the
process the analyst may revisit earlier steps in light of new insights. To
the best of our knowledge there is no analogue of the sense-making
loop for interactive optimisation.

The problem-solving loop shown in Fig. 7 is our attempt to provide
a similar theoretical framework for understanding the high-level user
goals and processes in interactive optimisation. There are two main



Fig. 6. Pirolli and Card’s sense-making loop.

Fig. 7. The problem-solving loop.

loops: the model-defining loop captures the development of the generic
mathematical optimisation model, typically by an expert in optimisa-
tion, while the second loop, the optimisation loop captures the use of
the model by the end-user, typically the domain expert, to support their
decision making. Our focus in this paper is on the optimisation loop. It
has the following steps:
• Solving the generic model with the problem specific data to generate

a pool of candidate solutions
• Evaluation and comparison of these candidates to give a ranked list

of solutions
• Decide upon a recommendation which may be a single solution or

solutions with an analysis of the tradeoffs between them
• Review by relevant stakeholders and decision makers to determine

the final decision
Like the sense-making loop the problem-solving loop is interactive and
the analyst will frequently return to earlier steps. For instance, after
evaluating and comparing the solutions in order to rank the candidate
solutions she may decide that none of them are good enough and try to
generate better candidate solutions, either by refining the general model
by guiding the solver, or by improving an existing solution manually by
changing the values assigned to some of the decision variables. Thus,
steering of the needle away from a grid point is an example of manual
improvement.

Another important loop results from critical feedback from stake-
holders and the final decision makers on the recommendations which
may lead to reevaluation of the ranked list. Interactive optimisation
is regularly employed to solve problems where the wrong decision
can lead to significant loss or even death. As we have seen in the first
study robust review is an important part of the problem solving process
in such high-stake applications and will often lead to refinement or
even rejection of the initial recommendation. This differs from many
visual analytics applications in which findings of the analyst tend to
be presented as a fait accompli rather than being the subject of robust
collaborative review.

Examination of the optimisation loop and of the prototype tool
developed for our case study clarifies the tasks for which interactive
visualisation may be useful:
• Evaluate: Showing a single solution and its associated constraints

and objective values in order to understand and evaluate it.
• Compare: Comparing multiple candidate solutions to rank them and

to better understand the tradeoffs between them (this is especially
important in multi-criteria optimisation).

• Improve: Manually manipulating a solution to improve it.
• Guide: Guiding the optimisation solver to search for new solutions

in “interesting” regions of the search space of the problem instance.
• Recommend: Presenting recommended solutions including alterna-

tives to decision makers and stakeholders.
There are a number of different kinds of multidimensional data that
may need to be visualised. The first is a single solution and its “fitness”.
The second is the solution space, the set of allowed values for the
decision variables. The third is the fitness landscape: the set of possible
values for the objective criteria while a fourth is the search space being
explored by the solver.

8 STUDY 2: FOCAL THERAPY
In our second study we investigated the use of interactive optimisation
for focal therapy. Our aims were fourfold:
1. Observe participants’ exploration of focal therapy planning;
2. Determine the participants’ preferred method for creating treatment

plans for focal therapy (manual, fully-automatic optimisation or
interactive optimisation) and the reasons for their preference;

3. Investigate whether experience with an interactive optimisation tool
will increase participant trust in focal therapy and in optimisation-
based treatment planning for focal therapy;

4. Obtain feedback on the design of the prototype tool.

8.1 Study Design
Apparatus & Materials: We used the interactive optimisation proto-
type tool for this study after we rolled back the changes required to
support whole gland rather than focal therapy and also integrated the
improvements from the first study. We used the tool to prepare two
automatically generated focal plans with different TCP values: F2:
with TCP = 0.87 and F4: with TCP = 0.96.
Participants: Participants were recruited at a second presentation
given to the brachytherapy team at the Alfred. This reported the find-
ings from the first study, introduced focal therapy and explained the
purpose of the second study. Participants from the first study were
again asked to participate to ensure they were familiar with the tool
and the project methodology and aims. One could not participate but
two new clinical professionals were recruited and were provided with
additional instruction in the tool (to compensate for their lack of expe-
rience of Study 1). This gave a total of 7 participants (one RO, three
MPs and three RTs). As in the first study, because of the low number
of participants we have also included the results from the pilot study
with a member of our research team (an experienced RO).
Procedure: Our second study followed the same structure as the first:
1. Introduction Activity: We asked participants questions about their
preferences in treatment planning methods (whole gland, focal) for
prostate brachytherapy, and preference and trust in methods (manual,
automatic, interactive) for creating a focal plan.
2. Training Activity: We presented our prototype tool and explained its
operations. Participants were asked to briefly evaluate both TCD and



Fig. 8. The relative ranks of all four focal plans and their associated TCP
scores and relative TCP ranks.

TCP visualisations and provide comments.
3. Planning Activity: The main part of the study was to evaluate
four focal treatment plans (one produced manually (F1), two produced
fully automatically (F2 and F4) and one produced using interactive
optimisation (F3)):

(a) Participants were asked to manually create a focal plan F1 with
the tool and then score it. They were provided with the choice
of two auto-seed-loading templates as the starting point, so as to
reduce the time required for the study and to mirror the manual
planning approach for the whole gland therapy approach they
were familiar with.

(b) Next, focal plan F2 was presented. Participants were asked to
evaluate and then score it.

(c) Then participants were asked to improve focal plan F2 using the
tool and score the resulting focal plan F3.

(d) The final focal plan F4 was presented and evaluated and scored
by participants.

They were then asked to rank the four focal plans.
4. Recap Activity: We repeated the questions about participants’ prefer-
ences of both treatment methods and approaches to create a focal plan.
Suggestions for improving the prototype tool were solicited.

8.2 Results & Discussion
One participate did not wish to manually create or improve a focal plan
because this participant thought it was outside their area of expertise.
As a result, only focal plans F2 and F4 were included for this particular
participant. We included the participant’s other responses.

Aim 1 (Observation of participants’ exploration of focal therapy
planning) was based on the Planning Activity. To this end we asked
participants to “think aloud” as they created a focal plan.

We observed they used different planning strategies. However all
participants started with dose coverage of the prostate gland. Because
of the unfamiliarity of focal therapy and TCP many participants were
not sure about what a clinically acceptable focal plan should look like
as they have never done any focal treatment before. They were unsure
about the right TCP threshold and the interpretation of TCP contours.

One participant finished planning without using either TCP or TCD
visualisations at all because of unfamiliarity. Another participant re-
fined the focal plan by using the TCP contours “as a second assess-
ment”, whereas the other three radiotherapy team members fine-tuned
plans based on the extra tumour information provided from TCD vi-
sualisations without looking at TCP contours at all. The remaining
two participants adjusted their focal plans according to the TCD visu-
alisation and finally double checked and refined plans by using TCP

Fig. 9. Participant preferences and level of trust in different methods
for creating a focal treatment plan including Manual, Fully automatic
optimisation, and Interactive optimisation. They were asked to rank the
methods before and after experience with the tool.

contours. Five of seven utilised the TCD visualisation to further adjust
the seeds’ and needles’ positions to give a better coverage around the
high tumour-risk areas. Most participants said the TCD visualisation
was useful and that it did affect the way they do treatment planning, for
example “Having contours showing your [tumour] control probability
is really good from a planning point of view.” and “I liked it (TCD visu-
alisation).” However, participants were curious and somewhat sceptical
about the reliability of the data underlying the TCD calculation, for
instance: “I definitely think it (TCD visualisation) will be useful. If this
information (TCD) is reliable, that will guide the treatment.”

Participant ranking of the focal plans (see Fig. 8) was difficult to
interpret. Focal plans F1, F3 and F4 received roughly equal ranks
which indicated that focal plans produced by manual, fully automatic
optimisation (with high TCP setting) and interactive optimisation are
acceptable. However, the automatically produced plan with low TCP
was not liked. It is also clear that overall TCP score is not the only
quality that participants were using to evaluate the plans. Other fac-
tors, such as dose coverage, needle positions and patterns, were also
important and considered in the evaluation. This provides support for
interactive optimisation rather than automatic optimisation. One partic-
ipant commented “The optimisation does not take a lot of the clinical
information you have and there’s still some kind of knowledge that we
have but the machine does not.”

To address Aim 2 (User preferences for creating treatment plans for
focal therapy) we asked participants to rank the methods (manual, fully
automatic optimisation, interactive optimisation) in order of preference
from most preferred (rank 1) to least preferred (rank 3) for creation of
a focal therapy treatment plan and in terms of trust. They were asked at
the beginning and the end of the interview so that we could see if their
experience with the tool changed their response. The results are shown
in Fig. 9.

Most participants (6 of 8) preferred interactive optimisation from
the beginning to the end. Two changed their preferences. One changed
from interactive optimisation to manual because the participant was
not happy with the focal plan produced from optimisation (poor dose
coverage and needle loading pattern, lack of symmetry) and felt that
fine-tuning an optimisation produced plan cannot completely fix these
problems or would take too long to do so. The other one preferred
manual at the beginning but interactive optimisation in the end. After
trying out the prototype tool they thought interactive optimisation has
more potential in treatment planning because of the speed advantage
from optimisation and the flexibility to make adjustment with interac-
tions. The responses strongly support that interactive optimisation is
the preferred method for focal therapy planning.

Aim 3 was to evaluate the effect of interactive optimisation on trust
in planning method and treatment method. In the case of optimisation-



Fig. 10. Participant preferences for treatment methods in prostate
brachytherapy, before and after experience with the tool.

based treatment planning half of the participants trusted interactive
optimisation the most from the start to the end. There were 3 partic-
ipants who did not trust any of the methods before trying and seeing
each themselves. These cells were kept empty in the trust preference
table (see Fig. 9). All 3 of them trusted manual planning the most at
the end of the interview. Two of them were very sceptical about focal
therapy during interviews. It’s perhaps not surprising that they trusted
the manual approach more in the end because they had a strong belief
in whole gland therapy and manual treatment planning approach is
the standard in whole gland therapy. One participant changed their
mind from equally trusting both manual and interactive optimisation to
trusting manual more than interactive optimisation. The main reason
for this change was concern about prostate dose coverage and the belief
that the coverage from both optimisation produced focal plans was not
satisfying while using the manual approach could give better coverage
to the prostate gland.

Overall, by the end of the study half of the participants trusted the
manual approach and the other half trusted the interactive optimisation
approach the most. What is clear is that the fully automatic optimisation
approach is the least trusted, all 8 participants ranking it last. One
stated “Optimisation is like a black-box and I don’t trust any black-box.”
Others also pointed out the importance of manual adjustment. We also
heard many times that clinicians will very rarely accept a treatment
plan from optimisation without any changes and more often than not
they would like to make some manual adjustment to the plan.

In Study 1, experience with the tool for whole gland planning did
not appear to increase or decrease participants’ level of trust in inter-
active optimisation. However, it is a different story for focal therapy
(see Fig. 10). Participants were asked ‘If both focal brachytherapy and
whole gland brachytherapy were available which would you prefer to
use? Why?’ at the very start and the very end of the interview. At the
start of the study, 5 of 8 participants preferred whole gland therapy,
another two preferred the combination of whole gland and focal therapy
and only one preferred focal therapy. By the end of the study, 3 of
the 5 who preferred whole gland therapy changed their minds: one
preferred focal therapy and the other preferred the combination. The
participants who preferred either the combination or focal therapy did
not change their answers. One participant who changed their prefer-
ence from whole gland therapy into focal therapy stated after using the
tool that providing extra information about prostate tumour cells from
TCD visualisation was really useful and she had become used to seeing
the TCP contours. This is a strong indication that experience with
the interactive planning tool and the planning exercises did increase
participants’ trust in focal therapy.

Aim 4 (Feedback on the design of the prototype interactive optimi-
sation tool) was addressed in the Recap Activity and by observations
of tool use in the Planning Activity.

There were few suggestions, suggesting they were now comfortable
with the design of the tool and visualisations. Some participants sug-
gested overlaying the TCP contours with the TCD visualisation, and
the isodose contours with the TCD visualisation in order to better sup-
port the visual representation of a focal plan. We made the suggested
changes and used them in the subsequent studies. When modifying
plans they used Add (a seed), Remove (a seed) and Steer (a needle)
but did not use Lock & Re-optimise. When queried about Lock &
Re-optimise most responded it would be useful and some of them gave
situations where it could be used such as in early stage of planning after
loading seeds from templates to adjust the plan followed by manual
fine-tuning using the other operations afterwards.

9 CONCLUSIONS

We have explored the relationship between visual analytics and inter-
active optimisation and developed a new theoretical framework for
understanding the high-level user goals and tasks in interactive op-
timisation called the problem-solving loop that is modelled on the
sense-making loop framework widely used in visual analytics.

Our other contribution was two studies providing an in-depth analy-
sis of the potential use of interactive optimisation for treatment planning
in whole-gland and focal LDR prostate brachytherapy. Our first study
fed into the design of the problem-solving loop and also allowed us
to refine the design of a prototype interactive optimisation tool for
treatment planning.

The second study suggested that interactive optimisation did build
trust in focal therapy and found that radiation oncology professionals
overwhelmingly prefer to use interactive optimisation to create focal
therapy treatment plans. These two studies, as well as the design and
implementation of the prototype interactive optimisation tool we used
in the studies, add significantly to our body of knowledge about the
potential use of interactive optimisation in real-world applications and
how to integrate interactive visualisation into such tools.

A limitation of the current research is that it is restricted to a sin-
gle use-case of a visual analytics approach to interactive optimisation
design and evaluation. This was unavoidable given that it was a deep
study representing two years of close collaboration with domain experts.
Further research is needed to verify applicability of the problem-solving
loop in other application domains.

Another limitation of the study was that our prototype tool was not
used by domain experts in actual clinical practice. Again this was
unavoidable given that the tool and the focal treatment have not been
clinically tested and health professionals are understandably conser-
vative in their adoption of new tools and techniques. Future work
will be to continue development of the tool with the aim to undertake
clinical testing. We believe it is in precisely such high-consequence
domains that visual analytics based interactive optimisation can have
a significant impact by keeping the human experts intimately “in the
loop”.

Our research is only a first step in studying interactive optimisation
from a visual analytics perspective. We believe this is a new and fruitful
research direction that will allow interactive optimisation applications
to benefit from visual analytics research into interactive visualisation
and analytics and provide visual analytics with a new and important
application field. This is an opportunity for visual analytics to broaden
its scope and application domain to other aspects of decision making.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Data 61, CSIRO is funded by the Australian Government through the
Department of Communications and the Australian Research Council
through the ICT Centre for Excellence Program. We would like to
thank Chris Mears for the optimisation solver development and Hayley
Reynolds for initial communication in the design phase. We thank
the brachytherapy team at Alfred Health Radiation Oncology for their
participations in both studies.



REFERENCES

[1] A. Agarwala, M. Dontcheva, M. Agrawala, S. Drucker, A. Colburn, B. Cur-
less, D. Salesin, and M. Cohen. Interactive digital photomontage. In ACM
Transactions on Graphics (TOG), vol. 23, pp. 294–302. ACM, 2004.

[2] M. Ai-Chang, J. Bresina, L. Charest, A. Chase, J. C.-J. Hsu, A. Jonsson,
B. Kanefsky, P. Morris, K. Rajan, J. Yglesias, et al. Mapgen: Mixed-
initiative planning and scheduling for the Mars Exploration Rover mission.
Intelligent Systems, IEEE, 19(1):8–12, 2004.

[3] M. Andersen, S. Kleindienst, L. Yi, J. Lee, M. Bodart, and B. Cutler.
An intuitive daylighting performance analysis and optimization approach.
Building Research & Information, 36(6):593–607, 2008.

[4] D. Anderson, E. Anderson, N. Lesh, J. Marks, B. Mirtich, D. Ratajczak,
and K. Ryall. Human-guided simple search. In AAAI/IAAI, pp. 209–216,
2000.

[5] G. Bailly, A. Oulasvirta, T. Kötzing, and S. Hoppe. Menuoptimizer:
Interactive optimization of menu systems. In Proceedings of the 26th
annual ACM symposium on User interface software and technology, pp.
331–342. ACM, 2013.

[6] J. Bénabes, F. Bennis, E. Poirson, and Y. Ravaut. Interactive optimization
strategies for layout problems. International Journal on Interactive Design
and Manufacturing (IJIDeM), 4(3):181–190, 2010.

[7] W. Berger, H. Piringer, P. Filzmoser, and E. Gröller. Uncertainty-aware
exploration of continuous parameter spaces using multivariate prediction.
In Computer Graphics Forum, vol. 30, pp. 911–920. Wiley Online Library,
2011.

[8] Y. Boykov and M.-P. Jolly. Interactive organ segmentation using graph
cuts. In Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention,
pp. 276–286. Springer, 2000.

[9] R. Brecheisen, B. Platel, A. Vilanova, and B. ter Haar Romeny. Parameter
sensitivity visualization for DTI fiber tracking. IEEE Transactions on
Visualization and Computer Graphics, 15(6):1441–1448, 2009.

[10] J. L. Bresina, A. K. Jónsson, P. H. Morris, and K. Rajan. Activity planning
for the Mars Exploration Rovers. In ICAPS, pp. 40–49, 2005.

[11] A. M. Brintrup, J. Ramsden, and A. Tiwari. An interactive genetic
algorithm-based framework for handling qualitative criteria in design
optimization. Computers in Industry, 58(3):279–291, 2007.

[12] E. Brochu, T. Brochu, and N. de Freitas. A Bayesian interactive optimiza-
tion approach to procedural animation design. In Proceedings of the 2010
ACM SIGGRAPH/Eurographics Symposium on Computer Animation, pp.
103–112. Eurographics Association, 2010.

[13] S. Bruckner and T. Moller. Result-driven exploration of simulation param-
eter spaces for visual effects design. IEEE Transactions on Visualization
and Computer Graphics, 16(6):1468–1476, 2010.

[14] K. A. Butler, J. Zhang, C. Esposito, A. Bahrami, R. Hebron, and D. Kieras.
Work-centered design: A case study of a mixed-initiative scheduler. In
Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing
systems, pp. 747–756. ACM, 2007.

[15] D. Coffey, C.-L. Lin, A. G. Erdman, and D. F. Keefe. Design by drag-
ging: An interface for creative forward and inverse design with simulation
ensembles. IEEE transactions on visualization and computer graphics,
19(12):2783–2791, 2013.

[16] K. A. Cook and J. J. Thomas. Illuminating the Path: The Research and
Development Agenda for Visual Analytics. IEEE Computer Society, Los
Alamitos, CA, 2005.

[17] D. Cosley, S. K. Lam, I. Albert, J. A. Konstan, and J. Riedl. Is seeing
believing? How recommender system interfaces affect users’ opinions. In
Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing
systems, pp. 585–592. ACM, 2003.

[18] M. L. Cummings, J. J. Marquez, and N. Roy. Human-automated path
planning optimization and decision support. International Journal of
Human-Computer Studies, 70(2):116–128, 2012.

[19] A. Diehl, L. Pelorosso, C. Delrieux, C. Saulo, J. Ruiz, M. E. Gröller, and
S. Bruckner. Visual analysis of spatio-temporal data: Applications in
weather forecasting. In Computer Graphics Forum, vol. 34, pp. 381–390.
Wiley Online Library, 2015.

[20] A. Glass, D. L. McGuinness, and M. Wolverton. Toward establishing trust
in adaptive agents. In Proceedings of the 13th international conference on
Intelligent user interfaces, pp. 227–236. ACM, 2008.

[21] S. Goodwin, C. Mears, T. Dwyer, M. G. de la Banda, G. Tack, and M. Wal-
lace. What do constraint programming users want to see? Exploring the
role of visualisation in profiling of models and search. IEEE Transactions
on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 23(1):281–290, 2017.

[22] J. L. Harman, J. O’Donovan, T. Abdelzaher, and C. Gonzalez. Dynamics
of human trust in recommender systems. In Proceedings of the 8th ACM
Conference on Recommender systems, pp. 305–308. ACM, 2014.

[23] A. Haworth, M. Ebert, D. Waterhouse, D. Joseph, and G. Duchesne.
Prostate implant evaluation using tumour control probability — The effect
of input parameters. Physics in medicine and biology, 49(16):3649, 2004.

[24] A. Haworth, C. Mears, J. M. Betts, H. M. Reynolds, G. Tack, K. Leo,
S. Williams, and M. A. Ebert. A radiobiology-based inverse treatment
planning method for optimisation of permanent I-125 prostate implants in
focal brachytherapy. Physics in medicine and biology, 61(1):430, 2015.

[25] A. Haworth, S. Williams, H. Reynolds, D. Waterhouse, G. M. Duchesne,
J. Bucci, D. Joseph, S. Bydder, and M. Ebert. Validation of a radiobi-
ological model for low-dose-rate prostate boost focal therapy treatment
planning. Brachytherapy, 12(6):628–636, 2013.

[26] C. V. Jones. Visualization and optimization. ORSA Journal on Computing,
6(3):221–257, 1994.

[27] A. Kapoor, B. Lee, D. Tan, and E. Horvitz. Interactive optimization for
steering machine classification. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pp. 1343–1352. ACM, 2010.

[28] D. A. Keim, J. Kohlhammer, G. Ellis, and F. Mansmann. Mastering the
Information Age: Solving Problems with Visual Analytics. Eurographics
Association, 2010.

[29] J. B. Kollat and P. Reed. A framework for Visually Interactive Decision-
making and Design using Evolutionary Multi-objective Optimization
(VIDEO). Environmental Modelling & Software, 22(12):1691–1704, 2007.

[30] S. Langley, H. U. Ahmed, B. Al-Qaisieh, D. Bostwick, L. Dickinson, F. G.
Veiga, P. Grimm, S. Machtens, F. Guedea, and M. Emberton. Report of
a consensus meeting on focal low dose rate brachytherapy for prostate
cancer. BJU international, 109(s1):7–16, 2012.

[31] D. Meignan, S. Knust, J.-M. Frayret, G. Pesant, and N. Gaud. A review
and taxonomy of interactive optimization methods in operations research.
ACM Transactions on Interactive Intelligent Systems (TiiS), 5(3):17, 2015.

[32] K. Miettinen. Survey of methods to visualize alternatives in multiple
criteria decision making problems. OR spectrum, 36(1):3–37, 2014.

[33] J. Nocedal and S. J. Wright. Numerical Optimization. Springer, New York,
1999.

[34] M. Nunes, B. Rowland, M. Schlachter, S. Ken, K. Matkovic, A. Laprie,
and K. Bühler. An integrated visual analysis system for fusing MR spec-
troscopy and multi-modal radiology imaging. In Visual Analytics Science
and Technology (VAST), 2014 IEEE Conference on, pp. 53–62. IEEE,
2014.

[35] J. Patten and H. Ishii. Mechanical constraints as computational constraints
in tabletop tangible interfaces. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference
on Human factors in computing systems, pp. 809–818. ACM, 2007.

[36] W. Pieters. Explanation and trust: What to tell the user in security and AI?
Ethics and information technology, 13(1):53–64, 2011.

[37] R. G. Raidou, O. Casares-Magaz, L. P. Muren, U. A. Van der Heide,
J. Rørvik, M. Breeuwer, and A. Vilanova. Visual analysis of tumor control
models for prediction of radiotherapy response. In Computer Graphics
Forum, vol. 35, pp. 231–240. Wiley Online Library, 2016.

[38] M. T. Ribeiro, S. Singh, and C. Guestrin. “Why should I trust you?”:
Explaining the predictions of any classifier. In Proceedings of the 22nd
ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and
Data Mining, pp. 1135–1144. ACM, 2016.

[39] C. Rother, V. Kolmogorov, and A. Blake. Grabcut: Interactive foreground
extraction using iterated graph cuts. In ACM transactions on graphics
(TOG), vol. 23, pp. 309–314. ACM, 2004.

[40] K. Savla, T. Temple, and E. Frazzoli. Human-in-the-loop vehicle routing
policies for dynamic environments. In Decision and Control, 2008. CDC
2008. 47th IEEE Conference on, pp. 1145–1150. IEEE, 2008.

[41] S. D. Scott, N. Lesh, and G. W. Klau. Investigating human-computer
optimization. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors
in computing systems, pp. 155–162. ACM, 2002.

[42] M. Sedlmair, C. Heinzl, S. Bruckner, H. Piringer, and T. Möller. Visual
parameter space analysis: A conceptual framework. IEEE Transactions
on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 20(12):2161–2170, 2014.

[43] M. Shibuya, H. Kita, and S. Kobayashi. Integration of multi-objective and
interactive genetic algorithms and its application to animation design. In
Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, 1999. IEEE SMC’99 Conference Proceed-
ings. 1999 IEEE International Conference on, vol. 3, pp. 646–651. IEEE,
1999.

[44] H. Takagi. Interactive evolutionary computation: Fusion of the capabilities
of EC optimization and human evaluation. Proceedings of the IEEE,



89(9):1275–1296, 2001.
[45] C. Thieke, K.-H. Küfer, M. Monz, A. Scherrer, F. Alonso, U. Oelfke, P. E.

Huber, J. Debus, and T. Bortfeld. A new concept for interactive radio-
therapy planning with multicriteria optimization: First clinical evaluation.
Radiotherapy and Oncology, 85(2):292–298, 2007.

[46] T. Torsney-Weir, A. Saad, T. Moller, H.-C. Hege, B. Weber, J.-M. Ver-
bavatz, and S. Bergner. Tuner: Principled parameter finding for image
segmentation algorithms using visual response surface exploration. IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 17(12):1892–1901,
2011.

[47] A. Uğur and D. Aydin. An interactive simulation and analysis software
for solving TSP using Ant Colony Optimization algorithms. Advances in
Engineering software, 40(5):341–349, 2009.

[48] W. van Wezel and R. Jorna. Cognition, tasks and planning: Supporting the
planning of shunting operations at the Netherlands Railways. Cognition,
Technology & Work, 11(2):165–176, 2009.

[49] C. Zeidler, C. Lutteroth, W. Sturzlinger, and G. Weber. The Auckland
Layout Editor: An improved GUI layout specification process. In Pro-
ceedings of the 26th annual ACM symposium on User interface software
and technology, pp. 343–352. ACM, 2013.


	Introduction
	Background Research in Optimisation
	Interactive Optimisation and Visual Analytics
	Application Context
	Prototype Interactive Optimisation Tool for Prostate Brachytherapy
	Study 1: Whole Gland Therapy
	Study Design
	Results & Discussion

	The Problem Solving Loop
	Study 2: Focal Therapy
	Study Design
	Results & Discussion

	Conclusions

