






































1. Immersive Analytics: An Introduction

Tim Dwyer1, Kim Marriott1, Tobias Isenberg2, Karsten Klein3, Nathalie Riche4,
Falk Schreiber1,3, Wolfgang Stuerzlinger5, and Bruce H. Thomas6

1 Monash University, Australia
[Tim.Dwyer, Kim.Marriott]@monash.edu

2 Inria and University Paris-Saclay
tobias.isenberg@inria.fr

3 ? University of Konstanz, Germany
[Karsten.Klein, Falk Schreiber]@uni-konstanz.de

4 Microsoft, USA
Nathalie.Henry@microsoft.com

5 Simon Fraser University, Canada
w.s@sfu.ca

6 University of South Australia
bruce.thomas@unisa.edu.au

Abstract. Immersive Analytics is a new research initiative that aims
to remove barriers between people, their data and the tools they use
for analysis and decision making. Here we clarify the aims of immersive
analytics research, its opportunities and historical context, as well as
providing a broad research agenda for the field. In addition, we review
how the term immersion has been used to refer to both technological and
psychological immersion, both of which are central to immersive analytics
research.

Keywords: immersive analytics, multi-sensory, 2D and 3D, data analytics,
decision making

1.1. What is Immersive Analytics?

Immersive Analytics is the use of engaging, embodied analysis tools to support
data understanding and decision making. Immersive analytics builds upon the
fields of data visualisation, visual analytics, virtual reality, computer graphics, and
human-computer interaction. Its goal is to remove barriers between people, their
data, and the tools they use for analysis. It aims to support data understanding
and decision making everywhere and by everyone, both working individually
and collaboratively. While this may be achieved through the use of immersive
virtual environment technologies, multisensory presentation, data physicalisation,
natural interfaces, or responsive analytics, the field of immersive analytics is not
tied to the use of specific techniques.

We live in an age where the amount and complexity of data available to us far
surpass our ability to understand or to utilise in decision making. This is not only

Tobias Isenberg
Typewritten Text
This is an author-prepared version of the book chapter published by Springer as part of the book “Immersive Analytics,” edited by Kim Marriott, Falk Schreiber, Tim Dwyer, Karsten Klein, Nathalie Henry Riche, Takayuki Itoh, Wolfgang Stuerzlinger, and Bruce H. Thomas. It can found online at doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-01388-2_1. The text of this version is virtually identical to the published one.

Tobias Isenberg
Typewritten Text



Immersive Analytics: An Introduction 9

Fig. 1: The research field of immersive analytics is exploring techniques that
will enable seamless local and remote collaborative work informed by data in
immersive environments. While the ideal technologies are not yet quite available
(left), researchers can already explore the design space and develop the necessary
display and interaction techniques using existing technologies (right). (Figure ©
2015 IEEE. Reprinted, with permission, from Chandler et al. [16]).

true for business analysts, scientists, and policymakers, but also for members
of the general public who have increasing access to, for instance, personalised
health data, IoT and other sensor data, as well as social media. In recent years
we have seen rapid progress in the development and availability of immersive
technologies such as head-mounted Virtual and Augmented Reality (VR and AR),
large wall-mounted, hand-held, or wearable displays. Similarly, progress in sensor
technology and the application of machine learning technologies to interpret
user gestures and utterances have fuelled the development of natural interfaces
making use of speech, gesture and touch. The combination of these new kinds
of display and interaction technologies is building towards a(nother) revolution
in how people use computers and offers a new approach to data analytics and
decision making; one that liberates these activities from the office desktop and
supports both collocated and remote collaboration (see Figure 1).

Immersive visual analytics has the potential to dramatically improve all areas
of our lives. One example application is healthcare, see Chapter 10 (Immer-
sive Analytics Applications in Life and Health Sciences). For medical specialists
treating a patient with a complex multi-faceted medical condition, a mix of AR
headsets and tiled wall displays potentially support collocated and remote collab-
oration, see Chapter 8 (Immersive Collaborative Analytics). This collaboration
may be synchronous, such as a group of nurses and doctors conducting surgery,
or asynchronous, where the collaborators participate at different times, perhaps
throughout the entire course of the medical treatment. Current technologies
allow specialists to create and remotely share immersive data visualisations. In
the near future they will be able to see, hear, touch and perhaps even smell an
anatomically correct model of the patient. They will be able to walk through the
model, overlaying it with, for example, 2D and 3D scans, or population-based
tumour occurrence models. By using AR to overlay the patient’s body with



10 Dwyer et al.

visualisations of their internal organs, they will be able to show the patient what
they believe is happening and the impact of possible treatment options.

Another example is urban planning and disaster management, as detailed
in Chapter 11 (Exploring Immersive Analytics for Built Environments). Urban
planners, engineers, and local authorities will soon be able to collaboratively
explore different flood, wildfire or other disaster mitigation strategies using a
3D-printed topographical model of the affected area, overlaying it with personal
and shared holographic displays and showing the results of computer simulations.
These technologies allow the local community to more deeply engage in decision
making by using immersive VR or AR to viscerally understand the complex
impact that these choices will have on their local neighbourhood.

Even more excitingly, these new technologies potentially democratise the use
of sophisticated data analysis and decision support tools, taking them outside
the workplace and into everyday life, see Chapter 7 (Situated Analytics). Already,
GPS-based navigation tools—computing optimal routes to the desired destination
using current location and live traffic data—have changed the way in which most
people navigate while driving. Ubiquitous AR promises a future in which we
live in a mixed-reality environment, where physical objects are overlaid with
virtual data and everyday analysis and decisions are computer-mediated. For
instance, when walking through a supermarket, products could be overlaid with
personalised dietary, ethical and pecuniary information to inform and guide
purchase decisions.

However, while many of the display and interaction hardware technologies
required for these scenarios already exist, the fundamental knowledge of how to
design appropriate human-computer interfaces and data visualisations is missing.
This is the subject of Immersive Analytics (IA). As the brief examples above
illustrate, IA offers several opportunities beyond more traditional visual analytics:

– The first opportunity is situated analytics in which user-controlled data
analytics information is linked with objects in the physical world. This might
be products in a supermarket, attendees at a conference, machinery in a
workshop, instruments in a lab, or objects at a building site. This has many
applications in the workplace and even more in other aspects of everyday life
through ubiquitous personalised analytics [37] (see Chapter 7).

– The second opportunity is embodied data exploration. By moving away from
the mouse and keyboard, it is hoped that touch, gesture, voice and tangible
interaction allow more intuitive and engaging data exploration in which
the computer becomes invisible, but continues to facilitate analytics behind
the scene. These topics are covered in Chapter 4 (Interaction for Immer-
sive Analytics) and Chapter 5 (Immersive Human-Centered Computational
Analytics).

– The third opportunity is collaboration, where the collaboration might be
collocated or remote as well as synchronous or asynchronous. IA potentially
supports deeper, more equitable and socially engaging collaboration (see
Chapter 8).



Immersive Analytics: An Introduction 11

– The fourth opportunity is spatial immersion. Moving away from the desktop
allows users to use the space around them as a three-dimensional workspace in
which they place coordinated 2D, 2 12 D, and 3D visualisations, see Chapter 2
(Immersive Analytics: Time to Reconsider the Value of 3D for Information
Visualisation).

– The fifth opportunity is multi-sensory presentation. Traditional visual analyt-
ics has focussed on visualisation but audio and the other senses can also be
used to provide additional information or as an alternative to vision where
this is unavailable or not useful. This topic is discussed in detail in Chapter 3
(Multisensory Immersive Analytics).

– The final opportunity is more informed and increased engagement in data-
informed decision making by the general public and other stakeholders.
Immersive interactive narrative visualisations can be used, for instance, to
engage the local community in climate change mitigation or to see the
potential impact of their local carbon footprint. Such immersive visual data
stories are discussed in Chapter 6 (Immersive Visual Data Stories).

Immersive analytics brings together researchers and data practitioners from
data visualisation and visual analytics, virtual and mixed reality, human-computer-
interaction and human-in-the-loop algorithmics. This book provides the first
comprehensive introduction to this emerging interdisciplinary research field. We
survey academic research and provide the necessary background material for new
PhD students or for more experienced researchers who wish to work in this field.
In addition, the book gives a roadmap of open questions to guide further research.
It is also designed to be accessible to a broader audience who are interested in
how emerging technologies may be used in data analysis applications in science,
technology, business, health, or other aspects of modern life.

1.2. Historical Context

Today we interact with computers through phones, laptops and other devices
so regularly and ubiquitously that many people forget or are unaware that such
activities were once almost unimaginable. Before the 1980s, however, computers
were intimidating and expensive tools. Computing pioneer Howard Aiken once
reminisced of the early days of computing: “there was no thought in mind that
computing machines should be used for anything except out-and-out mathemat-
ics” [18]. It took considerable time and research effort [44, 87] for the human
imagination to move beyond the notion that computers were centralised resources
to be used only by skilled technicians for very “serious” applications.

1.2.1. Human-Computer Interaction

Researchers in computing labs in the 1960s foresaw that this rapidly evolving
technology could play a more transformative role. For example, Engelbart and
English saw their computing lab at Stanford as “a research center for augmenting



12 Dwyer et al.

human intellect” [28]. Their work led to the first demonstrations of a windowed
UI, the mouse, hyperlinked documents, video conferencing, and visual word
processing. Around the same time, Ivan Sutherland at Harvard demonstrated
direct interaction with a graphical display using a light pen [92] and then the
first mixed reality head-mounted display system [93].

An early journal, Man-Machine Studies, began to link technologies for com-
puter interaction with more human-focussed studies in 1969 [56]. The increased
use of computers in real-time applications such as avionics meant that the initial
focus was on making interaction as simple and efficient as possible. Then, as com-
puters became cheaper and smaller, they moved into mainstream use. The focus
changed to computer use by non-specialists, and the field of Human-Computer
Interaction (HCI) emerged at the intersection of the previously disparate disci-
plines of computer science, cognitive and perceptual psychology, and ergonomics.
The creation of the ACM SIGCHI organisation and its first conference in 1982,
established HCI as an important new field of computer science.

The history of HCI is intricately bound to developments in interaction tech-
nologies. Sometimes research in HCI drives innovation in hardware and devices,
for example the light pen or the mouse. Sometimes hardware innovation drives
HCI research by allowing new ways to integrate computers into our work and
our lives. For example, motion tracking—conceived as a means to create lifelike
animated movie characters—is now supported by consumer devices1 and has
become a viable input for interaction, as processor speeds and algorithms for
feature detection have improved allowing real-time gesture recognition. Motion
tracking is only one example of an emerging technology that allows more nat-
ural, fluid, and embodied2 interaction with computers. Such natural and fluid
interaction is a potential key to engaging users in their data, a primary goal of
immersive analytics (as further discussed in Section 1.3.).

1.2.2. Graphics and Visualisation

In addition to input devices, the other critical technological advance that has
opened up new ways to interact with computers has been display technologies.
This advance began in the 1950s with computer-driven oscilloscopes that were
able to trace lines to form what we now call vector graphics. Once again, research
that began in labs made its way into the mainstream over the course of several
decades. With the introduction of the ACM SIGGRAPH conference series in 1974,
graphics was recognised as a distinct sub-field of computer science. Computer
graphics research rapidly evolved, and many sought to achieve photo-realistic
renderings of virtual scenes. By the 1980s, the opportunities for visualising

1 Examples of low-cost motion tracking devices being Microsoft Kinect [60]—launched
in 2010—and Leap Motion [49]—launched in 2013.

2 Embodied interaction refers to the notion that the affordances of a user interface or
interaction device somehow naturally embody the purpose or nature of the intended
action [24]. See Chapter 4 for more background on this and other aspects of immersive
interaction.



Immersive Analytics: An Introduction 13

data were evident, especially to the scientists already using powerful computers
with sophisticated graphics capabilities. A report based on the NSF sponsored
workshop on “Visualization in Scientific Computing” in 1987 [58] gave rise to
the IEEE Visualization conference series in 1990.

As mentioned earlier, virtual reality (VR) and augmented reality (AR) pro-
totypes were demonstrated by Ivan Sutherland in the late 1960s [93]. However,
it was not until the 1990s that advances in dedicated graphics hardware and
real-time rendering techniques led to the first practical interactive virtual reality
systems. An early example of such a VR system was the CAVE [19]. Research
interest in the area in industry and university labs was such that a dedicated
conference series, IEEE Virtual Reality (IEEE VR), was established in 1993.

After successful workshops in the two preceding years, the first Symposium
on 3D User Interfaces (3DUI) was held in 2006. This symposium series focussed
on the interaction aspects of VR and AR systems. Reflecting a growing interest
in interaction with virtual content, the ACM Symposium on Spatial interaction
(SUI) was established in 2013. Then, as a result of a convergence of research
within virtual reality, IEEE VR and 3DUI merged into the IEEE Conference on
Virtual Reality and 3D User Interfaces in 2018.

As of early 2018, there are several well-established commercial virtual reality
equipment providers. Some notable examples of VR equipment include: HTC
Vive,3 Oculus Rift,4 Microsoft Mixed Reality,5 and Google Daydream.6 What is
important about this latest generation of VR equipment is that they are modestly
priced, compatible with mid-range graphics PCs, and simple to set up as they
are a fully integrated system. In contrast, only a few years ago, head-mounted
displays and tracking subsystems were sold separately, and the input devices were,
by and large, custom-made by the end user. Furthermore, a major barrier to the
widespread use of earlier VR equipment was that integration of the subsystems
was left to the end user, and included such fundamental operations as mounting
tracking sensors onto the head mounted display.

In the past, while there have been commercial software development environ-
ments for VR, these were not widely used. WorldViz7 is an early example of an
easy to use VR development and runtime software environment, but it was not
commonly employed. This has changed, and emerging software standards are
allowing the rapid growth of VR applications and software ecosystems. Games
engines such as Unity 3D8 and UnReal Engine9 provide support for the develop-
ment and deployment of VR applications while software tools such as SteamVR10
provide cross-platform support.

3 https://www.vive.com/
4 https://www.oculus.com/
5 https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/store/collections/vrandmixedrealityheadsets
6 https://vr.google.com/daydream/
7 http://www.worldviz.com/
8 https://unity3d.com/
9 https://www.unrealengine.com/

10 http://store.steampowered.com/steamvr



14 Dwyer et al.

The visualisation field’s early emphasis on scientific applications concentrated
on data that had a natural spatial embedding in two or three dimensions. This
included geographic data such as ocean currents or architectural, physical or
biological data such as fluid flows in wind-tunnels or density in medical scans. Such
data was naturally visualised using immersive 3D display environments. Early
pioneers (e. g., Card et al. [15]) enthusiastically explored immersive visualisation
of data that was more abstract, i. e., purely numerical or relational and, therefore,
with more freedom in how it could be represented and spatially embedded.
Exploration of this design space of spatial mappings for abstract data became
a key theme of a new sub-field of visualisation called Information Visualisation
(InfoVis). Information visualisation built upon the work of graphic designers such
as Bertin [3], statisticians such as Tukey [99], Tufte [98], and Cleveland [17], as
well as HCI researchers such Card, McKinley, and Shneiderman [14], and many
others, to create a new interdisciplinary field that explored how to effectively
utilise computer graphics for abstract data visualisation and its interactive
exploration. In 1995, the new IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization
(IEEE InfoVis) was established to focus on this new theme, becoming a conference
in 2007.11

Despite an early enthusiasm for the kind of 3D representations of abstract
data made possible by first-generation graphics hardware (e. g., Figure 2), in
the 2000s information visualisation researchers became more conservative. As
information visualisation established itself as a new research discipline, researchers
concentrated on techniques suited to standard desktop and WIMP interfaces,
rather than to immersive technologies which, at that time, were only available
in labs. This conservatism was supported by studies finding that some 3D
representations of abstract data on standard 2D monitors were not particularly
useful. It remains an open question whether 3D representations of abstract data
can be more effective in genuinely immersive environments, for some settings or
application scenarios. More generally, the question of how we should be using the
space around users for representing data in immersive environments (whether VR
or AR) is a much more complicated issue than simple 2D versus 3D effectiveness.
Both questions are discussed in detail in Chapter 2.

1.2.3. Visual Analytics

In the early 2000s, national security concerns and exponential growth in data
and communication on the internet created an urgent need for more effective
techniques to analyse large, complex data. By this time information visualisation
research had shown some promise and developed novel techniques along with
guidelines for the design of useful visual data representations. However, this
new urgency suggested a need for a more holistic but also pragmatic research
agenda to tackle the grand challenge of creating tools that genuinely met the
requirements of big data analytics. In their agenda for the new National Visual-
ization and Analytics Center, Thomas and Cook called for a new science called
11 For a brief history of the IEEE VIS conferences see Section 2.2 in [40].



Immersive Analytics: An Introduction 15

(a) Cam Tree (b) 3D Hyperbolic Network Layout

Fig. 2: Early enthusiastic exploration of immersive visualisation of abstract data.
(a) Cone Trees and the horizontal variant Cam Trees were introduced by Robertson
et al. in 1991 as a way to navigate complex tree structures [80]. The internal nodes
of the tree could be rotated to bring a different children to the fore, exploiting
perspective distortion as a “focus and context” technique. (b) In 1997 Munzner
introduced a 3D hyperbolic network browser that exploited an even more exotic
space for focus and context [63]. (Figure (a) courtesy of S. Card, J. Mackinlay
and G. Robertson and used with permission from Xerox, Figure (b) © 1998 IEEE.
Reprinted, with permission, from [63])

Visual Analytics concerned with “analytical reasoning facilitated by interactive
visual interfaces” [96]. They made 19 high-level recommendations for the field
of visual analytics and, in particular, in contrast to earlier work on information
visualisation, they called for research that would enable visualisation techniques
to:

– scale to huge data [96, pg. 7] and
– enable a higher-level discourse between analyst and information [96, pg. 77]

rather than what they saw as a focus by information visualisation on straight-
forward and low-level analysis tasks.

Thomas and Cook’s definition of visual analytics was agnostic of the actual
interface and display devices employed by visual analysis systems. Nevertheless,
most visual analytics researchers inherited a certain scepticism of immersive
environments from the InfoVis community and continued to focus on developing
techniques for traditional desktop environments. However, as discussed in regard
to human-computer interaction, the affordances of the display and input devices
strongly affect the experience of users and so their degree of engagement and
productivity. While it may be that work in visual analytics has tried to have a high-
level focus on human cognition and workflows for “sense making” rather than on
the details of devices and computing environments, we feel that the embodiment



16 Dwyer et al.

of data afforded by the new generation of immersive environment technologies
fundamentally impacts the analyst’s experience and warrants consideration.

1.2.4. The Birth of Immersive Analytics

We contend that emerging display and interaction technologies open up new
possibilities for achieving Thomas and Cook’s goals for visual analytics described
above. But, in addition, as discussed in Section 1.1. these technologies can bring
data analytics:

– to a wider audience through tools and technologies that more fully engage
the senses,

– to a new generation whose first “language” of computer interaction is not
the mouse and keyboard,

– to new situations where desktop computing is impossible, and
– to teams of people where all participants are equally empowered.

This potential has already excited a large community of researchers from
the various fields we have discussed above. The idea that information should
be immersive is at least as old as the early work of Robertson, Card, and
McKinley [15]. However, the belief that visualisation and visual analytics needed
to embrace the explosion of new interaction paradigms took off in 2014, with
a workshop entitled “Death of the Desktop: Envisioning Visualization without
Desktop Computing” at IEEE VIS 2014.12

Shortly after this, the name Immersive Analytics was coined by researchers
exploring possibilities for data visualisation in virtual and mixed reality [16]
and introduced at IEEE BDVA 2015. Two coordinated workshops under the
banner of Immersive Analytics were held in 2016. The first at Shonan, Japan,
with 25 invited international experts on visualisation, visual analytics, human-
computer interaction and virtual and augmented reality [41] and the second was
held soon after at Dagstuhl, Germany with an additional 38 experts spanning
similar disciplines [27]. It was at these workshops that a broader understanding of
immersive analytics and the chapter topics for this book emerged. Most authors
of chapters in this book attended one of the two workshops, but some additional
experts were invited as required.

Since then there has been a flood of workshops on immersive analytics and
the community has grown rapidly. Immersive analytics workshops were held at:

– IEEE BDVA in 2016 and 2017, Australia
– IEEE VR 2016, USA
– Interactive Surfaces and Spaces 2016, Canada
– IEEE VIS 2017, USA

And, in 2018, the first symposium with an explicit call for Immersive Analytics
submissions will be held in Germany at IEEE Big Data Visual and Immersive
Analytics.13
12 http://dataphys.org/workshops/vis14/tag/visualization/
13 http://bdva.net/2018/

http://dataphys.org/workshops/vis14/tag/visualization/


Immersive Analytics: An Introduction 17

1.3. Engagement and Immersion

Engagement and immersion are at the heart of immersive analytics. We broadly
distinguish between technological immersion—which relates to the technologies
used in VR to immerse the user in a virtual world—and psychological immersion—
which relates to the cognitive state experienced by a user when they are absorbed
by some task. The latter could also be called engagement. As both technical and
psychological immersion are relevant to immersive analytics research, we provide
a brief review here. While clearly different they are connected: technological
immersion is, for example, widely employed in computer gaming with the belief
that it will increase psychological immersion.

1.3.1. Technological Immersion/Presence

A primary focus of VR research has been to develop technologies that immerse
the user in a virtual world by providing a sensory experience that is so similar
to that offered by the real world that the user feels and behaves like they are
indeed present in the virtual world, temporarily unaware that they are inhabiting
a computer-mediated environment. This is the intended meaning of “immersive”
in the terms “immersive environments” or “immersive technologies”. A significant
focus of immersive analytics is the use of immersive technologies to support
collaboration and embodied data exploration and decision making. Therefore,
a common, shared understanding of technological immersion is necessary for
immersive analytics researchers.

Following Slater [91], we distinguish between presence (the subjective psy-
chological experience of being in a virtual or remote space) and immersion
(the objective characteristics of the technology used to present the virtual
space). Since the term telepresence was introduced to describe the experience
of being virtually transported via telecommunication systems to another phys-
ical location [62], there has been considerable research into different aspects
of technological immersion and presence by IT researchers and psychologists,
e. g., [25,26,34,53,54,77,82–85,88,90,91, 101].

Immersive technologies can produce three main kinds of presence:

– Spatial presence is the psychological state in which the environment and
objects in the virtual world are experienced as actual physical objects [50].
According to Slater [88] it is (a) the sense of “being there” in the world
depicted by the virtual environment (VE), (b) the extent to which the VE
becomes the dominant one—i. e., the tendency to respond to events in the
VE rather than in the “real world”, and (c) the extent to which participants
remember the VE experience as having visited a “place” rather than just
having seen images generated by a computer [88].

– Social presence is the “sense of being with another” [6] or, more broadly, the
psychological state in which virtual social actors (both human and artificial)
are experienced as actual social actors [50]. Many different aspects have been
identified [6,50,53,67]. One is co-presence which requires the actors to be



18 Dwyer et al.

in the same virtual space and measures the degree of mutual awareness and
psychological involvement between actors [6]. Another aspect (confusingly
also called social presence) is the degree to which the actors believe the virtual
world supports interpersonal communication. This was originally introduced
to measure the effectiveness of telecommunication technologies. Related to
social presence is the notion of cultural presence [57].

– Self presence is the psychological state in which virtual selves are experienced
as the actual self [50] and measures the “effect of the VE on the perception of
one’s body (i. e., body schema or body image), psychological states, emotional
states, perceived traits and identity” [5] or “the extent to which some aspect
of a person’s proto (body-schema) self, core (emotion-driven) self, and/or
extended (identity-relevant) self is relevant during media use” [76].

Researchers have found that different kinds of presence are correlated (e. g., [67])
and that many features of the VE have been identified as affecting the subjective
feeling of presence. These include:

– Inclusiveness: the degree to which the virtual world blocks out the real
world [91].

– Extensiveness: the range of sensory channels (visual, audio, haptic, olfactory
etc.) provided in the environment [91]. While vision remains the primary
channel in VE, studies show that the use of spatialised audio and the provision
of other sensory channels increase the sense of spatial presence [23,35,36,75,
82].

– Vividness: the degree of visual realism or fidelity of the virtual environ-
ment [91]. Studies have found that higher frame rate, stereopsis and large
field of view can increase spatial presence [82]. Surprisingly, visual realism
does not seem to have a significant impact [82].

– Proprioceptive matching: the degree to which the perceptual effects of move-
ment by the user in the virtual world mirror their effects in the real world [91].
For instance, head tracking and the ability to walk through the virtual world
increase presence [82].

– Autonomous action: the extent to which the participant can act autonomously
and interact with objects in the VE and the affordances provided [30,86,102].
As Schultze writes: “The sense of ‘being there’ is grounded in the ability to
‘do there.’ ” [79,84].

– Representation of virtual self: the degree of realism of the representation of
the participant in the VE. This affects self-presence and behaviour [43,68].

– Plausability: the extent to which objects and actors in the virtual world
exhibit real-world behaviour [89].

– Representation of others: the degree of realism of the representation of other
actors in the VE [48].

– Communication channels: the range of ways, e. g.verbal and nonverbal, in
which communication is made available to individuals or groups in the
environment. Communication greatly benefits from awareness features in
VE [66].



Immersive Analytics: An Introduction 19

1.3.2. Psychological Immersion/Engagement

Even more central to immersive analytics research is understanding how to
cognitively immerse the user in the analytics or decision-making task. Such task
immersion has been studied by psychologists, computer game, user interface (UI)
and other researchers.

Csikszentmihalyi et al. [20, 21] extensively studied intrinsically motivated
activity in both work and play settings. They introduced the notion of flow to
describe the enjoyable subjective state that people experience when they are
completely involved in something to the point of forgetting time, fatigue and
everything but the activity itself. This might come from reading an engrossing
novel, playing chess or when engaging in sport. Flow is an example of psychological
absorption, the term describing total engagement in the present experience. Unlike
some other kinds of psychological absorption [39], flow is always enjoyable.

Flow is characterised by: intense and focussed concentration on what one is
doing in the current moment; merging of action and awareness; loss of reflective
self-consciousness; a sense of control; temporal disassociation (typically time
passes faster than usual); and enjoyment of the activity itself rather than only
the outcome [64]. Two necessary preconditions for flow are that the perceived
challenges or opportunities stretch existing skills but are not over-demanding,
and that there are clear sub-goals with immediate feedback on performance.

Flow has been applied to software use [1,97,100]. Building upon the notion of
flow, Agawal and Karahanna [1] define cognitive absorption as “a state of deep
involvement with software”. It is characterised by: focussed immersion and total
engagement in using the software; temporal disassociation; enjoyment; a sense of
control and curiosity. Like flow, cognitive absorption requires an extreme state of
engagement.

It seems unrealistic to expect that immersive analytics systems will regularly
engender the degree of immersion required for flow or cognitive absorption. A
more general notion of software engagement has been studied by HCI researchers
wishing to move beyond usability and to characterise and design more engaging
interfaces [2,69,70]. They have found that an engaging experience is encouraged
by the aesthetic and sensory appeal of the software and that the task should be
regarded as interesting or novel, be sufficiently challenging and provide regular
feedback. Engaged users are emotionally involved, motivated and perceive them-
selves to be in control. However, while the user must be focussed on the activity,
engagement, unlike flow, does not require them to be so focussed that they lose
all awareness of the surrounding world.

Software engagement and immersion has been most extensively studied for
computer games [7, 11, 13]. Immersion is commonly used in the games industry
to refer to the feeling of “being in the game”. Unlike flow, but like software
engagement, games immersion is not an all or nothing experience [9]. The first
level of immersion is called engagement, simply investing enough time and energy
to play the game, the next level is engrossment at which point the players devote
considerable effort and have an emotional attachment. The final level is total
immersion in which the player is completely involved in the game and nothing



20 Dwyer et al.

else matters. This is similar to flow, though more transient. It is important to
note that being “in the game” does not refer to immersion in a virtual world but
to a cognitive state and can occur in both digital and non-digital games.

Jennett et al. [42] identified five constituent factors to immersion: emotional
involvement, cognitive involvement, real-world disassociation, challenge, and con-
trol, while Ermi and Mäyrä [29] identified three kinds of immersive experience:
sensory, challenge-based, and imaginary. These are related: challenge-based corre-
sponds to cognitive involvement, challenge, and control, while imaginary relates
to emotional involvement and sensory to real-world disassociation through the
use of immersive technologies to create a sense of presence [11]. More generally,
Poels et al. [73] identified the following dimensions to descriptions of the gaming
experience by digital game players: enjoyment, flow, imaginative immersion,
sensory immersion, suspense, competence, control, social presence, as well as
negative affect.

It is implicit in many discussions of immersion in computer gaming that the
use of immersive technologies will increase player engagement and sense of “being
there” in the game. However, study results are somewhat mixed [11,33]. Social
presence is now recognised as an important aspect of many digital games [22] and
high social presence, i. e., the sense of being socially connected to others, leads to
greater enjoyment [31] and to increased immersion [12]. There is some evidence
that flow in immersive environments leads to better performance, though this
may be confounded by non-congruent interfaces [4].

Narrative has been identified as another factor contributing to immersion [74]
and increased engagement [33], though there is some disagreement as to whether
digital games make use of narrative. If we mean the use of storytelling techniques
to emotionally engage the player in the characters and setting of the game, then it
is clear that some games utilise narrative while others, such as Tetris, do not [11].

Narrative as a device for immersion has been previously studied in literature
and film-making [32,65,81]. Like engagement in games, immersion in a book or
film is graduated. Nell [65] writes of absorption sometimes deepening to become
entrancement, while Ryan [81] identifies four successively deeper levels of immer-
sion: concentration, in which the reader is focusing on reading or understanding
the text itself and is hardly immersed; imaginative involvement in which the users
engages emotionally and imaginatively with the text but is also aware of the text
and in the case of non-fiction will critically analyse the arguments; entrancement
in which the reader is wholly engaged in the book and cannot easily put it down
but is still aware that the textual world is not real; and the pathological state of
addiction in which the reader cannot distinguish between the fictional and real
world or compulsively reads book after book without finding pleasure. Immersion
in a text or film relies “on being transported” to the textual world [32]. It may
involve spatial or sensorial immersion, social connection with the characters, or
game-like engagement in the plot.

The line between literature and film and new digital media is blurring. In-
creasingly, journalists are utilising computer games, online communities and
immersive technologies to present news stories interactively. An extreme form of



Immersive Analytics: An Introduction 21

such immersive journalism uses VR to recreate the news event and allow the user
to experience it as one of the actors [71]. Undoubtedly, immersive analytics can
learn from the techniques and tricks used by UI and game designers and jour-
nalists to engage their audience using immersive technologies, social connection,
narrative as well as responsive interfaces that allow the user to feel in control
through frequent feedback.

1.4. Overview of this Book

The chapters of this book study different aspects of immersive analytics, focusing
on potential opportunities and applications. The chapters are self-contained and
are intended to provide background for researchers and interested practitioners
outside the field as well as a theoretical framework for future research. All chapters
provide a list of research issues and questions.

In Chapter 2, Marriott et al. explore spatial immersion and investigate whether
immersive analytic applications should continue to use traditional 2D information
visualisations or whether there are situations when the use of 3D depth cues may
offer benefits. They also discuss the opportunity that spatial immersion provides
to arrange multiple views in the 3D space around the user.

In Chapter 3, McCormack et al. look at another important aspect of techno-
logical immersion. They review how non-visual sensory channels—audio, haptic,
smell and taste—can be used to present data, both as an adjunct to vision and
as a replacement when vision is unavailable. They summarise the physiological
characteristics of each channel, current presentation technologies including data
physicalisation, and provide a preliminary investigation of the resulting design
space for multisensory data exploration.

As mentioned in Sections 1.2. and 1.3. of this introductory chapter, effective
interaction is key to giving people a fluid and, hence, immersive experience while
exploring their data. The state of the art in immersive interaction technologies
and the ramifications of these is discussed by Büschel et al. in Chapter 4.

Chapter 5 discusses the broader question of how to immersively integrate
the “human in the loop” of automated machine processes for processing data.
In this chapter, Stuerzlinger et al. reinterpret the sense-making loop of visual
analytics as it applies to user engagement during data exploration in immersive
environments.

We have identified the potential of immersive analytics for data-driven story-
telling (also known as narrative visualisation). This is explored by Isenberg et
al. in Chapter 6. They give examples of immersive storytelling and review the
theoretical frameworks for understanding data-driven narratives. In particular,
they provide a detailed analysis of how immersion has been understood in related
fields such as gaming and relates this back to data-driven storytelling.

Thomas et al., in Chapter 7, explore another potential benefit of immersive
analytics. They provide a theoretical framework for understanding situated
analytics—the use of “data representations organised in relation to relevant
objects, places, and persons in the physical world for the purpose of understanding,



22 Dwyer et al.

sense-making, and decision-making”. They characterise its properties, give a
number of examples, and clarify the relationship to related fields and concepts.

The chapter by Bezerianos et al. (Chapter 8) explores the shared use of
immersive technologies to support collaborative analytical reasoning and decision
making. They provide a taxonomy of collaborative systems based on space and
time, give examples of immersive applications, and analyse the different roles
people may play in these systems.

In Chapter 9, Marriott et al. present an initial design framework for immersive
analytics that extends Brehmer and Munzner’s “What, Why and How” [8]
data visualisation framework by considering display and interaction capabilities,
collaboration and all sensory channels.

The two final chapters in the book look in more detail at application domains
of immersive analytics. The chapter by Czauderna et al. (Chapter 10) investigates
typical use-cases of immersive analytics in life and health sciences ranging from
structural biology to neurosciences.

Chandler et al., in Chapter 11, present immersive analytics applications to
simulations of built environments. They investigate virtual prototyping tools, 3D
simulation of urban areas, and the reconstruction and crowd simulation of the
medieval Cambodian temple complex of Angkor Wat.

Chapter Review Process The chapter groups were formed across the Shonan and
Dagstuhl immersive analytics workshops in 2016. Authors submitted manuscripts
for their chapters in mid-2017. These initial versions were reviewed at first
“internally” by one of the book editors. After an initial round of revisions based
on the recommendations of these internal reviews, updated manuscripts were
sent to expert reviewers invited from the community. We are grateful to these
people for their detailed and insightful reviews.

1.5. Research Agenda

While the chapters provide a detailed introduction to the field of immersive
analytics, they also make it clear that we have only begun to scratch the surface
of this new field and that many questions remain. While the individual chapters
detail research questions for a particular topic, we can group these under the
following seven headings.

1.5.1. Underpinning Theory

We have seen how technological and psychological immersion has been studied for
virtual environments [10], telepresence [94], telecommunications, and gaming [95].
A fundamental question for immersive analytics is how to modify these theories
to identify and formalise the various kinds of immersion and engagement that
might occur during data analytics and decision making. Such a theory would
need to extend the current understanding of physical or spatial presence from
representation of virtual worlds in virtual reality to representation of abstract



Immersive Analytics: An Introduction 23

data in mixed reality [61] and even data physicalisation [10]. It will need to clarify
the links between technological and psychological immersion, the connection
between these and the emotional state of the viewer, as well as the relationship
with user performance.

Immersive analytics also requires the development of models for the processes
and workflows employed by users. Variants of the sense-making loop underpin
visual analytics [45,72] and recently the problem-solving loop was introduced for
interactive optimisation [52]. Is it possible to develop a more general model of
human-in-the-loop decision making? Furthermore, current models do not capture
all of the activities of users in immersive analytics. They focus on the analyst, not
on the stakeholders trying to understand and evaluate the result of the analysis.
They do not adequately consider collaboration and the different roles that people
may play in this process (see Chapter 8).

1.5.2. Effectiveness

A necessary question is to identify when immersive analytics techniques are
useful. When (if ever) does the use of immersive technologies offer benefits over
current desktop visual analytics tools? Traditionally data visualisation researchers
have focussed on task performance, typically accuracy and speed. As Chapter 2
identifies, the use of depth cues may improve task effectiveness for some kinds
of visualisation tasks. However, task performance is not the only measure of
effectiveness. Emotional engagement and recall may also be important, especially
when communicating findings to stakeholders. There is some evidence that both
presence and emotional engagement improves recall [55]. In general, presence is
bi-directionally linked to the emotional state of the viewer: the emotional state
is influenced by the degree of presence and the feeling of presence is increased
in “emotional” environments [78]. More research is required to understand this
in the context of immersive data-driven narratives (see Chapter 6) and other
aspects of immersive analytics.

Such an understanding crucially relies on methodologies for measuring the
various aspects of user engagement and immersion [47]. These are most com-
monly evaluated using self-reported measure and a number of surveys have
been developed to measure spatial and social presence [6,51,67, 101] in virtual
worlds and immersion in games [22, 42, 74]. Less subjective measures include
behavioural measures such as the responses to virtual and external stimuli and
psychophysiological measures such as skin conductance, heart rate, or brain
activity [38,46,59].

1.5.3. Responsive Analytics

Few machine learning, data mining, optimisation, or simulation algorithms are
designed to be used in responsive, interactive analytics applications. Human-in-
the-loop algorithmics is still an emerging research field (see Chapter 5). More



24 Dwyer et al.

research is required to understand the trade-offs between responsiveness, pre-
dictability and the quality of answer, as well as how to design systems that
leverage from the real-world knowledge of the human analyst.

1.5.4. Work Flows and Work Spaces

Immersive analytics, in particular situated analytics, allows very different work
flows in which analytics can be employed in virtually any process or situation.
What are general guidelines for doing this? Collaboration raises many additional
questions, e. g., division and allocation of work, group dynamics and consensus.
A related question is how to organise both shared and individual workspaces.
Some further background on these questions is provided in Chapters 5 and 8.

1.5.5. Design Space

Many of the chapters have identified the need to explore and understand the
design space for immersive analytics applications. Chapter 9 presents a prelimi-
nary framework but decades of research will be required to refine and validate
this framework. Particular areas that require attention are interaction, mixed
reality, collaboration and the use of audio and haptic feedback. The difficulty is
compounded by rapidly changing technology, which means that previous findings
and guidelines may no longer apply.

1.5.6. Applications

In this book, we have presented two possible application domains: life and health
sciences, and the built environment, but there are many more. Examples include
disaster management (where participants must quickly plan and direct reactions
to threats), healthcare, including personalised health, manufacturing applications,
and so on.

1.5.7. Societal Impact

The democratisation of data analysis and decision making has potentially far-
reaching consequences for our society. There are also potential dangers: Will
the use of emotionally engaging immersive data-driven narratives lead to less
objective and possibly worse decisions by stakeholders (Chapter 6)? What will
be the health effects and impact on social cohesion of increased use of virtual
environments at work as well as at home?

Acknowledgements

Early efforts that prompted the conversations and workshops that have eventually
led to this book were strongly supported by the Monash University Faculty of
Information Technology. Chapters in this book were written by working groups



Immersive Analytics: An Introduction 25

formed at workshops on Immersive Analytics at Shonan, Meeting 2016-2 [41],
and Dagstuhl, Seminar 16231 [27]. Continuing work by the authors of this
chapter was funded by the Australian Research Council Discovery Scheme,
project DP180100755 and the German Research Foundation (DFG), project D4
of SFB/Transregio 161.

References

1. Agarwal, R., Karahanna, E.: Time flies when you’re having fun: cognitive absorption
and beliefs about information technology usage. MIS Quarterly pp. 665–694 (2000)

2. Attfield, S., Kazai, G., Lalmas, M., Piwowarski, B.: Towards a science of user
engagement (position paper). In: WSDM Workshop on User Modelling for Web
Applications. pp. 9–12 (2011)

3. Bertin, J.: Semiology of graphics: diagrams, networks, maps. University of Wisconsin
press (1983)

4. Bian, Y., Yang, C., Zhou, C., Liu, J., Gai, W., Meng, X., Tian, F., Shen, C.:
Exploring the weak association between flow experience and performance in virtual
environments. In: Proceedings of the Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems (CHI). pp. 401:1–401:12. ACM (2018)

5. Biocca, F.: The cyborg’s dilemma: progressive embodiment in virtual environments.
Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication 3(2), 12–26 (1997)

6. Biocca, F., Harms, C., Burgoon, J.K.: Towards a more robust theory and measure
of social presence: Review and suggested criteria. Presence: Teleoperators & Virtual
Environments 12(5), 456–480 (2003)

7. Boyle, E.A., Connolly, T.M., Hainey, T., Boyle, J.M.: Engagement in digital enter-
tainment games: a systematic review. Computers in Human Behavior 28(3), 771–780
(2012)

8. Brehmer, M., Munzner, T.: A multi-level typology of abstract visualization tasks.
IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 19(12), 2376–2385
(2013)

9. Brown, E., Cairns, P.: A grounded investigation of game immersion. In: CHI’04
extended abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems. pp. 1297–1300. ACM
(2004)

10. Burdea, G.C., Coiffet, P.: Virtual Reality Technology. John Wiley & Sons, Inc.,
New York, NY, USA, 2 edn. (2003)

11. Cairns, P., Cox, A., Nordin, A.I.: Immersion in digital games: review of gaming
experience research. Handbook of Digital Games 339, 337–361 (2014)

12. Cairns, P., Cox, A.L., Day, M., Martin, H., Perryman, T.: Who but not where:
the effect of social play on immersion in digital games. International Journal of
Human-Computer Studies 71(11), 1069–1077 (2013)

13. Calleja, G.: In-game: From immersion to incorporation. MIT Press (2011)
14. Card, S.K., Mackinlay, J.D., Shneiderman, B.: Readings in information visualization:

using vision to think. Morgan Kaufmann (1999)
15. Card, S.K., Robertson, G.G., Mackinlay, J.D.: The information visualizer, an

information workspace. In: Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors
in Computing Systems. pp. 181–186. ACM (1991)

16. Chandler, T., Cordeil, M., Czauderna, T., Dwyer, T., Glowacki, J., Goncu, C.,
Klapperstueck, M., Klein, K., Marriott, K., Schreiber, F., Wilson, E.: Immersive
analytics. In: IEEE 2015 Big Data Visual Analytics (BDVA). pp. 1–8 (2015)



26 Dwyer et al.

17. Cleveland, W.S., McGill, R.: Graphical perception: Theory, experimentation, and
application to the development of graphical methods. Journal of the American
Statistical Association 79(387), 531–554 (1984)

18. Cohen, I.B.: Howard Aiken on the number of computers needed for the nation.
IEEE Annals of the History of Computing 20(3), 27–32 (1998)

19. Cruz-Neira, C., Sandin, D.J., DeFanti, T.A., Kenyon, R.V., Hart, J.C.: The CAVE:
audio visual experience automatic virtual environment. Commun. ACM 35(6), 64–72
(1992)

20. Csikszentmihalyi, M.: Beyond boredom and anxiety. Jossey-Bass Publishers (1975)
21. Csikszentmihalyi, M., Abuhamdeh, S., Nakamura, J.: Flow. In: Flow and the

Foundations of Positive Psychology, pp. 227–238. Springer (2014)
22. De Kort, Y.A., IJsselsteijn, W.A., Poels, K.: Digital games as social presence

technology: development of the social presence in gaming questionnaire (SPGQ).
Proceedings of PRESENCE 195203 (2007)

23. Dinh, H.Q., Walker, N., Hodges, L.F., Song, C., Kobayashi, A.: Evaluating the
importance of multi-sensory input on memory and the sense of presence in virtual
environments. In: Proceedings IEEE Virtual Reality. pp. 222–228 (1999)

24. Dourish, P.: Where the action is: the foundations of embodied interaction. MIT
Press (2004)

25. Draper, J.V., Kaber, D.B., Usher, J.M.: Telepresence. Human Factors 40(3), 354–
375 (1998)

26. Durlach, N., Slater, M.: Presence in shared virtual environments and virtual
togetherness. Presence: Teleoperators & Virtual Environments 9(2), 214–217 (2000)

27. Dwyer, T., Riche, N.H., Klein, K., Stuerzlinger, W., Thomas, B.: Immersive analytics
(Dagstuhl seminar 16231). Dagstuhl Reports 6(6), 1–9 (2016)

28. Engelbart, D.C., English, W.K.: A research center for augmenting human intellect.
In: Proceedings of the December 9-11, 1968, Fall Joint Computer Conference, Part I.
pp. 395–410. AFIPS ’68 (Fall, part I), ACM (1968)

29. Ermi, L., Mäyrä, F.: Fundamental components of the gameplay experience:
analysing immersion. Worlds in Play: International Perspectives on Digital Games
Research 37(2), 37–53 (2005)

30. Flach, J.M., Holden, J.G.: The reality of experience: Gibson’s way. Presence:
Teleoperators & Virtual Environments 7(1), 90–95 (1998)

31. Gajadhar, B.J., De Kort, Y.A., Ijsselsteijn, W.A.: Shared fun is doubled fun: player
enjoyment as a function of social setting. In: Fun and Games, pp. 106–117. Springer
(2008)

32. Gerrig, R.J.: Experiencing narrative worlds: on the psychological activities of
reading. Yale University Press (1993)

33. Gorini, A., Capideville, C.S., De Leo, G., Mantovani, F., Riva, G.: The role of
immersion and narrative in mediated presence: the virtual hospital experience.
Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and Social Networking 14(3), 99–105 (2011)

34. Hartmann, T., Wirth, W., Vorderer, P., Klimmt, C., Schramm, H., Böcking, S.:
Spatial presence theory: state of the art and challenges ahead. In: Immersed in
Media, pp. 115–135. Springer (2015)

35. Hoffman, H.G.: Physically touching virtual objects using tactile augmentation
enhances the realism of virtual environments. In: Proceedings IEEE 1998 Virtual
Reality Annual International Symposium. pp. 59–63 (1998)

36. Hoffman, H.G., Hollander, A., Schroder, K., Rousseau, S., Furness, T.: Physically
touching and tasting virtual objects enhances the realism of virtual experiences.
Virtual Reality 3(4), 226–234 (1998)



Immersive Analytics: An Introduction 27

37. Huang, D., Tory, M., Aseniero, B.A., Bartram, L., Bateman, S., Carpendale, S.,
Tang, A., Woodbury, R.: Personal visualization and personal visual analytics. IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 21(3), 420–433 (2015)

38. IJsselsteijn, W.A., de Ridder, H., Freeman, J., Avons, S.E.: Presence: Concept,
determinants and measurement. In: Human Vision and Electronic Imaging. vol.
3959, pp. 520–529 (2000)

39. Irwin, H.J.: Pathological and nonpathological dissociation: the relevance of child-
hood trauma. The Journal of Psychology 133(2), 157–164 (1999)

40. Isenberg, P., Heimerl, F., Koch, S., Isenberg, T., Xu, P., Stolper, C.D., Sedlmair,
M., Chen, J., Möller, T., Stasko, J.: vispubdata.org: A metadata collection about
IEEE visualization (VIS) publications. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics 23(9), 2199–2206 (Sep 2017)

41. Itoh, T., Marriott, K., Schreiber, F., Wössner, U.: Immersive analytics: a new mul-
tidisciplinary initiative to explore future interaction technologies for data analytics.
Shonan Reports (2016)

42. Jennett, C., Cox, A.L., Cairns, P., Dhoparee, S., Epps, A., Tijs, T., Walton, A.:
Measuring and defining the experience of immersion in games. International Journal
of Human-Computer Studies 66(9), 641–661 (2008)

43. Jin, S.A.A.: Avatars mirroring the actual self versus projecting the ideal self:
The effects of self-priming on interactivity and immersion in an exergame, wii fit.
CyberPsychology & Behavior 12(6), 761–765 (2009)

44. Kay, A., Goldberg, A.: Personal dynamic media. Computer 10(3), 31–41 (1977)
45. Kerren, A., Schreiber, F.: Toward the role of interaction in visual analytics. In:

Rose, O., Uhrmacher, A.M. (eds.) Prodeedings Winter Simulation Conference. p.
420 (2012)

46. Kober, S.E., Kurzmann, J., Neuper, C.: Cortical correlate of spatial presence
in 2D and 3D interactive virtual reality: an EEG study. International Journal of
Psychophysiology 83(3), 365–374 (2012)

47. Laarni, J., Ravaja, N., Saari, T., Böcking, S., Hartmann, T., Schramm, H.: Ways
to measure spatial presence: review and future directions. In: Immersed in Media,
pp. 139–185. Springer (2015)

48. Latoschik, M.E., Roth, D., Gall, D., Achenbach, J., Waltemate, T., Botsch, M.:
The effect of avatar realism in immersive social virtual realities. In: 23rd ACM
Symposium on Virtual Reality Software and Technology (VRST). pp. 39:1–39:10
(2017)

49. Leap Motion. http://www.leapmotion.com, accessed: January 2018
50. Lee, K.M.: Presence, explicated. Communication Theory 14(1), 27–50 (2004)
51. Lessiter, J., Freeman, J., Keogh, E., Davidoff, J.: A cross-media presence ques-

tionnaire: the itc-sense of presence inventory. Presence: Teleoperators & Virtual
Environments 10(3), 282–297 (2001)

52. Liu, J., Dwyer, T., Marriott, K., Millar, J., Haworth, A.: Understanding the
relationship between interactive optimisation and visual analytics in the context of
prostate brachytherapy. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics
24(1), 319–329 (2018)

53. Lombard, M., Ditton, T.: At the heart of it all: the concept of presence. Journal of
Computer-Mediated Communication 3(2) (1997)

54. Lombard, M., Jones, M.T.: Defining presence. In: Immersed in Media, pp. 13–34.
Springer (2015)

55. Makowski, D., Sperduti, M., Nicolas, S., Piolino, P.: Being there and remembering
it: presence improves memory encoding. Consciousness and Cognition 53, 194–202
(2017)

http://www.leapmotion.com


28 Dwyer et al.

56. International journal of man-machine studies (From 1969 to 1993)
57. Mantovani, G., Riva, G.: ?Real? presence: how different ontologies generate different

criteria for presence, telepresence, and virtual presence. Presence: Teleoperators &
Virtual Environments 8(5), 540–550 (1999)

58. McCormick, B.H.: Visualization in scientific computing. Computer Graphics 21(6),
1–14 (1987)

59. Meehan, M., Insko, B., Whitton, M., Brooks Jr, F.P.: Physiological measures of
presence in stressful virtual environments. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG)
21(3), 645–652 (2002)

60. Microsoft Kinect. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kinect, accessed: January 2018
61. Milgram, P., Kishino, F.: A taxonomy of mixed reality visual displays. IEICE

Transactions on Information and Systems 77(12), 1321–1329 (1994)
62. Minsky, M.: Telepresence. Omni (1980)
63. Munzner, T.: Exploring large graphs in 3D hyperbolic space. IEEE Computer

Graphics and Applications 18(4), 18–23 (1998)
64. Nakamura, J., Csikszentmihalyi, M.: The concept of flow. In: Flow and the Foun-

dations of Positive Psychology, pp. 239–263. Springer (2014)
65. Nell, V.: Lost in a book: the psychology of reading for pleasure. Yale University

Press (1988)
66. Nguyen, T.T.H., Duva, T.: A survey of communication and awareness in collab-

orative virtual environments. In: Proceedings of IEEE International Workshop on
Collaborative Virtual Environments (3DCVE) (2014)

67. Nowak, K.: Defining and differentiating copresence, social presence and presence as
transportation. In: Presence 2001 Conference, Philadelphia, PA. pp. 1–23 (2001)

68. Nowak, K.L., Biocca, F.: The effect of the agency and anthropomorphism on
users’ sense of telepresence, copresence, and social presence in virtual environments.
Presence: Teleoperators & Virtual Environments 12(5), 481–494 (2003)

69. O’Brien, H.L., Toms, E.G.: What is user engagement? A conceptual framework for
defining user engagement with technology. Journal of the Association for Information
Science and Technology 59(6), 938–955 (2008)

70. O’Brien, H.L., Toms, E.G.: The development and evaluation of a survey to measure
user engagement. Journal of the Association for Information Science and Technology
61(1), 50–69 (2010)

71. De la Peña, N., Weil, P., Llobera, J., Giannopoulos, E., Pomés, A., Spanlang, B.,
Friedman, D., Sanchez-Vives, M.V., Slater, M.: Immersive journalism: immersive
virtual reality for the first-person experience of news. Presence: Teleoperators &
Virtual Environments 19(4), 291–301 (2010)

72. Pirolli, P., Card, S.: The sensemaking process and leverage points for analyst tech-
nology as identified through cognitive task analysis. In: Proceedings of International
Conference on Intelligence Analysis. vol. 5, pp. 2–4 (2005)

73. Poels, K., De Kort, Y., Ijsselsteijn, W.: It is always a lot of fun!: exploring dimensions
of digital game experience using focus group methodology. In: Proceedings of the
2007 Conference on Future Play. pp. 83–89. ACM (2007)

74. Qin, H., Patrick Rau, P.L., Salvendy, G.: Measuring player immersion in the
computer game narrative. International Journal of Human-Computer Interaction
25(2), 107–133 (2009)

75. Ranasinghe, N., Jain, P., Thi Ngoc Tram, N., Koh, K.C.R., Tolley, D., Karwita,
S., Lien-Ya, L., Liangkun, Y., Shamaiah, K., Eason Wai Tung, C., Yen, C.C., Do,
E.Y.L.: Season traveller: Multisensory narration for enhancing the virtual reality
experience. In: Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems (CHI). pp. 577:1–577:13. ACM (2018)

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kinect


Immersive Analytics: An Introduction 29

76. Ratan, R.: Self-presence, explicated: body, emotion, and identity. Handbook of
Research on Technoself: Identity in a Technological Society (2012)

77. Riva, G., Davide, F., Ijsselsteijn, W.: Being there: the experience of presence in
mediated environments. Being there: Concepts, Effects and Measurement of User
Presence in Synthetic Environments 5 (2003)

78. Riva, G., Mantovani, F., Capideville, C.S., Preziosa, A., Morganti, F., Villani, D.,
Gaggioli, A., Botella, C., Alcañiz, M.: Affective interactions using virtual reality:
the link between presence and emotions. CyberPsychology & Behavior 10(1), 45–56
(2007)

79. Riva, G., Waterworth, J.A., Waterworth, E.L., Mantovani, F.: From intention to
action: The role of presence. New Ideas in Psychology 29(1), 24–37 (2011)

80. Robertson, G.G., Mackinlay, J.D., Card, S.K.: Cone trees: animated 3D visual-
izations of hierarchical information. In: Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems. pp. 189–194. ACM (1991)

81. Ryan, M.L.: Narrative as virtual reality: immersion and interactivity in literature
and electronic media. Johns Hopkins University Press (2001)

82. Sanchez-Vives, M.V., Slater, M.: From presence to consciousness through virtual
reality. Nature Reviews Neuroscience 6(4), 332–339 (2005)

83. Schuemie, M.J., Van Der Straaten, P., Krijn, M., Van Der Mast, C.A.: Research
on presence in virtual reality: a survey. CyberPsychology & Behavior 4(2), 183–201
(2001)

84. Schultze, U.: Embodiment and presence in virtual worlds: a review. Journal of
Information Technology 25(4), 434–449 (2010)

85. Sheridan, T.B.: Musings on telepresence and virtual presence. Presence: Teleopera-
tors & Virtual Environments 1(1), 120–126 (1992)

86. Sheridan, T.B.: Further musings on the psychophysics of presence. Presence: Tele-
operators & Virtual Environments 5(2), 241–246 (1996)

87. Shneiderman, B.: Direct manipulation: A step beyond programming languages. In:
ACM SIGSOC Bulletin. vol. 13 (2-3), p. 143. ACM (1982)

88. Slater, M.: Measuring presence: A response to the Witmer and Singer presence
questionnaire. Presence: Teleoperators & Virtual Environments 8(5), 560–565 (1999)

89. Slater, M.: Place illusion and plausibility can lead to realistic behaviour in immersive
virtual environments. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London B:
Biological Sciences 364(1535), 3549–3557 (2009)

90. Slater, M., Lotto, B., Arnold, M.M., Sanchez-Vives, M.V.: How we experience
immersive virtual environments: the concept of presence and its measurement.
Anuario de psicología/The UB Journal of psychology 40(2), 193–210 (2009)

91. Slater, M., Wilbur, S.: A framework for immersive virtual environments five: specu-
lations on the role of presence in virtual environments. Presence: Teleoperators &
Virtual Environments 6(6), 603–616 (1997)

92. Sutherland, I.E.: Sketchpad a man-machine graphical communication system. Trans-
actions of the Society for Computer Simulation 2(5), R–3 (1964)

93. Sutherland, I.E.: A head-mounted three dimensional display. In: Proceedings of the
December 9-11, 1968, Fall Joint Computer Conference, Part I. pp. 757–764. AFIPS
’68 (Fall, part I), ACM (1968)

94. Tachi, S.: Telexistence. In: Virtual Realities, pp. 229–259. Springer (2015)
95. Thomas, B.H.: A survey of visual, mixed, and augmented reality gaming. Computers

in Entertainment (CIE) 10(1), 3 (2012)
96. Thomas, J.J., Cook, K.A.: Illuminating the path: the research and development

agenda for visual analytics. National Visualization and Analytics Ctr (2005)



30 Dwyer et al.

97. Trevino, L.K., Webster, J.: Flow in computer-mediated communication: electronic
mail and voice mail evaluation and impacts. Communication Research 19(5), 539–573
(1992)

98. Tufte, E.R.: Envisioning information. Graphics press (1990)
99. Tukey, J.W.: Exploratory data analysis. Reading, Mass. (1977)
100. Webster, J., Trevino, L.K., Ryan, L.: The dimensionality and correlates of flow in

human-computer interactions. Computers in Human Behavior 9(4), 411–426 (1993)
101. Witmer, B.G., Singer, M.J.: Measuring presence in virtual environments: a presence

questionnaire. Presence: Teleoperators & Virtual Environments 7(3), 225–240 (1998)
102. Zeltzer, D.: Autonomy, interaction, and presence. Presence: Teleoperators & Virtual

Environments 1(1), 127–132 (1992)




