

























































Towards HMD-based Immersive Analytics
Grégoire Cliquet*
READi Design lab
l’École de Design

Matthieu Perreira†

LS2N UMR6004 CNRS
University of Nantes

Fabien Picarougne‡

LS2N UMR6004 CNRS
University of Nantes

Yannick Prié§

LS2N UMR6004 CNRS
University of Nantes

Toinon Vigier¶

LS2N UMR6004 CNRS
University of Nantes

Figure 1: Three decades of various immersive analytics systems using CAVE [43], stereoscopic [4], or Head Mounted [15] Displays.

ABSTRACT

Advances in 3D hardware and software have led to increasingly
cheaper and simple-to-use immersive virtual reality systems that can
provide real-time interactive 3D data representation. The immersive
analytics field is developing as the newest avatar of 3D visual analyt-
ics, which may relaunch the long enduring 2D vs 3D visualization
debate. However, the terms of the debate have changed: leveraging
3D human perception within virtual environments is now easier, and
the immersive quality of today’s rendering is sufficient enough for
researchers to concentrate on testing and designing immersive data
representation and interaction rather than on technological problems.
In this position paper we propose a short historical perspective on
the use of immersive technologies for visual analytics and on the 2D
vs 3D debate. We stress out five principles that we think should be
followed to explore the HMD-based visual analytics design space,
before introducing ongoing work within the IDEA project.

CCS CONCEPTS
• Human-Centered Computing→ Virtual Reality;Visual Analyt-
ics;Information visualisation

1 INTRODUCTION

Within the research fields concerned with visual analysis of abstract
data, Visual Data Mining [51] focuses on computer mining pro-
cesses and the visualization of their results, while Visual Analytics
is more concerned with the human analyst who has to ”get a feeling
for the data, detect interesting knowledge, and gain a deep visual
understanding of the data set” [6]. The advent of lab accessible 3D
technologies in the 1990’s developed research on the contribution
of 3D to visual analytics. Indeed, researchers argued that taking

*e-mail: g.cliquet@lecolededesign.com
†e-mail: matthieu.perreira@univ-nantes.fr
‡e-mail: fabien.picarougne@univ-nantes.fr
§e-mail: yannick.prie@univ-nantes.fr
¶e-mail: toinon.vigier@univ-nantes.fr

advantage of human capabilities for 3D perception and spatial cog-
nition would considerably improve knowledge discovery through
visual representations adequate for rapid information recognition
and pattern detection [9]. However, these lines of work seem to have
been depreciated by a probably biased debate between 2D and 3D
enthusiasts, and a widely-shared though not clearly stated consensus
amongst the datavis community on the supposed non-utility of the
use of 3D technologies for data visualization and analytics.

One of the caveats of this debate may be that 3D has not been well
defined. Indeed, 3D human perception implies a lot of depth cues
that can only be satisfied by the use of dedicated equipment, such as
those used in Virtual Reality: CAVE, HMD, spatial tracking, etc. But
the difficulty to access to or implement such complex technical solu-
tions, has often limited experiments to use 2D flat display, largely
jeopardizing the possibility to design useful 3D systems. Moreover,
recent advances in 3D related hardware and software have led to
increasingly cheaper and simple-to-use Head-Mounted Displays
(HMD) that provide consumer with real-time tracking and interac-
tive 3D data representation. Sustained by the equivalent maturing of
consumer grade Augmented Reality (AR) technology, researchers
and industrial are once again getting involved in designing 3D-based
data exploration tools, and the newly named ”Immersive analytics”
field [11] is developing along various seminars, scientific workshops,
startups, and community building initiatives. Indeed, the terms of
the 2D/3D debate have changed, as the quality of consumer-grade
immersive systems has now reached a sufficient level to allow de-
signers to concentrate on the design and the test of immersive data
representation and interaction.

In the first part of this paper we propose a perspective on the use
of immersive technologies for visual analytics, and further discuss
the 2D/3D debate. The second part is dedicated to stressing out five
principles that we think should be followed for HMD-based visual
analytics studies. We then rapidly present the research directions
we are following in our IDEA (Immersive Data Exploration and
Analysis) interdisciplinary group.



2 IMMERSIVE TECHNOLOGIES FOR VISUAL ANALYTICS
2.1 Depth cues for 3D visual perception
3D human visual perception is mainly related to the ability of our
brain to discern depth. Several factors (depth cues) are involved in
this perception mechanism. They have been widely studied in the lit-
erature [14,30] and come from different stimuli: ocular (accommoda-
tion and vergence), pictorial (shading, size and occlusion), dynamic
(motion cues) and stereopsis (binocular disparity). While the relative
importance of the different depth cues is still an open question, the
current consensus carefully states that they are complementary, and
that the quality of a 3D representation is strongly correlated with the
effectiveness of the depth perception it conveys [12].

2.2 A short history of VR in visual analytics
Although the literature is not abundant on the subject, VR and
more generally Virtual Environment (VE) have long been used for
(scientific) data visualization, while visual analytics in VE began in
the mid-90’. The first systems used CAVE (e.g. [43]) for database
visualization. The development of inexpensive rendering techniques,
such as stereoscopic display, later encouraged the implementation of
generic VR-based visualizations that took into account the associated
advantages. For instance, [4, 35] did extend basic techniques such
as scatterplots to 3D, leveraging audio-visual aspects of VR so as to
create mutually perceptually distinguishable attributes. Since these
early works, several adaptations of visual analytics methods have
been carried in VR such as [18] in the graph domain, or [50] for Self
Organizing Maps. A more detailed review of different techniques is
proposed by [15, 19].

Parallel to this system-related line of research, other more
theoretically-oriented studies tried to establish the added value of
VE in the context of visual analytics. A number of researcher have
showed that the benefits of VR for helping people better understand
their data, both from a perceptual [2, 12, 32, 48] or a more hard-
ware [49] point of view. They notably have demonstrated that, with
the use of appropriate depth cues, 3D perception can improve the
intelligibility of the data, allow to disambiguate complex abstract
representations, and make it easier to move a shape mentally.

2.3 The 2D vs 3D debate
As mentioned earlier, a debate regarding the use of 2D vs 3D in
data visualization has persisted for at least twenty years. It has
been raised in several communities with different arguments. To
name a few, the graph drawing community has for instance long
considered that 3D visualizations have significant difficulties mainly
due to perceptual and navigational conflicts when using 2D screens
and 2D input devices to interact with a 3D world [22]. 3D having
even been considered as ”a prejudicial epiphenomena” by one of
the major figures of the community [17]. Argumentation in the
infovis community has been more focused on the nature of the
data, mostly involving categorical variables (as opposed to scientific
visualization), for which conventional 2D techniques such as 2D
scatterplots with color and size coding are sufficient for the typical
tasks related to patterns, trends or outliers discovery [42].

The 2D/3D debate still persists today with arguments about per-
formance issues (3D requires large calculations), or the relative
importance between resolution and immersion (immersion involves
a large field of view, reducing the resolution for the same number of
pixels displayed) [34]. However we think there are two reasons for
which it may have been based on unstable foundations.

A first reason would be related to the non acknowledgment of
the difference between monoscopic 3D rendering on 2D screens and
immersive 3D. Yet perception is undoubtedly different in immersive
environments and on flat 2D screens, as several experiments have
showed interesting properties of immersion related to estimation
of relative depths [14], perception of specific objects through an
important visual clutter [33], perception of camouflaged objects [47],

perception of curved surfaces and textures [26], and perception of
the quality of the representation despite the impact of several image
degradations (noise, low contrast, low definition...) [33].

A second reason would be related to visual fatigue and cybersick-
ness [31] due to early stereoscopic displays and VR systems. Indeed,
the hardware limitations in terms of resolution, latency, etc., and
the ocular and vestibular constraints (e.g. accommodation/vergence
conflict) have long damaged the user experience and prevented fairly
lengthy immersion sessions that would have enabled efficient visual
analytics [46]. However, the recent technological progresses have
led to the development of light and high quality consumer-graded
VR devices which opens the way to a regular use of VR systems and
pushes several research works to even more reduced discomfort and
fatigue [38, 44].

As a conclusion of this short discussion, 3D and VR techniques
still have a potential to assist decision-makers in analytical tasks.
For instance, by deeply immersing users in data sets they allow
analysts to explore data and/or knowledge from the inside-out and
not from the outside-in as in 2D techniques [36]. Such use cases
can only be tested by using VR environments where users are, by
design, allowed to navigate continuously to new positions inside
the data sets, gaining more insights about the data. The advent of
new VR technologies leads us to believe that the 2D/3D debate is
far from being closed, but that it may be relaunched on a sounder
basis, around the determination of cases in which immersive visual
analytics is better than 2D visual analytic, or provides possibilities
that are not feasible in 2D.

3 TOWARDS HMD-BASED VISUAL ANALYTICS

The recent introduction of affordable good quality HMDs such as
Oculus Rift and HTC Vive allowed investigations in HMD-based im-
mersive analytics, with promiseful results. [13] showed for instance
that modern HMDs provide comparable experiences to CAVE2 sys-
tems for collaborative graph exploration, even reducing time to
complete tasks, for a fraction of the cost. It may be only a matter of
months before researchers have easy access to wireless high-quality
HMD, with integrated eye-tracking, as well as robust hand, body,
and objects tracking, and hand/body active haptic systems. Such
technical capabilities will unfold an enormous design space for ab-
stract data HMD-based immersive analytics. This design space will
need careful definition and exploration. We propose below five
principles that may be of help in that exciting scientific journey.

3.1 Design for daily immersive analytics

A first crucial principle is to design for professionals who spend
time working on actual datasets, within everyday work settings [7].
Showing examples of practical usefulness of HMD-based immersive
analytics is indeed mandatory for developing immersive analytics
community.

Developing scenarios with credible tasks and objectives under-
lines the importance of studying work context at various levels to
leverage acceptance. Focusing on real world tasks that last suffi-
ciently long (i.e. more than half an hour) seems important, as well
as being able to sit while conducting immersive data exploration
tasks. The integration of the classical desktop remains a question, to
which various answers can be given. [54] propose that users mostly
remain seated at their desks putting in and out their HMD. Another
possibility is that the user hops for a data exploration session in a
chair with rollers and a tablet, that both allows for 360° rotation and
movements, while still giving access to papers or keyboard if needed
(see section 4). Such solutions could be enhanced by completely
freeing the user from his desktop if VR desktop-like applications
for knowledge work develop (such as web browser, mailer, word
processor, spreadsheet, social apps, etc.), together with robust text
input devices [53].



Lastly, social acceptability of VR for future workers, mostly
related to social interactions from VR to the external real work
environment, is also a key, but this question exceeds immersive
analytics per se and may be out of scope for the moment being.

3.2 Create spaces for bodily-engaged users
We are talking here of virtual and real spaces, within which users
will act physically. Displacements in real space are mainly of 3
types: move the head while sitting; move the head and rotate the
body while standing; or freely move (e.g. walk) at room scale level.
Those can be combined with various body parts movements such as
hands, arms, legs, feet, etc. There has been a lot of transfer function
proposals to map these to displacement, body movements, command
launching, virtual spaces, not to mention the use of dedicated con-
trollers, gloves, or all kind of tangible props that can as well play
the role of passive (e.g. tablets [3]) or active haptic (e.g. gloves [8])
feedback effectors.

There is a crucial challenge in considering the embodied con-
nection to data entailed by movements, postures, displacements,
gestures, etc. Immersion and presence in VR environments allow
designers to make use of a lot of the embodied perception and in-
teraction capabilities [16], proprioception largely complementing
visual perception when the head, the arms, and the whole body are
engaged in action. For instance spatial memory would allow an ana-
lyst to literally remember with his body where objects are behind his
back, while unconscious body-related measurements would allow
to compare distances from or between datapoints. Objects can also
be at various ego-centered distances, from arm’s reach to walking
reach, to teleporting reach, etc.

We think that VR immersive analytics spaces should be designed
so as to make maximal use of the analyst’s body. This implies
designing for various physical distances to data, providing useful
proximal and distal points of views on datapoints withing a coherent
space. Movements in or out of the data have to be considered, which
complement zooming in or out. Also, datapoints becoming ”real”
objects (and not just points) around which users can move, that
can be manipulated, examined, carried, etc. one has to study the
affordances they should provide, their shapes, their associated tools
(what is an inspector?), etc.

3.3 Pay attention to perception at every stage
Although perception is largely studied in VR, visual analytics raise
new perceptual challenges and constraints which should be taken
into account at every stage of the design process, from ideation to
production to evaluation. Such challenges are mostly related to 3D
data visualization (e.g. impact of depth and distances on 3D percep-
tion of shapes, colors and contrasts [45]) and data visualization in
VR (color [21] as well as shape and size [5] perception in peripheral
vision); but hardware-related aspects are also very important (e.g.
impact of display resolution and latency on data perception). These
questions should be tackled both at theoretical and empirical levels:
data visualization and interaction design choices should both be
motivated from previous theoretical knowledge about human percep-
tion, and subjectively tested for the specific tasks of the dedicated
immersive analytics application.

We also want to stress out visual attention as a perceptual aspect
of particular importance, that can be used either to improve the over-
all comfort of a 3D data visualization, or to analyze user’s behavior
during immersive data analysis. With regards to comfort, knowledge
about where the user is gazing at can be used to adjust both dis-
parity and depth of focus in real time, which are two major factors
linked to stereoscopic viewing comfort [52]. Such possibilities have
already been investigated in the last ten years in immersive rooms
or stereoscopic screens using eye-tracking [24] or visual attention
models [10,23]. But the imminent availability of eye-tracking HMD
promises a democratization of these perceptual improvements as

well as the possibility to use gaze recordings for perceptual render-
ing through simulated fovea [37]. Concerning the study of users’
behaviors, if some work has already been conducted for visual analyt-
ics [29], the extension to immersive analytics remains to be studied.
This extension is a challenge for the eye-tracking community as the
study of visual attention in VR environment still remains an open
research question from both theoretical (e.g. scanpath comparison
methods) and methodological (e.g. experimental protocols) points
of view [39].

Lastly, because VR immersive analytics mainly challenges 3D
data visualization, most of our previous examples deal with visual
perception. However, as claimed in Section 3.2, HMD-based immer-
sive analytics should enable users to be physically engaged in the
VE. This implies that immersive analytics perceptual studies should
involve multiple sensory modalities [25]. It is also a crucial topic to
study discomfort and cybersickness in VR, as they are mainly caused
by inter-sensory constraints, e.g. vestibulo-ocular conflicts [40].

3.4 Use design methods and processes
There is no design method for immersive analytics yet, and it is not
clear if such methods are desirable. Yet we think that one should
pay careful attention to their processes when designing immersive
analytic systems, both as guides in the design process, and for later
reflection, so as to hopefully to come up with shareable actionable
conclusions on how to design immersive analytics. There are some
directions that may be worth looking at, beyond classical design
thinking, UX design, or more focused HCI/vis methods. First, gen-
eral VR methods and tools [28] may be useful to design specific
virtual environments dedicated to data visualizations. Tools to de-
sign VR environments and program from within VR could also be
leveraged, which could lead to the development of rapid prototyping
environments for immersive visualization. Second, taking advantage
of physical representations of data [27] by implementing them in VR
should provide valuables insights. These representations could either
be physically constructed through design workshops, or already be
on the shelf. Third, there should be value in the translation of clas-
sical data visualizations into immersive environment, a challenge
that has to be tackled, and for which work should be acknowledged
in publication [41]. Such translation should focus on taking into
account body engagement (e.g. climbable barcharts, or pie-chart
parts that can be manipulated), using classical VR interaction means
first, and only developing dedicated tools if needed.

3.5 Provide shareable experiences to build community
Reading the description of a new VR interaction means in a scientific
paper can take several minutes of struggling with a few paragraphs,
without being sure to fully grasp the embodied signification of it,
while actually experiencing the interaction means may just takes a
few seconds to allows this grasping. We think that it is crucial that
publications are accompanied with shared immersive experiences.
Hopefully WebVR [1] will soon allow to share valuable snippets
of immersive analytics representation / interaction proposals. Open
sourcing could also be a solution for incremental co-building of
shareable immersive analytics frameworks and workspaces [20].

4 THE IDEA PROJECT
The IDEA project (Immersive Data Exploration and Analysis)
gathers both designers and Data science, HCI/Vis, and percep-
tion/attention/VR scientists. The aim of the project is to explore
both representation, interaction, and evaluation means for Immersive
Analytics. Following our first principles, our main design decision
has been to use a roller-chair with a tablet, freeing the user from
his desk and allowing him to either sit, stand, or walk (fig. 2). We
are currently developing an open-source framework for immersive
analytics environments adapted to such work context, while design-
ing and testing various data representations and interaction means.



Figure 2: IDEA project preliminary developments. Users have roller
chairs with tablets, they can either sit, stand, or walk to explore and
interact with the data environment, so as to make maximal use of
embodied perception and action.

The immersive analytics experiences proposals will be evaluated
using datavis methods with a focus on eye-tracking and attention
modeling.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors wish to thank the developers of the IDEA environment
Florian Melki and Rodolphe Rosalie. The IDEA Project is funded
by the Pays de la Loire French region (West Creative Industries
program) and Episteme ANR project (ANR-14-CE24-0028).

REFERENCES
[1] WebVR explained. https://github.com/w3c/webvr/blob/
master/explainer.md. Accessed: 2017-07-13.

[2] Y. Aitsiselmi and N. S. Holliman. Using mental rotation to evaluate the
benefits of stereoscopic displays. In SPIE 7237, Stereoscopic Displays
and Applications XX, 2009.

[3] I. G. Angus and H. A. Sowizral. Embedding the 2d interaction metaphor
in a real 3d virtual environment. In Proceedings Volume 2409, Stereo-
scopic Displays and Virtual Reality Systems II, pp. 282–293, 1995.

[4] H. Azzag, F. Picarougne, C. Guinot, and G. Venturini. VRMiner: a tool
for multimedia databases mining with virtual reality. In J. Darmont
and O. Boussaid, eds., Processing and Managing Complex Data for
Decision Support, pp. 318–339. IDea Group Publishing,, Apr. 2006.

[5] J. Baldwin, A. Burleigh, R. Pepperell, and N. Ruta. The perceived size
and shape of objects in peripheral vision. i-Perception, 7(4), 2016.

[6] C. Beilken and M. Spenke. Visual, interactive data mining with info-
zoom - the medical data set. In Workshop notes on discovery challenge.
PKDD, pp. 49–54, Sept 1999.

[7] M. Bellgardt, S. Pick, D. Zielasko, T. Vierjahn, B. Weyers, and T. W.
Kuhlen. Utilizing immersive virtual reality in everyday work. In 3rd
IEEE Workshop on Everyday Virtual Reality (WEVR), 2017.

[8] J. Blake and H. B. Gurocak. Haptic glove with mr brakes for virtual
reality. IEEE/ASME Trans. on Mechatronics, 14(5):606–615, Oct 2009.

[9] S. K. Card, J. D. Mackinlay, and B. Shneiderman, eds. Readings in
Information Visualization: Using Vision to Think. Morgan Kaufmann
Publishers Inc., San Francisco, CA, USA, 1999.

[10] C. Chamaret, S. Godeffroy, P. Lopez, and O. Le Meur. Adaptive 3d
rendering based on region-of-interest. In Proc. SPIE, vol. 7524, 2010.

[11] T. Chandler, M. Cordeil, T. Czauderna, T. Dwyer, J. Glowacki,
C. Goncu, M. Klapperstueck, K. Klein, K. Marriott, F. Schreiber, and
E. Wilson. Immersive analytics. In BDVA, pp. 1–8, Sept 2015.

[12] I. Cho, W. Dou, Z. Wartell, W. Ribarsky, and X. Wang. Evaluating
depth perception of volumetric data in semi-immersive vr. In 2012
IEEE Virtual Reality Workshops (VRW), pp. 95–96, March 2012.

[13] M. Cordeil, T. Dwyer, K. Klein, B. Laha, K. Marriott, and B. H.
Thomas. Immersive collaborative analysis of network connectivity:
Cave-style or head-mounted display? IEEE TVCG, 23(1):441–450,
Jan 2017.

[14] J. E. Cutting. How the eye measures reality and virtual reality. Behavior
Research Methods, Instruments, & Computers, 29(1):27–36, Mar 1997.

[15] C. Donalek, S. G. Djorgovski, A. Cioc, A. Wang, J. Zhang, E. Lawler,
S. Yeh, A. Mahabal, M. Graham, A. Drake, S. Davidoff, J. S. Norris,
and G. Longo. Immersive and collaborative data visualization using
virtual reality platforms. In IEEE Big Data, pp. 609–614, Oct 2014.

[16] P. Dourish. Where the Action Is. The Foundations of Embodied Inter-
action. MIT Press, oct 2001.

[17] P. Eades. On the future of graph drawing. Invited talk, 18th Interna-
tional Symposium on Graph Drawing, 2010.

[18] N. Férey, P. E. Gros, J. Hérisson, and R. Gherbi. Visual data mining of
genomic databases by immersive graph-based exploration. In Proc. of
the 3rd Int. Conf. on Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques,
GRAPHITE ’05, pp. 143–146. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 2005.

[19] R. J. Garca-Hernndez, C. Anthes, M. Wiedemann, and D. Kranzlmller.
Perspectives for using virtual reality to extend visual data mining in
information visualization. In IEEE Aerospace, pp. 1–11, March 2016.

[20] R. Hackathorn and T. Margolis. Immersive analytics: Building virtual
data worlds for collaborative decision support. In 2016 Workshop on
Immersive Analytics (IA), pp. 44–47, March 2016.

[21] T. Hansen, L. Pracejus, and K. R. Gegenfurtner. Color perception
in the intermediate periphery of the visual field. Journal of Vision,
9(4):26–26, 2009.

[22] I. Herman, G. Melancon, and M. S. Marshall. Graph visualization and
navigation in information visualization: A survey. IEEE Transactions
on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 6(1):24–43, Jan 2000.

[23] S. Hillaire, A. Lécuyer, G. Breton, and T. R. Corte. Gaze behavior and
visual attention model when turning in virtual environments. In ACM
Symp. on VR Software and Technology, pp. 43–50, 2009.

[24] S. Hillaire, A. Lécuyer, R. Cozot, and G. Casiez. Using an eye-tracking
system to improve camera motions and depth-of-field blur effects in
virtual environments. In Virtual Reality, pp. 47–50. IEEE, 2008.

[25] T. Hogan, U. Hinrichs, and E. Hornecker. The visual and beyond:
Characterizing experiences with auditory, haptic and visual data repre-
sentations. In DIS, pp. 797–809. ACM, 2017.

[26] N. Holliman. 3d display systems. Technical report, University of
Durham, 2005.

[27] Y. Jansen, P. Dragicevic, P. Isenberg, J. Alexander, A. Karnik, J. Kildal,
S. Subramanian, and K. Hornbæk. Opportunities and challenges for
data physicalization. In Proc. CHI’15, pp. 3227–3236. ACM, 2015.

[28] J. Jerald. The VR Book: Human-Centered Design for Virtual Reality.
AMC and Morgan & Claypool, New York, 2016.

[29] K. Kurzhals, B. Fisher, M. Burch, and D. Weiskopf. Evaluating visual
analytics with eye tracking. In BELIV Workshop, pp. 61–69, 2014.

[30] M. Landy, L. Maloney, and M. Young. Psychophysical estimation of
the human depth combination rule, vol. 1383, pp. 247–254. Publ by
Int Soc for Optical Engineering, 1991.

[31] J. J. LaViola Jr. A discussion of cybersickness in virtual environments.
ACM SIGCHI Bulletin, 32(1):47–56, 2000.

[32] J. I. Maletic, A. Marcus, G. Dunlap, and J. Leigh. Visualizing object-
oriented software in virtual reality. In Workshop on Program Compre-
hension), May 2001, Toronto, Canada, pp. 26–35, 2001.

[33] J. Merritt. Evaluation of stereoscopic display benefits. Introduction
to stereoscopic displays and applications. In: SPIE The International
Society for Optical Engineering, 33, 1991.

[34] T. Munzner. Visualization analysis and design. CRC press, 2014.
[35] H. R. Nagel, E. Granum, S. Bovbjerg, and M. Vittrup. Immersive

Visual Data Mining, pp. 281–311. Springer, 2008.
[36] L. Nelson, D. Cook, and C. Cruz-Neira. Xgobi vs the c2: Results of

an experiment comparing data visualization in a 3-d immersive virtual
reality environment with a 2-d workstation display. Computational
Statistics, 14(1):39–51, Mar 1999.

[37] A. Patney, J. Kim, M. Salvi, A. Kaplanyan, C. Wyman, N. Benty,
A. Lefohn, and D. Luebke. Perceptually-based foveated virtual reality.
In ACM SIGGRAPH 2016 Emerging Technologies, p. 17. ACM, 2016.

[38] T. M. Porcino, E. Clua, D. Trevisan, C. N. Vasconcelos, and L. Valente.
Minimizing cyber sickness in head mounted display systems: design
guidelines and applications. In 5th Int. Conf. on Serious Games and
Applications for Health (SeGAH), pp. 1–6. IEEE, 2017.

[39] Y. Rai, J. Gutiérrez, and P. Le Callet. A Dataset of Head and Eye
Movements for 360 Degree Images. In Proc. 8th Conf. on Multimedia
Systems, MMSys’17, pp. 205–210. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 2017.

https://github.com/w3c/webvr/blob/master/explainer.md
https://github.com/w3c/webvr/blob/master/explainer.md


[40] L. Rebenitsch and C. Owen. Review on cybersickness in applications
and visual displays. Virtual Reality, 20(2):101–125, 2016.

[41] R. Sadana, V. Setlur, and J. Stasko. Redefining a contribution for
immersive visualization research. In Proc. Companion on Interactive
Surfaces and Spaces, ISS Companion ’16, pp. 41–45. ACM, 2016.

[42] B. Shneiderman. Why not make interfaces better than 3d reality? IEEE
Computer Graphics and Applications, 23(6):12–15, Nov 2003.

[43] J. Symanzik, D. Cook, B. D. Kohlmeyer, and C. Cruz-Neira. Dynamic
statistical graphics in the cave virtual reality environment. In Proc.
Dynamic Statistical Graphics Workshop. Citeseer, 1996.

[44] K. Terzić and M. Hansard. Methods for reducing visual discomfort in
stereoscopic 3d: a review. Signal Processing: Image Communication,
47:402–416, 2016.

[45] J. T. Todd. The visual perception of 3D shape. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 8(3), 2004. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2004.01.006

[46] A. Van Dam, A. S. Forsberg, D. H. Laidlaw, J. J. LaViola, and R. M.
Simpson. Immersive vr for scientific visualization: A progress report.
IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications, 20(6):26–52, 2000.

[47] S. G. Wardle, J. Cass, K. R. Brooks, and D. Alais. Breaking camouflage:
Binocular disparity reduces contrast masking in natural images. Journal
of vision, 10(14):38–38, 2010.

[48] C. Ware and P. Mitchell. Visualizing graphs in three dimensions. ACM
Trans. Appl. Percept., 5(1):2:1–2:15, Jan. 2008.

[49] E. J. Wegman and J. Symanzik. Immersive projection technology for
visual data mining. Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics,
11(1):163–188, 2002.

[50] D. Wijayasekara, O. Linda, and M. Manic. Cave-som: Immersive visual
data mining using 3d self-organizing maps. In The 2011 International
Joint Conference on Neural Networks, pp. 2471–2478, July 2011.

[51] P. C. Wong. Visual data mining. IEEE Computer Graphics and
Applications, 19(5):20–21, Sept 1999.

[52] M. Wöpking. Viewing comfort with stereoscopic pictures: An experi-
mental study on the subjective effects of disparity magnitude and depth
of focus. J. of the society for information display, 3(3):101–103, 1995.

[53] C.-M. Wu, C.-W. Hsu, T.-K. Lee, and S. Smith. A virtual reality
keyboard with realistic haptic feedback in a fully immersive virtual
environment. Virtual Reality, 21(1):19–29, Mar 2017.

[54] D. Zielasko, B. Weyers, M. Bellgardt, S. Pick, A. Meibner, T. Vierjahn,
and T. W. Kuhlen. Remain seated: towards fully-immersive desktop
VR. In 3rd IEEE Workshop on Everyday Virtual Reality, pp. 1–6, 2017.


	Introduction
	Immersive technologies for visual analytics
	Depth cues for 3D visual perception
	A short history of VR in visual analytics
	The 2D vs 3D debate

	Towards HMD-based visual analytics
	Design for daily immersive analytics
	Create spaces for bodily-engaged users
	Pay attention to perception at every stage
	Use design methods and processes
	Provide shareable experiences to build community

	The IDEA Project

