













































Seventh European Workshop on Standardised Procedure for the Inspection of Sprayers – SPISE 7 -, Athens, Greece, September 26 – 28, 2018 

 

Berichte aus dem Julius Kühn-Institut 196  287 

 

Spanish’s experience on improving inspection of sprayers: official manual for 
ISO 16122 and ISO 16119 
Emilio Gil, Javier Campos and Paula Ortega

 

Department of Agri Food Engineering and Biotechnology - Unit of Agricultural Machinery - Universitat Politécnica 
de Catalunya - Esteve Terradas, 8 - 08860 - Castelldefels (Barcelona) - SPAIN 

Summary 

Mandatory inspections in Spain are organized following ISO 16122. In order to guarantee a clear and 
comprehensive inspection’s procedure in all of the official inspection’s workshops, the Spanish Ministry 
of Agriculture published an official inspection’s manual based on ISO 16122 in order to improve and 
harmonize the process. 

On the other hand, and considering the more and more cases of new sprayers with difficulties to fulfill 
the mandatory inspections requirements, an official manual for sprayer’s manufacturers have been 
published in collaboration with the Spanish Association of Agricultural Machinery Manufacturers 
(ANSEMAT) giving them a practical document to fulfill the requirements established in ISO 16119. 

Both documents have been written by the research team of UMA-UPC. In this paper will be presented 
the objectives, structure and success of the two official manuals. 

Introduction 

Since the official publication of European Directive for a Sustainable Use of Pesticides (SUD) (EC, 
2009a), the inspection of sprayers in use in Europe became mandatory in all EU members. Since that 
date, the mandatory process was adopted in a different way in all countries, with great differences 
among them, both in terms of experience, capabilities and resources. 

Concerning the technical aspects of the inspection procedure, the requested mandate from the 
European Commission to the CEN (Committee European of normalization) started a large and intense 
process in order to produce new harmonized standards to be adopted in all EU members for the 
inspection of all pesticide application equipment (PAE), in line with the specifications of Annex II of the 
SUD (EC, 2009). 

Before the official publication of SUD, inspection of sprayers in use was already arranged in some 
countries, either on a voluntary basis or linked to specific national requirements. Technically, the 
process followed European Standard documents, as EN 13790-1&2. These standards, only available for 
boom and orchard sprayers (parts 1 and 2 respectively) have been deeply reviewed and finally published 
as EN ISO 16122 (parts 1,2,3 and 4) (ISO, 2015). This new series of harmonized standards requires 
technical skills for a complete interpretation and application. That’s was the reason why Ministry of 
Agriculture in Spain started a process to elaborate an official Manual for inspection of sprayers in use, in 
order to provide to all the official inspector’s workshops a practical guide for a fully application of ISO 
16122 series. This paper offers a detailed explanation about the  

Difficulties to follow International Standards on a daily inspection activity 

Official documents establishing the technical procedure for a complete inspection of sprayers in use 
(EN ISO 16122 series) are not a good example of clear, objective and easy to read documents. These 
facts lead to a difficulty in the interpretation and application of technical requirements during an 
inspection process. Especially for those non-frequent standard-readers, by the way the larger number 
of official inspectors and workshop’s directors in Spain. This fact leads into practical problems that can 
be upgrade into administrative failures, due to absence of objectivity during the inspection process. 
This feeling is widely disseminated in general among technicians when talking about the official 
standard documents and its difficulties to be implemented. For all these previous reasons, it was 



Seventh European Workshop on Standardised Procedure for the Inspection of Sprayers – SPISE 7 -, Athens, Greece, September 26 – 28, 2018 

 

288  Berichte aus dem Julius Kühn-Institut 196 

 

decided in Spain to develop an official guideline to help the users in the application of the official 
standards. 

Manual for inspection of sprayers: structure and contents 

This tool is mainly focused and dedicated to facilitate the comprehension of the whole procedure for 
the future inspectors and inspection’s workshop responsible. The manual (Figure 4) has been developed 
by Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya and Centre de Mecanització Agraria (Generalitat de Catalunya), 
and includes detailed explanation (with graphical and pictures support) of every single action to be 
developed during the inspection procedure. The main objective of this manual is to facilitate all 
stakeholders involved in the inspection process the detailed knowledge and abilities to manage the 
international standards officially in use for the purpose (EN ISO 16122-1,2 & 3). The structure of the 
manual has been established as a guideline during the practical process of the inspections. During the 
whole document, the information and contents have been structured as indicated in Figure 1. The left 
part of the book includes specific pictures/graphics concerning the subject explained in the right part. 
Pictures with “good or bad marks” indicate good or bad thinks on different aspects to be considered. 
The right part of the book contains, for every specific aspect during the inspection process, the official 
wording according the EU standards, the established procedure (measurement, checking, control...), 
some practical recommendations for the inspector and the evaluation process depending on the 
inspection results. The Manual contains all aspects concerning the inspection of sprayers in use, 
according EN ISO  16122, for field crop sprayers (part 2) and orchard and bush trees sprayers (part 3).  
First part of the manual is dedicated to a complete explanation of part 1 of the standard. 

This manual has been adopted as the official reference document in the Spanish legislation concerning 
the mandatory inspection program (BOE, 2011), and it has been distributed during the official 
inspector’s training courses. 

The new version of the manual includes all the changes, new incorporations and new evaluation criteria 
appeared in the new harmonized standard ISO 16122. 

 

 

Figure 1. Manual for inspection of sprayers in use. Main page (left) and structure (right). Available at 
www.uma.deab.upc.edu  and www.magrama.es  ) 

Software for inspections and structure of manual 

As it was arranged previously, the Spanish authorities allocated the manual of inspections as the official 
reference book for the process. Linked to that, it was also adopted as official software the one 
developed by Universidad de Zaragoza (Gil et al. 2014) (https://eps.unizar.es/priteaf ) (Fig. 2). 

http://www.uma.deab.upc.edu/
http://www.magrama.es/
https://eps.unizar.es/priteaf


Seventh European Workshop on Standardised Procedure for the Inspection of Sprayers – SPISE 7 -, Athens, Greece, September 26 – 28, 2018 

 

Berichte aus dem Julius Kühn-Institut 196  289 

 

 

 

Figure 2. Architectonic structure of PRITEAF software 

 

After the official publication of new harmonized standard ISO 16122, and once the new manual for 
inspection of sprayers has been updated and officially published as the reference book, also the 
software has been modified. With the main objective to clarify and simplify the inspection process, the 
new software has been adapted according the structure of the new manual of inspections. 

Importance of guarantee the quality of new sprayers: Manual for manufactures 

Technical characteristics of the sprayers have an important effect during the inspection process being. 
Theoretically, a new sprayer should simplify the inspection process by accomplishing the mandatory 
requirements. However, more often than expected, some difficulties have been observed with new or 
close to new sprayers, showing difficulties to accomplish the technical requests established in ISO 
16122. More often than expected, also, failures in accomplishment of ISO 161109 have been observed. 

 

 

Fig. 3.  Practical guideline for the application of ISO 16119 developed by UMA-UPC in collaboration with 
the Spanish Association of Agricultural Machinery Manufacturers/Dealers (ANSEMAT). 

 



Seventh European Workshop on Standardised Procedure for the Inspection of Sprayers – SPISE 7 -, Athens, Greece, September 26 – 28, 2018 

 

290  Berichte aus dem Julius Kühn-Institut 196 

 

This fact leads to an official arrangement with the Spanish Association of Sprayer’s manufacturers with 
the main objective to guarantee the complete accomplishment of the official requirement for new 
sprayers (ISO 16119). This collaboration allowed to demonstrate the difficulties encountered by 
medium/small manufactures in the total accomplishment of the requirements, in most cases due to the 
absence of information of need for additional explanation. Also, it has been proved the difficulties of 
evaluate the sprayers following the ISO 16119-3. The assays were expensive, time-consuming and 
complex (Gil et al, 2018) A complete application of the standard may require a lot of resources. This can 
be a serious problem for a large number of European sprayer’s manufacturers bellowing to SME group., 
with limited resources and facilities. Even more, another not quantified difficulty is related with the lack 
of knowledge of most of those medium/small sprayer’s manufactures, with important difficulties to 
understand all the established requirements. It is important to improve the communication and 
feedback from national representative on International Standardization Bodies and local 
manufacturers, in order to guarantee a clear and useful information channel. In this sense, as a 
requirement of the Spanish Association of Agricultural Machinery Manufacturers (ANSEMAT), UMA-
UPC has developed a practical guideline (Fig. 3) with clear and practical information including real 
examples, in order to help the Spanish sprayer’s manufactures in the complex process of the 
accomplishment of ISO 16119 series. This practical guide includes, in more than 80 pages, a complete 
description of all the requirements and tests procedures to guarantee a complete accomplishment of 
ISO 16119. This guideline (Fig. 4) has been written with the main objective to help sprayer’s 
manufacturers in the accomplishment of the mandatory requirements derived from the European 
Machine Directive (EC, 2009b). 

 

Figure 4. Technical guideline (87 pages) with detailed explanation about test methods, material, procedure 
and evaluation results following ISO 16119 (1,2&3) 

Conclusions 

The Spanish experience has widely demonstrated the interest for a good guideline as support for the 
fully accomplishment of the official international standards. Due to different reasons, unfortunately in 
some cases, ISO 16122 result unclear and tricky interpretable, resulting on a difference criterion of 
interpretations. For that reasons, the implementation and official publication of a manual for 
inspections resulted clearly well appreciated by all the official inspection’s workshops in Spain. For all 
those technicians not very well experienced with the international standards, the manual of inspections 
represents a clear and useful tool. 



Seventh European Workshop on Standardised Procedure for the Inspection of Sprayers – SPISE 7 -, Athens, Greece, September 26 – 28, 2018 

 

Berichte aus dem Julius Kühn-Institut 196  291 

 

Concerning the difficulties to apply the ISO 16119 specially in the case of small and medium size 
manufacturers, it has been clearly detected deriving in an unintentional non accomplishment of the 
technical requirements. 

It is important to improve the communication and feedback from national representative on 
International Standardization Bodies and local manufacturers, in order to guarantee a clear and useful 
information channel. In this sense, as a requirement of the Spanish Association of Agricultural 
Machinery Manufacturers (ANSEMAT), UMA-UPC has developed a practical guideline with clear and 
practical information including real examples, in order to help the Spanish sprayer’s manufactures in 
the complex process of the accomplishment of ISO 16119 series. 

References 

BOE 2011 Real Decreto 1702/2011, de 18 de noviembre, de inspecciones periódicas de los equipos de 
aplicación de productos fitosanitarios. BOE Nº 296, 9 diciembre de 2011, secc. I pag. 130569. Available 
at: www.boe.es  

EC/127. Directive 2009/127/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 21 October 2009 
amending Directive 2006/42/EC with regard to machinery for pesticide application; 2009 [Of. J. EU, 
25.11.2009, L 310/29]. 

EC/128. Directive 2009/128/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 21 October 2009 
establishing a framework for Community action to achieve the sustainable use of pesticides; 2009 [Of. 
J. EU, 24.11.2009, L 309/71]. 

Gil, E., Jiménez, A., García-Ramos, J. 2014. Manual for inspection of sprayers in use and PRITEAF, 
dedicated software for inspection of sprayers: success tools developed for the inspector’s training 
process in Spain. Fifth European Workshop on Standardised Procedure for the Inspection of Sprayers in 
Europe - SPISE 5. Die Deutsche Nationalbibliothek verzeichnet diese Publikation In der Deutschen 
Nationalbibliografi e: detaillierte bibliografi sche Daten sind im Internet über http://dnb.d-nb.de 
abrufbar. ISSN 1868-9892 ISBN 978-3-95547-021-0 

Gil, E., Salcedo, R., Campos, J., Llop, J., Ortega, P., Gallart, M. 2018. Orchard sprayer’s evaluation 
according ISO 16119-3. Need to support manufacturer’s procedure. In P. Balsari, S. E. Cooper, E. Gil, C. 
R. Glass, W. Jones, B. Magri, J. Van de Zande (Eds.), Aspects of Applied Biology 137 International 
Advances in Pesticide Application. Brighton (UK). 

International Standardization Organization. 2015. ISO 16122. Agricultural and forestry machinery – 
Inspection of sprayers in use – Parts 1, 2 & 3. Geneva, Switzerland: ISO. 

ISO - International Standardization Organization. 2013. ISO 16119. Agricultural and forest machinery – 
Environmental requirements for sprayers – Parts 1, 2 & 3. Geneva, Switzerland: ISO. 

 
  

http://www.boe.es/

