















































Aspects of Applied Biology XXX, 2018 

International Advances in Pesticide Application 

Reducing spray drift by adapting the spraying equipment to 

the canopy shape in olive orchards with isolated trees 

By ANTONIO MIRANDA-FUENTES1, ANDRÉS CUENCA1, ALBERTO GODOY-

NIETO1, EMILIO J. GONZÁLEZ-SANCHEZ1, EMILIO GIL2, JORDI LLORENS3, 

JESÚS A. GIL-RIBES1 

1 Department of Rural Engineering, University of Córdoba, Ctra. Nacional IV, km 396, 

Campus de Rabanales, Córdoba 14014, Spain 
2 Department of Agri Food Engineering and Biotechnology, Universitat Politècnica de 

Catalunya, EsteveTerradas 8, Campus del Baix Llobregat D4, 08860 Castelledfels, 

Barcelona, Spain 
3 Department of Agricultural and Forest Engineering, Research Group in AgroICT and 

Precision Agriculture, University of Lleida – Agrotecnio Center, Rovira Roure, 191, 

25198 Lleida, Spain 

Corresponding author Email: antonio.miranda@uco.es 

 

Summary 

  The lack of specificity of the spraying equipment commonly used in olive orchards is a 

remarkable problem, for not allowing farmers to apply adjusted pesticide doses to their 

trees, making necessary to spray very high liquid volumes that increase the environmental 

pollution risk. In this context, three prototypes were specially developed to increase the 

application efficiency in olive orchards with isolated trees, which represent 98% of the 

olive harvested area in Spain. A study was conducted to assess the drift produced by one 

of these prototypes in comparison with a commercial airblast sprayer like the ones 

commonly used in the current practices. 

  A total of 10 trees belonging to two different fields inside an olive commercial farm in 

Córdoba, Southern Spain, were selected. The selected fields presented the traditional and 

intensive cultivation systems. A commercial airblast sprayer and a prototype airblast 

sprayer with six small-sized axial fans, placed in both sides of the equipment, were tested. 

In order to set the application volume, the tree crown volume was manually measured, 

using a specific spray volume of 0.12 L m-3. This configuration resulted in applied 

volumes of 1150 and 580 L ha-1 in the traditional and intensive system, respectively. The 

air flow rate was set in 12.5 and 11.0 m3 s-1 in the aforementioned systems, and it was 

equal for both sprayers. Food dye E-102 (Tartrazine) was used to assess deposition on 

filter paper pieces, in the canopy, and Petri dishes on the ground, to evaluate drift. A total 

of 16 sampling positions were set in the canopy, and 16 and 12 were set on the ground in 

the traditional and intensive systems. Water sensitive paper (WSP) was used to assess the 

percentage coverage and the impacts per square centimeter. 

  The results show that the prototype significantly reduced the spray drift in both systems: 

52.7% and 57.0% in the traditional and intensive orchard, respectively. Nevertheless, the 

ground deposit distribution among the different sampling positions was similar in both 

cases. The deposition values collected in the canopy, along with the percentage coverage 

and the impact number did not vary significantly, though they were slightly higher in the 



Aspects of Applied Biology XXX, 2018 

International Advances in Pesticide Application 

prototype. These results are promising for indicating a potential for reducing the drift risk 

associated to the operation. 

Keywords: olive, pesticide application, sprayer testing, drift reduction, spray quality 

 

 

Introduction 

Olive is a very important crop in Spain, the main World producer, with 2.6 Mha and a mean 

annual production of about 6 Mt. This crop is mostly grown in very traditional cultivation 

systems, with very low plantation densities, what makes trees to be very large in size. This fact 

makes difficult its mechanization, and especially the pesticide application, as the target to be 

covered is very irregular in shape, and trees may differ markedly from one to the next (Miranda-

Fuentes et al., 2015a). In this situation, pesticide losses are very important as the commonly-

used conventional airblast sprayer do not have the possibility to adapt the application to the tree 

shape and volume.  

Over the last years, many authors have designed improvements to be implemented to 

conventional sprayers in order to adjust the spray dose or the airflow rate according to the signal 

of different sensors which characterize the canopy volume and shape (Doruchowski et al., 2014; 

Escolà et al., 2013; Gil et al., 2013; Giles et al., 1989; Landers, 2010; Pai et al., 2009). 

Nevertheless, these improvements have not the possibility to reduce the flight time of the 

sprayed droplets. In this sense, further improvements should be made in these sprayers to 

increase the application efficiency in isolated olive tree orchards. This study tests a sprayer 

prototype specifically designed for olive to check its application quality and efficiency against 

a commercial airblast sprayer.  

 

Materials and methods 

A description of the materials and methods of the trials is presented. 

 

Farm and field selection, canopy and weather conditions characterization. 

The trials were performed in two olive fields belonging to a commercial olive farm 

(coordinates: 37°42′53″ N; 4°48′32″ W). The two fields had different olive cultivation systems 

(Fig. 1). On the one hand, the intensive one had 7 m in row spacing with a plantation density of 

204 trees per ha. On the other hand, the traditional one had a quincunx scheme, with row spacing 

of 10 m and tree spacing of 12 m (107 trees · ha-1). 

The canopy characterization was done according to the mean vector method (Miranda-Fuentes 

et al., 2015a), which consists of calculating the average value from 8 measurements of the 

distance from the centre of the tree to 8 external points of the canopy, chosen in 8 pre-

established directions separated 45º among them (Fig. 2). This parameter showed to have a 

good correlation with the LiDAR volume of different kinds of olive trees. 

The weather conditions were measured to ensure that every treatment was done with similar 

conditions, especially concerning wind speed and direction. A meteorological station (CR800, 

Campbell Scientific Inc., Logan, UT, USA) with a 2D sonic anemometer (WindSonic 232, 

Campbell Scientific Inc.) and two temperature and relative humidity probes (CS215, Campbell 

Scientific Inc.) was used, recording air speed and direction, temperature and relative humidity 

data each 10 s (0.1 Hz registration frequency). 

 

 



Aspects of Applied Biology XXX, 2018 

International Advances in Pesticide Application 

 

 
Fig. 1. Experimental fields used in the field trial: a. Intensive and b. Traditional plantation 

systems. 

 
Fig. 2. Mean vector method for canopy characterization. Measurements. 

 

Application equipment and working parameters 

The sprayers used in this trial were a conventional airblast sprayer (Eolojet 2200 L, Osuna-

Sevillano S.L., Jauja, Spain), like those typically used in olive orchards (Fig. 3a) and a prototype 

of air-assisted sprayer specially developed for olive (Fib. 3b). This prototype had 6 small-size 

hydraulically-driven axial fans with perimeter hollow cone nozzles that can be approached 

towards the canopy by being mounted on two mobile structures moved by analogical ultrasonic 



Aspects of Applied Biology XXX, 2018 

International Advances in Pesticide Application 

sensors (UC6000-30GM-IUR2-V15, Pepperl+Fuchs, Mannheim, Germany). This prototype 

was fully described in previous works (Miranda-Fuentes et al., 2017). 

 

 
Fig. 3. a. Conventional airblast sprayer. b. Air-assisted sprayer prototype. 

 

The working parameters were optimized for the conventional airblast sprayer, according to the 

optimization trials previously undertaken. The operation parameters can be found in Table 1. 

 

Table 1. Operation parameters for the field trials. 

 

The low speed values are related to the high volumes to be applied and the low nozzle number 

of the conventional sprayer. As it can be seen, the volumes needed to be almost doubled in the 

traditional orchard because of their high crown size, as the volume per tree was calculated by 

multiplying the crown volume by the specific spray volume of 0.12 L · m-3, which showed to 

be optimal for isolated olive trees (Miranda-Fuentes et al., 2016). 

 

Experimental design and sampling system. 

Five consecutive trees per cultivation system (10 in total) were sprayed from both sides to assess 

the deposition and coverage generated by each one of both sprayers. A total of 16 sampling 

positions were set in the canopy, organized in 4 sectors, 3 heights and 2 depths in the 

intermedium height (Fig. 4). Each sampling position contained a squared 10 x 10 cm filter paper 

collector and two water sensitive paper (WSP) pieces (76 x 26 mm, Syngenta Crop Protection 

  Cultivation system 

  Intensive Traditional 

Parameter Prototype Conventional Prototype Conventional 

Nozzle colour Yellow Green Red Blue 

Number of open nozzles 36 (2 x 18) 14 (2 x 7) 36 (2 x 18) 14 (2 x 7) 

Pressure (bar) 11 13 7 14 

Liquid flow rate (L · min-1) 38.52 39.06 58.32 55.86 

Spray volume (L · ha-1) 585.1 583.0 1170.3 1151.8 

Forward speed (km · h-1) 3.95 4.02 2.99 2.91 

Air volumetric flow rate (m3 · s-1) 10.8 10.9 12.3 12.3 



Aspects of Applied Biology XXX, 2018 

International Advances in Pesticide Application 

AG, Basel, Switzerland). The food dye E-102, Tartrazine, was used as tracer and added at 8 g 

· L-1 concentration to the sprayer tank.  

The spray drift comparative assessment was undertaken by placing 6 sampling areas per single 

field, two per side of the row. These areas were placed inside the field, at two row distance (Fig. 

5a). 

 
 

Fig. 4. Sampling positions in the tree crown. 

 
Fig. 5. a. Field disposal of the 6 sampling areas for the spray drift comparative assessment. b. 

Arrangement of the sampling positions for both cultivation systems. 

a)

b)



Aspects of Applied Biology XXX, 2018 

International Advances in Pesticide Application 

 

The drift collectors were Petri dishes of 15 mm in diameter, placed on horizontal wooden 

boards. These were set at different depths and profiles, ranging from the back part of the trees 

to the centre of the space in between two consecutive trees in a row. In the case of the intensive 

orchard, there were 12 sampling positions per single sampling area. In the case of the traditional, 

there were 16, as shown in Figure 5b.  

 

Trial performance and data analysis 

The treatment order was randomized in each case. The real forward speed and liquid flow rate 

were measured on the field, and samples of the tank content were collected before and after 

each treatment to check the tank real concentration. Once the trials were done, every sample 

was collected in darkness conditions and carried to the laboratory. Once there, the filter paper 

samples were washed with 100 ml of distilled water. The Petri dishes required a variable 

washing volume, depending on the deposition, to enter in the measuring range of the 96 well 

plate spectrophotometer (Synergy HTX, BioTek Instruments, Inc., Winooski, VT, USA). The 

WSP samples were analysed with the free image analysis software ImageJ (National Institutes 

of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA). 

The parameters obtained from the samples were the absolute spray deposition on the leaves and 

on the ground dishes (dl and dg, µg · cm
-2), the percentage coverage (SC, %) and the impact 

number per area unit (Ni, cm
-2). 

 

 

Results and discussion 

The two plantation systems resulted in very different crown volumes. Thus, intensive trees 

showed to have a volume of 23.86 m3 in average and the traditional ones had 90.34 m3 in 

average. These values were obtained from the Mean Vector, which resulted in 2.00 and 3.10 m 

for the intensive and traditional trees, respectively. Intensive trees had a mean canopy height 

(discounting the height of the lower leaves) of 3.54 m, and traditional ones had a mean canopy 

height of 4.82 m.  

As to the weather conditions, the wind speed was irrelevant, keeping under 0.3 m · s-1 all the 

time that the trials left, so it can be considered that it did not affect the trials. The air temperature 

ranged from 21.5ºC in the treatment with the conventional sprayer in the intensive orchard and 

26.5ºC in the treatment with the prototype in the traditional trees. The relative humidity was 

comprised between 45% and 52%. 

As to the deposition, coverage, impacts and drift results, they are all comprised in Table 2. As 

it can be seen, spray deposition on leaves, dl, was not affected in practice in intensive trees, with 

mean values that were very similar for the two sprayers. Different results were obtained in the 

traditional trees, where the prototype increased the amount of spray that was deposited on the 

leaves, increasing the mean value by nearly 25%. This matches the results of Holownicki et al. 

(2000), who reported that the airblast sprayer is less efficient in big-sized isolated old trees, as 

those found in traditional olive orchards. 

Similar results were obtained with the spray coverage, SC, but in this case, significant 

differences were also obtained for the intensive cultivation system, resulting in better results 

for the prototype. As it can be drawn from Table 2, the increase in coverage was similar to that 

obtained in the dl parameter in the traditional orchard, and much more marked in the intensive 



Aspects of Applied Biology XXX, 2018 

International Advances in Pesticide Application 

one. In this case, the relative increase was 22.2 % for the intensive trees and 23.1 % for the 

traditional ones. 

 

Table 2. General results of the study 

 

  Cultivation system 
  

Intensive Traditional 

Parameter   Prototype Conventional Prototype Conventional 

Mean deposition leaves dl (µg cm-2) 19.00* 18.75 28.20 a 22.6 b 

Mean coverage SC (%) 33.5 a 27.4 b 32 a 26 b 

Coverage upper side SC up (%) 36 36 50 a 33 b 

Coverage lower side SC lo (%) 31 a 20 b 46 a 26 b 

Mean impacts Ni (cm-2) 103 a 123 b 106 a 146 b 

Impacts upper side Ni up (cm-2) 102 a 123 b 86 a 131 b 

Impacts lower side Ni lo (cm-2) 103 a 124 b 126 a 155 b 

Mean deposition ground dg (µg cm-2) 0.68 a 1.56 b 0.35 a 0.75 b 

* Results with no letter showed no significant differences between prototypes  
 

As to the upper side of leaves, the mean spray coverage, SC up, was exactly the same in the 

intensive system, whilst it was importantly increased by the prototype in the traditional one 

(+51.5 %). The most important changes come in the lower side (SC lo). Some studies performed 

previously with conventional airblast sprayer in olive trees showed that the underside of the 

leaf remains markedly less covered than the upper side (Miranda-Fuentes et al., 2015b), and 

this can be a problem when trying to adjust the spray dose, as the whole leaf must remain 

completely covered to prevent the entrance of fungal diseases. In the case of the prototype, 

differences between upper and lower side are importantly reduced, with absolute coverage 

values much higher than those obtained by the conventional sprayer.  

Just the opposite response was obtained with the impacts. The mean value for impacts is 

significantly higher in the case of the conventional sprayer, both for the mean value, the upper 

side and the lower side of leaves.  This result was not expected, as the pressure and nozzle type 

were combined to give similar results in terms of droplet size, so this factor should not be the 

cause. The explanation could be the kind of droplet distribution from both systems. As the 

prototype included a completely new design, it could affect the way how droplets are 

distributed. 

The most important thing about this study is the mean deposition on the ground, dg, used to 

compare the spray drift produced by both sprayers. As it can be seen, this parameter is markedly 

reduced with the prototype in both systems. Concretely, the spray deposited on the ground 

collectors was reduced in 57.0% and 52.7% in the intensive and traditional systems, 

respectively. This fact is very important if considered that the spray deposit and coverage was 

not reduced with the prototype with respect to the conventional sprayer. It should be pointed 

out that the operation parameters were optimized for the conventional sprayer, and in fact the 

coverage and deposition values obtained with this equipment in both plantation systems were 

appropriate and higher than the ones obtained by the researchers in previous trials. 



Aspects of Applied Biology XXX, 2018 

International Advances in Pesticide Application 

Figure 6 shows the deposit distribution in depth on the ground (according to the scheme showed 

in Fig. 5b).  

 
Fig. 6. Ground deposit in depth from the application point (1: minimum distance; 4: 

maximum distance). 

 

As it can be seen, differences of the ground deposition in depth are much more evident than 

mean differences. The prototype, in general, makes the spray to reach a lower distance, being 

the application, therefore, much safer. 

 

Conclusions 

As the study showed, the developed prototype has the potential to positively affect the quality 

of the spray applications in isolated olive trees, being this difference much more evident in the 

traditional cultivation system. Not only it increments the overall deposit and coverage, but 

reduces the drift losses as well. In addition, specific aspect like the underside coverage and the 

ground deposit collected at the maximum distance make it very suitable for its purpose: making 

spray applications to olive canopies safer and more sustainable, which is what the European 

guidelines are encouraging. 

 

Acknowledgements 

The authors thank the Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness of the Spanish Government 

for financial support for the pre- commercial procurement Mecaolivar project with FEDER 

funds. They also appreciate the support of the Spanish Olive Oil Interprofessionals (IAOE). 

 

References 

Doruchowski, G, Balsari, P, Gil, E, Marucco, P, Roettele, M, Wehmann, HJ, 2014. 

Environmentally Optimised Sprayer (EOS) ─ A software application for comprehensive 

assessment of environmental safety features of sprayers. Science of the Total Environment 482–

483: 201–207. 

Escolà, A, Rosell-Polo, JR, Planas, S, Gil, E, Pomar, J, Camp, F, Llorens, J, Solanelles, F, 

2013. Variable rate sprayer. Part 1 – Orchard prototype: Design, implementation and validation. 

Computers and Electronics in Agriculture 95:122–135. 



Aspects of Applied Biology XXX, 2018 

International Advances in Pesticide Application 

Gil, E, Llorens, J, Llop, J, Fàbregas, X, Escolà, A, Rosell-Polo, JR, 2013. Variable rate 

sprayer. Part 2 – Vineyard prototype: Design, implementation, and validation. Computers and 

Electronics in Agriculture 95:136–150.  

Giles, DK, Delwiche, MJ, Dodd, RB, 1989. Sprayer control by sensing orchard crop 

characteristics : orchard architecture and spray liquid savings. Journal of Agricultural 

Engineering Research 43:271–289. 

Holownicki, R, Doruchowski, G, Godyn, A, Swiechowski, W, 2000. Variation of spray 

deposit and loss with air-jet directions applied in orchards. Journal of Agricultural Engineering 

Research 77:129–136.  

Landers, AJ, 2010. Developments towards an automatic precision sprayer for fruit crop 

canopies, in: ASABE Annual International Meeting. Pittsburg, PA.  

Miranda-Fuentes, A, Llorens, J, Gamarra-Diezma, JL, Gil-Ribes, JA, Gil, E, 2015a. 

Towards an optimized method of olive tree crown volume measurement. Sensors 15:3671–

3687.  

Miranda-Fuentes, A, Rodríguez-Lizana, A, Gil, E, Agüera-Vega, J, Gil-Ribes, JA, 2015b. 

Influence of liquid-volume and airflow rates on spray application quality and homogeneity in 

super-intensive olive tree canopies. Science of the Total Environment 537:250–259.  

Miranda-Fuentes, A, Llorens, J, Rodriguez-Lizana, A, Cuenca, A, Gil, E, Blanco-Roldán, 

GL, Gil-Ribes, JA, 2016. Assessing the optimal liquid volume to be sprayed on isolated olive 

trees according to their canopy volume. Science of the Total Environment 568:296–305. 

Miranda-Fuentes, A, Rodríguez-Lizana, A, Cuenca, A, González-Sánchez, EJ, Blanco-

Roldán, GL, Gil-Ribes, JA, 2017. Improving plant protection product applications in 

traditional and intensive olive orchards through the development of new air-assisted sprayer 

prototypes. Crop Protection 94:44–58.  

Pai, N, Salyani, M, Sweeb, RD, 2009. Regulating airflow of orchard airblast sprayer based on 

tree foliage density. Transactions of the ASABE 52:1423–1428. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


