














































Education and research related to organic waste management at agricultural engineering
Schools
Montserrat Soliva and Carles Bernat
Escola Superior d’Agricultura de Barcelona –
Universitat Politécnica de Catalunya, Castelldefels, Spain
Emilio Gil
Department d’Enginyeria Agroalimentà ria i Biotecnologia –
Universitat Politécnica de Catalunya, Castelldefels, Spain
Xavier Martínez and Miquel Pujol
Escola Superior d’Agricultura de Barcelona –
Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya, Castelldefels, Spain
Josep Sabaté
Department d’Enginyeria Agroalimentaària i Biotecnologia –
Universitat Politécnica de Catalunya, Castelldefels, Spain, and
Jordi Valero
Escola Superior d’Agricultura de Barcelona –
Universitat Politécnica de Catalunya, Castelldefels, Spain
Abstract
Purpose – The purpose of this paper is to describe the experience of the Agriculture Engineering School of Barcelona (ESAB), where undergraduate students were involved in field research experiments on organic waste use in agricultural systems.	
Design/methodology/approach – The paper outlines how the formation of professionals oriented to work for OWM companies has been successfully promoted.
Findings – Agricultural systems can assimilate self-produced organic wastes (OW) and others from different sources. Their management for crop production can generate enormous economic and environmental benefits which can contribute to sustainable development. The implementation of an integrated strategy for OW treatment (OWT) and management (OWM) must be adapted to the characteristics of the specific geographical region and must consider the interrelations among diverse subjects such as: soil science, fertilizer management, plant production, animal husbandry, farm machinery, climate and culture.
Practical implications – The education of future specialists in OWM requires a multidisciplinary education which can be effectively achieved if those topics are incorporated into the educational programs of agriculture engineering schools. Originality/value – The paper shows how agricultural systems can assimilate self-produced organic wastes from different sources. 
Keywords: Education, Sustainable development, Agriculture,Waste, Waste management, Spain 
Paper type Case study
The current issue and full text archive of this journal is available at
www.emeraldinsight.com/1467-6370.htm 
International Journal of Sustainability in Higher Education

Vol. 8 No. 2, 2007
pp. 224-233
Emerald Group Publishing Limited
1467-6370
DOI 10.1108/14676370710726670


Introduction
The present production systems do not usually take into account the need to protect the environment versus simple economic benefits. This fact normally produces a negative effect on the environment plus difficulties to produce high quality food due to the generation of huge volumes of wastes which must be treated. The European Union has been preparing different instruments to reduce the amount of waste. In the case of organic wastes, they must undergo adequate treatment/management to achieve maximum recycling and to reduce problems due to land filling and incineration (EC, 2001).
Managers of agricultural systems have much responsibility for the conservation of natural resources (water and soil) and quality of food production. Their development is closely related to the increase of production and the use of more aggressive technologies that may degrade the natural resources. To overcome this degradation a complex link between farmers, agricultural technicians and the environment is needed. An obsession with increasing productivity has obscured the fact that there is a high cost to pay for agricultural progress that often leads to degradation of rural environments, both biophysical and sociocultural (Kuyvenhoven et al., 2001; Cobb et al.,1999). Sustainability can be thought of as a bridge between conservation and development, which have often been seen as contradictory. The future well-being of humanity is inexorably linked to our understanding of the natural world and to its sustainable management. The present production systems and their interests in short-term economic benefits usually do not adequately consider the need to protect the different environmental compartments in the short and long-term. With such systems we reduce or close many ways of quality food production for future generations and we lessen their possibilities of enjoying a safe environment.
Agricultural systems can assimilate self-produced organic wastes (OW) and others from different sources (Soliva, 1994; Soliva and Felipo´ 2003). The proper management of the wastes in the soils soil can lead to economical and environmental benefits which can contribute to sustainable development. Therefore, it is necessary to take into account certain aspects related to soil conservation (especially important in Mediterranean countries) and nutritional crop needs. These are essential issues because the natural resources and carrying capacity of the Earth are limited and we should avoid erosion of our natural assets caused by using natural resources faster than their rate of replacement.
Sustainability means different things to different people; it can mean low-input agriculture, or in more sociological terms that can help to ensure the maintenance of stable, self reliant rural communities. Another meaning can be the overall imbalance between the use of renewable and non-renewable resources and the increasing degradation of the physical environment (Doornbos, 2001). The reutilization of organic wastes (OW) can be considered to be part of the solution in the last case. In the area of agricultural engineering it is necessary to incorporate changes focused on applying the sustainability concept to agricultural production; a particular case could incorporate the global study of waste management because it is directly connected to agricultural systems (Soliva, 1998). Sustainable development and conservation issues cut across many of the traditional disciplinary subjects including agricultural, social sciences and ecology. It also requires a combination between academic approaches with collaborative processes of governance and decision-making. 
Organic waste management.
It is necessary to promote multidimensional research to support the development of farming systems that are sustainable and equitable, as well as stable and productive (Conway, 1985).
Agricultural engineering education.
Conventional approaches to agricultural education deal with a lot of different aspects of the plant and animal production systems; they need other subjects such as biology, chemistry, physics, soil science, economics, cartography, and machinery. This provides wide and complete training but unfortunately, it is usually taught in closed disciplines that reduce and subdivide knowledge, impeding the solution of many existing problems in modern and intensive agriculture (Soliva et al., 1988).
Is it possible to increase plant and animal production without knowing the amount of water used, the energy consumed by fertilizer and pesticide manufacturing, the machinery necessary or the problems linked with the management of different wastes? Is it possible to forget the excess nutrients or the residues of pesticides as potential contaminants? Unfortunately in most schools we emphasize “learning for knowing,” and we forget “learning for doing,” or “for making decisions.”
New techniques and new knowledge evolve so quickly that education should train the students to listen, understand, compare, discuss and relate; while teaching them to learn to think and to inter-relate the diverse issues. If this is not done at college, it is much more difficult for them to develop those capacities later. At the level of interdisciplinary education and research, students benefit in many ways from the real-world experience. First, students are faced with the real-world complexities and constraints of a problem. Real-world problems are not as neatly packaged as those in the literature, and interactions with different stakeholders make clear both the complexity of a real-world problem and the many different ways that people define problems.
The new generation of agricultural professionals must be concerned as much with new systemic ways of knowing and learning-for-action as with using new knowledge and novel technology. Nevertheless, they must remember that the relationship with the environment is a central concern of agricultural development. Agriculture is an important economic activity with great environmental responsibility, but for different reasons the landowners do not often have adequate formal training in the basics of the soil-plant-animal interface. And even if there are important subsidies, a long-term lack of knowledge regarding management of natural resources can quickly turn into a por economic situation. All this often leads to the necessity for new and different ways to educate future agricultural engineers.
Changes must be made.
This is a good time to apply them in the specific field of organic waste management through the soil, considering the way it may affect soil conservation, production and food quality, while keeping all new legislation in context. Sustainable organic waste management in agricultural engineering schools Waste management in the soil can be considered to be an integrative scientific discipline. Students of agricultural engineering need to develop their knowledge of proper waste management or utilization, soil properties, climatic conditions, crop needs, etc. through their courses in physics, chemistry, biology, ecology, geology, soil science, crop science, climatology and other areas. Because, OWs are complex and ill-defined, a comprehensive knowledge of waste transformations and utilization in plant growth is needed in order to work with the ecosystem and not against it in the diverse soil types, climatic conditions and cropping patterns.
Some aspects of organic waste management require specialists such as architects, industrial and chemical engineers. However, the subjects studied in agricultural engineering schools give a global view and therefore, can potentially lead to an integrated and sustainable solution to the OW management. In the future, the students of agriculture can work in many different fields: farms or food transformation industries, administration, water or waste treatment plants. 
In order for the students to gain the integrated knowledge and understanding, have to work with students with different professional training. To reach the objectives it is not only necessary to have technical knowledge but also to be able to communicate with colleagues and non-experts alike. Therefore, we have to teach students to work in teams and to consider farms as learning systems in constant co-evolution with their environment (Sriskandarajah et al., 1991).They must learn how to create new sets of persistent relationships between themselves and their biophysical and socio-cultural surroundings.
Shellnhuber (1999) postulates that a second Copernican revolution driven by the main revelations of scientific investigations within the natural world is underway. It can be a revolution in the form of sustainable management. Humanity’s future well-being depends on the maintenance of the ecosystem processes, goods and services (Table I) that are requisites for sustaining the future (Miller, 2003). Agricultural resources (A). Proper OWmanagement can contribute to this goal, as shown in the last column of Table I.
Science is a major driver of sustainable agriculture and OW management.
Furthermore, the scientific and technical community is not well-networked to deal with these themes, compared with other scientific fields and advances related with agricultural production. This is probably because OW management issues are not as well addressed as those of production. Similarly, many goods and services indicated in Table I are seldom recognized, priced or marketed. Only when these services are lost, do they become appreciated.
Interest in OW management is fragmented into a variety of specific interests and organizations, which means that its correct treatment with a global vision becomes  difficult. To overcome this difficulty it is necessary to know:
· The quantity and types of OW generated and to be responsible for them.
· The possibility of reducing the quantity generated or to improve the waste’s characteristics.
· The more sustainable destinations and treatments.
· How to control different treatment systems to prevent environmental problems.
· The energetic and environmental inventory of some OW recycling systems.
· The possibility of reuse in the soil and to identify and monitor soil quality indicators after application of OW.
For each one of these points there are responsible people who usually forget how their decisions can affect stability of the dynamic equilibrium between biophysical capital and human technological capital as an indicator of sustainability of human activity.
Organic waste management
Despite the remarkable technological developments of humans, the physical/biological capital of planet Earth is still essential to produce food and a quality environment for the biosphere (Giampietro et al., 1992). Unfortunately, current patterns are systematically decreasing the Earth’s physical/biological capital. Although the accumulation of information and knowledge within human societies is enormous, it is seldom adequately utilized. Particularly, with regard to OW management, it is necessary to be well aware of the connection between our lifestyle and waste generation, the degradation of the environment that it produces, the state of the agricultural economy and the connection between food and health. Information exists but we do not raise enough awareness of the fact that only careful management of the land and water and the wastes that we add to them will maintain our present way of life for future generations. It is not exaggerating to say that our future is in our land.
There are many new technologies but we must remember that no technology can replace the lost biological species and nor fulfill their essential roles in agriculture, to recharge contaminated groundwater or to correct global climate changes. Thus, to prevent the principal problems related to OW, it is not only necessary to develop new. Ecosystem processes include:
· Sustaining solar energy flux, heat dissipation –
· Climate modulation –
· Sustaining hydrological flux, hydrological cycle, filtration and water quality A-OW
· Biological productivity, pollination, sustaining food webs, habitats A
· Sustaining biogeochemical flux, mineral and gaseous cycling, storage A-OW
· Decomposition, weathering, soil genesis, forming and stabilizing landscapes A-OW
· Sustaining biological diversity A
· Absorbing, buffering, diluting, decomposing, detoxifying pollutants. . . A-OW
· Ecosystem goods include
· Climate zones conductive to biological diversity and production A
· Food wood, fiber, forage, wildlife, marine life A
· Soil and water resources, precipitation, fresh water A-OW
· Renewable and nonrenewable natural resource base for human well-being A-OW
· Medicinal plants, sources of pharmaceuticals A
· Biodiversity A
· Natural aesthetics, amenities, biodiversity that support tourism, recreation A-OW
· Ecosystem services include
· Maintaining hydrologic cycles, watershed character, water quality A-OW
· Modulating ground water recharge, runoff and flooding A-OW
· Regulating climate, cleaning air and water, UV radiation filtration –
· Providing and maintaining ecological niches for biodiversity, human culture A
· Biological dynamics; modulate atmospheric composition, CO2 sequestration A-OW
· Maintaining biodiversity; provision of food, fodder, shelter, medicines A
· Providing for pollination of crops and other plants, seed dispersal A
· Generating soil development; driving N, C cycles, sustains agriculture A-OW
· Storing and cycling essential nutrients A-OW
· Absorbing and detoxifying pollutants, provides for waste treatment A-OW
· Providing natural beauty, inspiration, and recreation A-OW
Source: Modified from Miller (2003)
Ecosystem processes, goods and services technologies to treat them, but also to know the reason of their generation and the effects of bad management. It should be recognized that economic growth and a well-managed environment are fundamentally inter-linked and that if the environment is not taken into account, the socio-economic future is at risk.
According to the arguments presented above and the position of the authors, as professors in an agricultural engineering school, we must ask ourselves whether or not the students are being prepared to fulfill these new roles and whether or not the teaching programs and current research deal with these issues.
A case study: research and education on treatment and management of organic wastes in ESAB.
It is clear that organic wastes bring about environmental problems if they are not managed properly, especially when they are applied to the soil. When someone working in an agricultural engineering school designs a research assignment, in this field, they should answer two key questions about the objectives of the project: 
(1) Is the goal of the project exclusively focused on the research results or also on the future teaching applications as well?
(2) Does the research project consider the application of organic wastes to soil only as a way to manage them or as a system to improve the soil quality?
In this part of this document, two projects supported by the Spanish Administration (CICYT, Comisio´n Interministerial de Ciencia y Tecnologı´a) are reported. They were performed by ESAB professors fromdifferent disciplines in order to obtain amore global vision of the problems (characterization, handling, application and effects on soil and plants) and possible solutions. Furthermore, the issues studied in the projects were very close to the previous research and the current teaching work done by the participants. The projects were:
· Optimization of the composting of urban solid wastes, sewage sludge and pruning residues. (“Optimización del compostaje de RSU, lodos de depuradora y restos de poda”) Project reference: AMB92-07(1992-1994).
· .Effects of the application of organic wastes in two types of rotations (horticultural and extensive crops) (“Efectos de la aplicación de residuos orgánicos en dos tipos de rotaciones (cultivos hortícolas y cultivos extensivos)”. Project reference: AGF96-0966 (1996-1999).
The aim of the projects was to analyze the conditions that allow application OW to agricultural soils in Catalonia. It must consider the environmental effects, comply with the legislation and facilitate OW management. The OWs tested were animal manure, compost from the organic fraction of municipal solid wastes and sewage sludge. They were applied to two crop rotations for a period of three years. The following parameters were studied: productivity, content of macronutrients, micronutrients and heavy metals in vegetables and soil and specific quality characteristics of produced food (protein content, vitamins, antinutritive factors. . .). The fulfillment of the projects involved carrying out a great variety of tasks: analysis of wastes, soils, waters and crops, determination of the dose of OW to be applied, comparison of OW application methods, control of mineralization rate and control of crop growth, production and quality.


Organic waste management
The main conclusions were the following: manure and compost showed a similar mineralization rate and produced a comparable increase in organic matter in the soil, sewage sludge led to a rapid release of mineral nitrogen and to higher levels of heavy metals. The gradual mineralization of manure and compost makes it possible to apply large doses with less frequency, thus keeping the application costs lower. The design, results and conclusions of the study are widely described elsewhere (Bernat et al., 2001; Soliva et al., 1998).
Finally, we have made a large effort to transfer this knowledge to the productive sector in our region. That makes us wonder what the main research objectives and priorities should be in a technical college, and how they would affect assessment of the professor’s activities. Under these circumstances, education, research and extensión become different facets of a single learning process. It is necessary to consider it not just as a transfer from informed to uninformed, but the outcome of a dynamic, collaborative process among co-learners.
The diversity of the experimental work required made it possible to relate the research projects with class work and use them to open new ways to combine research, experimentation, teaching and dissemination. An initial decision was to promote, as far as the experiments allowed, the participation of undergraduate students who were doing their final projects. Because the research projects took much longer than the students’ final projects, a suitable organization was designed so that as each student received his/her particular work, their results could be inserted in the results of the global projects. Table II shows the results of the projects. 
Additionally, the different points of view of the working team, the sort of experiments (laboratory and field), previous and final discussions, led the professors to consider the teaching methods that were being utilized in the school and how to use the project results to change and improve the methods. The experience and the research performed influenced the basic subjects taught by the participating professors, but it mainly had a beneficial effect on later optional subjects in the agricultural engineering studies (Control of the pollution in agriculture and wastes treatment and management) and Doctoral courses (Composting and organic wastes management, characterization and evaluation of organic wastes suitable to improve vegetal production and wastes recycling and soils quality) developed in our college. 


AMB92-07 (1992-1994) AGF96-0966 (1996-1999)
Professors from ESAB 6 7
Disciplines 4 4
Final studies projects 19 36
Participating students 21 48
PhD 1
Divulgation papers 6 2
National papers 8 4
Proceedings/monographies 10 15
International papers 5 3
Chapters of book/ 3 6
Conferences/forums 11 18
Collaborations with administration and companies 4 4
We want to emphasize that ten former students who took part in the second project are currently working on waste management in different companies. This helps to maintain an informal network of discussion, update of knowledge and deliberation. 
Proposals for the near future
It is essential to create an interesting new specialty in the agricultural engineering studies in order to satisfy the need society for technicians in OW management, treatment and application to the soil. The new teaching proposal could have an impact on environmental concerns and will provide opportunities for students to reshape their personal environmental ethic. This special area should include sustainability concepts in a more innovative way of teaching where participation of students would be of higher value. Such a specialty could be called: organic waste management and soil protection.


Such training could be useful to:
· Administrations. There is a lack of technicians who are well informed on these subjects and who can offer direct solutions, participate in the legislative proposals and in advising and controlling the environmental management plans at the level of farms or small enterprises.
· Agricultural farms and cooperatives. It is needed to train technicians able to face the production and environmental challenges.
· Farmers, husbandry farmers, natural space and landscape managers.
· Technicians with a wide knowledge of the new situation able to advise on new legislation and new technologies.
· Industries. (Fertilizers, pesticides, food transformation, machinery, waste management...) There is a need for technicians who are prepared to act in the interests of production, society and the environment and to avoid focusing solely upon the short-term economic arguments that are usually considered in making decisions.
We believe that for future professionals that will be engaged in Agriculture, husbandry and the related food industries, soil conservation and recovery as well as in management of all residues through the soil and plants, there is a need for coherent interdisciplinary education. Such education should be centered on the strategy of sustainable management of the soil and its basic functions (Blum, 1990). These basic functions are six: three of them primarily ecological and the other three in the technical/industrial, socio-economic, and cultural, spheres. They include:
· Producing biomass.
· Acting as a filter and buffer, with a transforming function which has only recently been fully recognized.
· Serving as the basis for the ecological gene-bank and as a protective medium for flora and fauna.
· Providing the source of numerous raw materials.
· Providing the function with regards to technical infrastructure and providing the basis for the erection of houses, industrial premises, roads, recreational and leisure facilities, and for waste disposal.
· Providing the framework for supporting the archaeological and paleontological evidence, the protection and preservation of which is highly significant for our cultural understanding of development and human evolution.
All this could be simplified and summarized in the old Chinese saying (Soliva et al.,1988): “Man, despite his artistic pretensions, his sophistication and his many accomplishments, owes his existence to a six-inch layer of top soil and the fact that it rains.”
The new teaching proposal would oblige faculty to carry out well-coordinated work, not only between, subjects and teachers but also between teaching, experimentation, research and extension as presented in the following paragraphs.
Teaching
It is necessary to choose the basic subjects and the more specific ones for this new specialty very carefully, giving each one its proper value and utility in OW treatment related with soil protection. Lessons should be based on specific problems and should include different subjects for student participation in order to provide a truly interdisciplinary education. A diffusive interrelation should be established between lessons and practice. Student participation must be considered; real problems should be presented, discussed and worked on within multi-disciplinary teams. Students from more advanced courses can also take part directly in research and experimentation conducted in school or in connected research centers. The origin of the problems discussed and the questions to be solved should be closely related to real situations in farms, cooperatives, industries, administration, and with research and experiments carried out at the school.
Research-experimentation
Research and teaching must be as closely linked as possible. In order to do this, certain selections will be necessary such as: choosing more applied research specifically related to local needs and relinquishing certain publications, which could be quite interesting for a curriculum vitae, in favor of others more suited to future scenarios. Doing research with less well prepared collaborators/students may delay the research but will improve the teaching.
Extension
Teaching, research and experimentation in this new special branch, in order to be useful, should be closely linked with the different agricultural production levels as well as with the society responsible for the generation of residues. This could be done through knowledge of real situations such as post graduate projects, research placements abroad and work on advisory councils and through the extension and transference of the obtained results through articles, courses, meetings, publications. 
References
Bernat, C., Casado, D., Ferrando, C., Paulet, S., Pujol, M. and Soliva, M. (2001), “Compost, manure and sewage sludge applied to a crop rotation”, in Sangiorgi, F. (Ed.), Recycling of Agricultural Municipal and Industrial Residues in Agriculture, Universita´ de Milano, Milano, pp. 231-6.
Blum, E.H. (1990), “The challenge of soil protection in Europe”, Environmental Conservation,Vol. 17, pp. 72-4. 
Cobb, C., Goodman, G.S. and Wackernagel, M. (1999), Why Bigger Isn’t Better: The Genuine Progress Indicator-1999 Update, Redefining Progress, Washington, DC, available at: www.rprogress.org , pp. 1-50.
Conway, G.C. (1985), “Agricultural ecology and farming systems research”, in Remenyi, J.V.(Ed.), Agricultural Systems Research for Developing Country. ACIAR. Proceedings No. 11, Australian Center for International Agricultural Research, Canberra.
Doornbos, G. (2001), “Adopting technologies for sustainable farming systems: the farmer perspective”, Adoption of Technologies for Sustainable Farming Systems, Wageningen Workshop Proceedings, pp. 24-8.
EC (2001) European Commission. DG-Env. E3- 2001. Waste management. Working Document on Biological Treatment of Biowaste, 2nd draft, available at: http://europa.eu.int/comm/environment/waste/compost 
Giampietro, M., Cerretelli, G. and Pimentel, D. (1992), Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment, Vol. 38, pp. 219-44.
Kuyvenhoven, A., Ruben, R. and Roseboom, J. (2001), “Assessing sustainable technologies in developing countries; measuring environmental, economic and social impacts”, Adoption of Technologies for Sustainable Farming Systems, Wageningen Workshop Proceedings,pp. 30-5.
Miller, F.P. (2003), “Natural resources management and the second Copernican revolution”, Journal. Natural Resources Life Science Education, Vol. 32, pp. 43-51.
Shellnhuber, H.J. (1999), “‘Earth system’ analysis and the second Copernican Revolution”, Nature (London), Vol. 402, pp. 19-23.
Soliva, M. (1994), “L’Agricultura com a productora i receptora de residus”, Arxius ESAB, Vol. 5, pp. 3-16.
Soliva, M. (1998), “Residus orga`nics per a l’agricultrura: Un tema de recerca a l’Escola Superior d’Agricultura de Barcelona (ESAB)”, Arxius ESAB, Vol. 5 No. 1, pp. 29-54.
Soliva, M. and Felipo´, M.T. (2003), “Organic wastes as a resource for Mediterranean soils”, in Langenkamp, H. and Marmo, M. (Eds), Biological Treatment of Biodegradable Wastes. Technical Aspects. Proceedings of the Workshop in Brussels, pp. 249-72.
Soliva, M., Cañaameras, N. and Martínez, F.X. (1988), “La coordinacio´ entre alguns ensenyaments agrícoles i el seu paper en l’agricultura catalana”, Primer Congres de la Institucio´ Catalana d’Estudis Agraris, p. 6.
Soliva, M., Bernat, G.E., Martı´nez, X., Sabate´, J., Seguı´, J., Pujol, M. and Valero, J. (1998), “Agriculture applicattion of organic wastes: behaviour differences depending on origin”, paper presented at VII Congreso Iberoamericano de residuos sólidos, Madrid.
Sriskandarajah, N., Bawden, R.J. and Packham, R.G. (1991), “Systems agriculture: a paradigm for sustainability”, AFSRE, Vol. 2 No. 3, pp. 1-5.
