













































Variable rate technology for vineyard sprayers: challenges of electronic devices for crop characterization


DOSAVIÑA: five years of success experiences in field tests 

 
Gil E., Llorens J., Llop J. 

Department of Agri food Engineering and Biotechnology 
Universitat Politécnica de Catalunya 

Avda. Esteve Terradas, 8 08860 – Castelldefels (Barcelona) – Spain 
Emilio.Gil@upc.edu 

 
Introduction 

 
To increase and improve spraying quality requires a  thorough knowledge of the 
existing relationship amongst operating parameters (working pressure, forward 
speed, spraying pattern quality) and plant morphology and structure. One of the 
aspects on which these parameters have more influence than any other is over the 
establishment of the adequate spraying volume for each treatment. Latest trends in 
recommendations for volume and dose rate have been widely discussed by 
researchers. Parameters such as row width, tree height, canopy volume (Tree Row 
Volume or TRV), leaf area index (LAI) and leaf area density (LAD) have been 
proposed to characterize trees and vines and their relation with the deposition 
values obtained in field trials (Koch, 2007). 
 
 

Methodology 
 
DOSAVIÑA is a Decision Support System developed to determine the optimal 
volume rate for vineyard spraying. This decision tool, arranged over a Microsoft 
Excel sheet®, is based on multiple data obtained after several years in real 
working conditions using different types of sprayers in vineyards, and includes a 
complete data base about crop characteristics (structure, crop stage, leaf area, leaf 
area index, leaf area density, etc). The computer program has been developed with 
the objective to generate an easy-to-use and useful tool and is able to determine 
the optimal volume rate to apply in vineyards, based on different calibration 
procedures. DOSAVIÑA also quantifies, in terms of losses of liquid, the effect of all 
parameters involved during the application process. 
 
DOSAVIÑA has been continuously used to determine the optimal volume rate in 
spray applications in vineyard since 2006. Different wine farms in USA and Spain 
make their applications according DOSAVIÑA proposals in a wide variety of canopy 
conditions. From Vitis labrusca varieties characterized by its great canopy volume 
to local and traditional vinifera varieties as Cabernet Sauvignon, Riesling or Merlot. 
From early stages up to full canopy development, DOSAVIÑA has been used as a 
unique tool to determine the applied volume rate. In most cases, the interest of this 
tool has been quantified not also by the volume reduction but also by the 
correspondent pesticide reduction. And in all cases, biological efficacy has been 
measured 

mailto:Emilio.Gil@upc.edu


Results 
 
The obtained results after five years of use in real conditions in the field show the 
interest of DOSAVIÑA. Average reduction about 39% in volume rates has been 
obtained and, consequently, the same reduction has been achieved in terms of 
plant protection products. This factor links directly with the main objective of the 
European Directive of Sustainable Use of Pesticides. 
 

 
Figure 1 Variation of applied volume rate in all field tests and for all crop stages.  

 
 
The resulting reduction in pesticide use did not present any difference in disease 
control for all the selected varieties (Landers and Gil, 2009). Methodologies based 
on coverage and leaf area, as prescribed by DOSAVIÑA, seems to be an interesting 
alternative method to determine the most adequate volume rate according to 
canopy structure, with the consequent diminution of pesticide use and the increase 
of environmentally-friendly practices. 
 
 

References 
 
Gil, E (2003) Tratamientos en viña. equipos y técnicas de aplicación. Edicions 

UPC, Barcelona, España.  
Gil, E. and A. Escolà (2009) Design of a decision support method to determine 

volume rate for vineyard spraying. Appl. Eng. Agric. 25, 145-151. 
Koch, H (2007) How to achieve conformity with the dose expression and sprayer 

function in high crops. Pflanzenschutz-Nachrichten Bayer 60, 71-84. 
Landers, A. and Gil, E (2009) Software to Determine the Optimal Volume Rate for 

Pesticide Application in Vineyard. Annual Report of 2009/08 and07. 
Viticulture Consortium East.Geneva. Cornell University, NYSAES. 
http://nysaes.cornell.edu/pubs/vitcon  

 

http://nysaes.cornell.edu/pubs/vitcon

