





































3494 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 45, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2007

Single-Pass Polarimetric SAR Interferometry
for Vessel Classification

Gerard Margarit, Member, IEEE, Jordi J. Mallorquí, Member, IEEE, and Xavier Fàbregas, Member, IEEE

Abstract—This paper presents a novel method for vessel classifi-
cation based on single-pass polarimetric synthetic aperture radar
(SAR) interferometry. It has been developed according to recent
ship scattering studies that show that the polarimetric response
of many types of vessels can be described by trihedral- and
dihedral-like mechanisms. The adopted methodology is quite sim-
ple. The input interferometric data are decomposed in terms of the
Pauli basis, and hence, one height image is derived for each simple
mechanism. Then, the local maxima of these images are isolated,
and a 3-D map of scatters is generated. The correlation of this map
with the scattering distribution expected for a set of reference ships
provides the final classification decision. The performance of the
proposed method has been tested with the orbital SAR simulator
developed at Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya. Different vessel
models have been processed with a sensor configuration similar to
the incoming TanDEM-X system. The analysis of diverse vessel
bearings, vessel speeds, and sea states shows that the map of
scatters matches reasonably the geometry of ships allowing a
correct identification even for adverse environmental conditions.

Index Terms—Coherent target decomposition (CTD), polari-
metric synthetic aperture radar interferometry (PolInSAR), vessel
classification.

I. INTRODUCTION

V ESSEL monitoring is an important research area, as itcan help to improve surveillance and control activities.
Up until now, four main options have been considered, namely,
the following: 1) Transponders located onboard the vessels
provide almost perfect location and identification at real time.
These devices put the autonomy of the overall system at
risk, as they can be disconnected. 2) Optical imagery taking
photographs of the scene. In this case, the dependence on
sunlight reflection makes these sensors to be unoperatable at
night or in cloudy areas. 3) Acoustic sensors that deal with the
underwater noise generated by the engines of ships [1], [2]. This
option needs arrays of sensors that can be damaged by ships.
4) High-frequency surface wave radar that exploits the conduc-
tivity properties of the ocean surface to detect small vessels [3].
They have been designed to work in local areas.

The lessons learnt in real scenarios show that none of
these options (even the synergy of some of them) is enough

Manuscript received September 29, 2006; revised March 8, 2007. This work
was supported in part by the Spanish Ministerio de Educación y Ciencia (MEC)
and Fondos Europeos para el Desarrollo Regional (FEDER) funds under Project
TEC2005-06863-C02-01 and in part by the Spanish Ministerio de Educación y
Ciencia (MEC) Grant AP2002-2313.

The authors are with the Remote Sensing Laboratory (RSLab), Univer-
sitat Politècnica de Catalunya, 08028 Barcelona, Spain (e-mail: gerardm@
tsc.upc.edu; mallorqui@tsc.upc.edu; fabregas@tsc.upc.edu).

Color version of one or more figures in this paper are available online at
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.

Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TGRS.2007.897437

for achieving general-purpose vessel monitoring with the de-
manded independence, accuracy, and temporal and spatial
coverage. An alternative is synthetic aperture radar (SAR)
imagery, because it can monitor large areas independently of
meteorological conditions. Different projects carried out by
governments and official institutions, for instance, the European
IMPAST [4] and DECLIMS [5], show that SAR imagery can
provide important support and can even be an alternative to
classical methods.

First, works in SAR imagery have pointed out that vessel
classification is not reliable with the usage of segmentation
methods applied to single SAR/inverse-ISAR images [6], [7].
More resolution and/or information channels are demanded. In
this sense, the analysis of polarimetric SAR (PolSAR) data via
coherent target decompositions (CTDs) appears to be a reliable
solution [8]. The idea is to infer geometrical features from ves-
sel scattering by using a qualitative pixel-by-pixel procedure.
In this process, CTDs are adopted because they decompose
the complex scattering matrix of each pixel in terms of simple
mechanisms related to canonic-like scatters. Normally, these
scatters describe the scattering of some structures common in
most vessels, and hence, their distribution within the signature
can be useful for achieving a reasonable discrimination.

The potentialities of CTD in vessel classification have been
studied in some works [9], [10]. They mainly use the so-called
symmetric-scattering characterization method to interpret real
vessel SAR images. The results show that polarimetry can help
to isolate significant scatters that are useful for identification.
However, their relation with the geometry of vessels is not still
clear. In order to shed light on this issue and, extensively, on
the performance of CTD for vessel classification, a scattering
study that describes the polarimetric behavior of vessels for
the widest observation conditions possible will be very fruitful.
Preliminary works have been developed in this sense at the
Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya (UPC). They are based
on a numerical tool (GRECOSAR) that simulates SAR images
of large vessels in simple personal computers [11], [12]. The
analysis of large datasets related to diverse sensors, vessels,
and environmental conditions show the following: 1) Each
analyzed vessel has a particular polarimetric response in which
mechanisms can be described in terms of the Pauli channels and
can be associated with particular parts of the vessel structure;
2) the response of some key scatters is invariant within a cone
angle around 30◦ [11], [13]; and 3) PolSAR presents limitations
for vessel classification depending on vessel characteristics,
image resolution, and environmental conditions.

According to these results, a new vessel-classification
method that is based on polarimetric SAR interferometry

0196-2892/$25.00 © 2007 IEEE



MARGARIT et al.: SINGLE-PASS POLARIMETRIC SAR INTERFEROMETRY FOR VESSEL CLASSIFICATION 3495

Fig. 1. Centimetric scattering maps derived from GRECOSAR for the SPA, ICE, and FER models. They have been analyzed with the Pauli theorem, and the
results are impressed over a snapshot of the vessel. The following color code has been adopted: Red → trihedral, Green → dihedral 0◦, and Blue → dihedral 45◦.

(PolInSAR) has been proposed with the aim to overcome some
of the limitations of classical PolSAR [14], [15]. It applies the
Pauli theorem to the interferometric data and, then, retrieves the
height of the most significant scatters. This allows to generate
a 3-D map of scatters that, first, schematizes the structure
of vessels and, second, allows the development of a reliable
decision rule based on quantitative estimates.

This novel vessel classification method (Pauli–PolInSAR) is
the main concern of this paper. It is structured as follows. In
Section II, an overview of the vessel scattering study supporting
the current method is provided. Details about the adopted
methodology and the most important results are outlined.
Section III describes the method. The focus is placed on the
classification patterns and decision rule. In Section IV, the
method is tested with simulated PolInSAR datasets provided
by GRECOSAR for a sensor configuration similar to the future
TanDEM-X [16]. The analysis of some vessel models within
diverse scenarios shows that the map of scatters matches the
geometry of ships in most cases. As demonstrated later, this
allows us to reach a correct identification even when SAR
signatures suffer from notable distortions due to the sea surface.
Finally, Section V gives some guidelines about important issues
that must be discussed before adapting the current method to
real scenarios.

II. VESSEL SCATTERING STUDY

UPC has developed GRECOSAR, a SAR simulator of com-
plex targets able to generate PolSAR, PolInSAR, and po-
larimetric inverse SAR (PolISAR) data for flexible scenarios
[11]. It is based on the UPC’s Graphical Electromagnetic
Computing (GRECO) solver [12] that estimates in the fre-
quency domain the radar cross section (RCS) of 3-D com-
plex targets via high-frequency methods. Several formats are
admitted, but the computer-aided design package GiD of the
International Center of Numerical Methods for Engineering has
been adopted [17]. The proper performance of GRECOSAR
has been validated with exhaustive tests carried out for both
simple and complex targets [11].

Fig. 2. Imaging geometry for the inverse SAR imagery mode of GRECOSAR.

In previous works, GRECOSAR has been used to derive
a high amount of PolISAR images obtained with centimetric
resolutions for different vessels and environmental conditions
[11], [13]. The analysis with CTD shows the following items,
namely, as follows: 1) similar polarimetric interpretation is
retrieved for all CTD, and hence, any theorem is valid for
the application in mind; 2) the main scattering centers can be
described by trihedral/dihedral behaviors; and 3) the response
of the vessels allows a proper target identification. It appears
to be stable within a cone angle around 30◦ (this value comes
from the analysis of simulated data. When real imagery be-
comes available, it is expected that this value could be more
restrictive).

Some snapshots of the mentioned images are presented in
Fig. 1. They provide the scattering maps of three different
vessels, namely, as follows: 1) a Spanish fishing vessel (SPA),
27 m long and 10 m wide, 2) an Icelandic fishing vessel (ICE),
70 m long and 12 m wide, and 3) a common passenger ferry
(FER), 200 m long and 30 m wide. The adopted scenario is
presented in Fig. 2, where β defines the bearing and ϕ = 20◦,
the incidence angle. All the maps have been analyzed with
the Pauli theorem, and as observed, they allow a high scatter
discrimination.

In a second step, the previous experiment has been repeated
with PolSAR imagery (for the same observation conditions) but



3496 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 45, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2007

Fig. 3. Scheme of the Pauli–PolInSAR classification technique.

for resolutions ranging from 5 to 1 m [11]. The results have
shown that CTD present some limitations for vessel classifica-
tion under adverse environmental conditions and limited image
resolutions. Important restrictions are that they do not retrieve
quantitative estimates of geometrical features and the results
can be affected by the azimuth distortions induced by the sea
state [11], [18]. In this context, this paper tries to expand the
information derived from CTD with single-pass interferometry.
As stated by the previous scattering study, the relative height
among scatters, combined with a suitable polarimetric analysis,
appears to be an efficient solution for achieving an accurate 3-D
scatter isolation.

It is important to note the initial character of this paper as
the outlined concepts are only supported with simulated data.
In despite of that, it has been shown that the adopted numerical
tool provides realistic results, it does not include, for instance,
the sea clutter, and consequently, validation with real data
becomes mandatory once available. With the aim to advance
some useful ideas, preliminary comparisons have been per-
formed with the study in [10]. Some similarities were found.
First, in that work, the key scatters used for identification
behave as dipole, just the combination of a trihedral plus a
dihedral. In addition, they keep their polarimetric properties for
different views, as the reference hot spots observed in simulated
data. In some particular situations, both datasets present some
differences regarding the polarimetric mechanisms. They may
be caused by the different incidence angles adopted in both
cases and by the geometry of vessels.

III. PAULI–POLINSAR METHOD

The scheme of the proposed classification method is illus-
trated in Fig. 3 [14], [15]. In the first step, the polarimetric
analysis of the input data is performed via CTD. For such
process, any theorem is valid because the mechanisms ex-
pected for the main scattering centers are like trihedrals and/or
dihedrals, which is common in all the decomposition basis. The
proposed approach uses the Pauli due to its simplicity and the
fact that the orthogonality of this basis makes phase isolation
easier. In this context, the evaluation of the performance of
all CTD would be indeed interesting. However, it is expected

that none of the different options can improve the performance
achieved with the Pauli theorem.

For the ith pixel with the monostatic scattering matrix

Smi =
[

(Shh)mi (Shv)
m
i

(Shv)mi (Svv)
m
i

]
(1)

the Pauli theorem leads to the complex Pauli vector kmi

kmi =
1√
2

[
k

1st,m
i k

2nd,m
i k

3rd,m
i

]

=
1√
2

[ (Shh+Svv)mi (Shh−Svv)mi (2Shv)mi ]
T (2)

where m stands for master (m = M) or slave (m = S) image,
and [. . .]T denotes transpose operation. In the previous expres-
sion, k1st,mi refers to trihedral (odd number of reflections),
k

2nd,m
i refers to dihedral 0

◦ (even number of reflections), and
k

3rd,m
i refers to dihedral 45

◦ (antisymmetric components).
The second step applies the proper coregistration techniques

in order to derive the interferogram for each channel. As the
algorithm works directly with the scattering matrix, which is
a first-order polarimetric descriptor, the coregistration is based
on the cross correlation of the squared amplitudes of the two
images in all channels. This process results on three interfero-
metric samples for the ith pixel

I1sti = k
1st,M
i ·

(
k

1st,S
i

)∗

I2ndi = k
2nd,M
i ·

(
k

2nd,S
i

)∗

I3rdi = k
3rd,M
i ·

(
k

3rd,S
i

)∗
(3)

where (. . .)∗ denotes complex conjugate. For each “Pauli in-
terferogram,” three height images H1st, H2nd, and H3rd are
derived. In them, the local maxima that is related to a fixed
dynamic range provide the relative heights of the most im-
portant scattering centers, i.e., those scatters that can lead to
a proper identification. Their 3-D distribution is used to build
a map of scatters that provides a reasonable representation of
the structure of vessels. This map bases the decision rule of the
algorithm, which is run with a pattern database that gathers the
scattering information expected for a set of reference vessels.
In this way, the algorithm classifies the observed ship with the
pattern providing the highest similarity.

The main advantage of the current method is the retrieval
of the third dimension of the space that allows, jointly with a
proper polarimetric processing, a reliable vessel identification
based on quantitative measurements. This improvement can be
observed in Fig. 4, where simulated data is analyzed with the
Pauli theorem and with the Pauli–PolInSAR method. These
data are related to a target with two pairs of a trihedral and
a dihedral located within two different resolution cells. These
scatters have an edge length of 1 m, and they face the sensor.
The X-band system summarized in Table I has been adopted.
As observed, the four scatters are isolated in both cases with
their proper polarimetric behavior, but with interferometry, the
available information is improved with their heights.



MARGARIT et al.: SINGLE-PASS POLARIMETRIC SAR INTERFEROMETRY FOR VESSEL CLASSIFICATION 3497

Fig. 4. Analysis results for the simulated dataset related to the array of canonics. The log-magnitude of the first and second Pauli channels are attached jointly
with two colored images. The upper image shows the red/blue/green image related to the Pauli theorem, whereas the lower one shows the 3-D map of scatters
derived by Pauli–PolInSAR. In both cases, the red/green color outlines the information of the first/second Pauli channels.

TABLE I
X-BAND SENSOR EMULATING TERRASAR-X

The previous data show another important feature. In the case
that a cell has two or three scatters and that they behave close to
the mechanisms of the Pauli basis, the proposed method obtains
their heights [19]. But if they share the same mechanism, the
height of their center of phase is retrieved instead. Note that
this methodology is a particular case of the general theory
developed for the characterization of urban areas [20], [21]. In
that case, the idea is to find which combination of scattering
mechanisms (not necessarily orthogonal) allow to reach for
each pixel the maximum of coherence and, hence, the best
quality in the retrieved interferometric phase. As in the current
case, it is possible to retrieve up to three different heights in a
resolution cell.

A. Classification Patterns

The classification patterns used in the decision rule provide
the relative height, ground location, and Pauli mechanism of
a set of reference points within the structure of vessels [15].
These points are termed Persistent Polarimetric Scatters (PePS),
and they present two main characteristics, namely, as follows:
1) they have the highest RCS values in the polarimetric re-
sponse of vessels with a difference larger than 10 dB with
respect to the surrounding scatters and 2) their scattering prop-
erties are preserved for a cone of angular section of around 30◦.

PePS are identified by analyzing large datasets of scattering
maps obtained for a wide observation conditions (see Fig. 1).
With these images, the map height that Pauli–PolInSAR can
provide is predicted, and an “expected map” for a fixed solid an-
gle is defined. The selection of these guide scatters is performed

Fig. 5. Classification patterns for the vessels presented in Fig. 1. Full white
circles highlight PePS locations, whereas black labels the corresponding height
and Pauli mechanism (“Tri” → trihedral, “Dih” → Dihedral 0◦).

according to two main considerations, namely, as follows:
1) the relative distance and height among PePS should be
the maximum possible and 2) they should be placed in clean
scattering areas, i.e., areas where no other scattering centers
could interfere them. As commented later, such considerations
are very useful to relax resolution requirements and to reduce
the influence of some known distortions due to the sea envi-
ronment [11], [18]. For the vessels presented in Fig. 1, the
patterns illustrated in Fig. 5 are derived. They are valid for
(275◦ ≤ β ≤ 355◦) and (10◦ ≤ ϕ ≤ 40◦).

B. Decision Rule

The correlation process between the measured signature and
the pattern database is carried out in three stages. It uses a simi-
larity parameter 0 < S < 1 to establish the degree of similarity
between the observed vessel and the different patterns. This
parameter can be understood as a Euclidean distance between



3498 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 45, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2007

the locations of the main scatters isolated in the SAR image and
the locations of PePS in the processed pattern. It is defined as

S
.
=

r

R
·


1 −

4∑
j=1

ej · Wj


 (4)

where 0 ≥ ej ≥ 1 are four different errors fixed by

ej =
1
r

r∑
n=1

ej,n (5)

with j ∈ {“azi,” “ran,” “hei,” and “pol”} indicating the so-
called azimuth (eazi), range (eran), height (ehei), and polari-
metric (epol) errors. These errors point out the mean error that
is made when the value of these parameters is retrieved for all
the main scatters of the measured map. In these expressions, r
indicates the number of PePS with a corresponding reference
scatter in the measured map, and R is the total number of
PePS in the processed pattern. As observed later, the ratio
r/R plays an important role for discriminating those patterns
that have no relation with the measured structure. The factors
(0 ≥ Wj ≥ 1 for j ∈ {1, . . . , 4}) are weights that give different
“significance” to each error in the identification process. Empir-
ical analysis have shown that the following values provide the
best overall results (Whei = 0.35, Wpol = 0.35, Wazi = 0.15,
and Wran = 0.15). They reduce the influence of azimuth and
range errors that can cause severe mismatching due to the image
distortions induced by sea surface [11], [18].

The expression of the azimuth error is

eazi,n = 1, if

∣∣Pmeaazi,n − PPePSazi,n
∣∣

∆x
≥ 1

eazi,n = 0, if

∣∣Pmeaazi,n − PPePSazi,n
∣∣

∆x
< 1 (6)

where PPePSazi,n is the azimuth location expected for the nth
PePS of the pattern, and Pmeaazi,n is the azimuth position of
that the scattering center associated with it. Their difference is
normalized to the azimuth cell dimension ∆x. Similarly,

eran,n = 1, if

∣∣Pmearan,n − PPePSran,n
∣∣

∆r
≥ 1

eran,n = 0, if

∣∣Pmearan,n − PPePSran,n
∣∣

∆r
< 1 (7)

where, as before, PPePSran,n is the range location expected for the
nth PePS of the pattern, Pmearan,n is the range position of that the
scattering center associated with it, and ∆r is the range cell
dimension. The expression for the height error is

ehei,n = 1, if

∣∣∣Pmeahei,n − PPePShei,n
∣∣∣

∆h
≥ 1

ehei,n =

∣∣∣Pmeahei,n − PPePShei,n
∣∣∣

∆h
, if

∣∣∣Pmeahei,n − PPePShei,n
∣∣∣

∆h
< 1 (8)

where PPePShei,n is the height expected for the nth PePS of the
pattern, and Pmeahei,n is the height measured for that the scattering
center associated with it. In this case, ∆h = σh is the height

bias experimented by the system for a particular phase error
(σφ) [see (9)]. Finally, the polarimetric error epol,n is updated
to zero if the polarimetric behavior of the nth PePS matches the
Pauli mechanism of that the scattering center associated with it.
Otherwise, it is equal to one.

Based on the parameter S, the three-stage correlation proce-
dure is as follows.

1) For each pattern, the distribution of the measured scat-
tering mechanisms that better fits the PePS distribution
is found. The selection of the optimal configuration does
not only take into account the relative positions of such
mechanisms but also their different Pauli behaviors. This
means that, according to the number of PePS in the
pattern and the local maxima within each Pauli channel,
(4) is evaluated for all the possible permutations. Among
all permutations, the one providing the highest similarity
S is selected. In this process, possible offsets in each error
are canceled. In addition, there is a “suitability scatter”
step that discards, for a fixed permutation, those measured
scattering centers providing a relative height error higher
than ∆h or an azimuth and range error equal to one. This
modifies the value of r with respect to R giving sense to
the ratio r/R of (4).

2) Once each pattern has associated a particular distribution
of local maxima in the measured signature with a specific
value of S, the algorithm identifies the observed ship with
that model having the highest similarity. In this process,
the labels “PePS” and “mea” of (6)–(8) are, respectively,
associated with PePS and with the measured scattering
centers related to them.

3) Steps 1) and 2) are iterated for different dynamic ranges in
order to isolate different combinations of local maxima.
The idea is to reach the maximum similarity and/or
the best discrimination among the different models. The
model which pattern has been selected more times be-
comes the final decision of the algorithm. The final simi-
larity value is that value providing the best discrimination
among models. In the current version of the algorithm,
the vessel bearing is assumed to be known according to
some of the methods available in the literature [6], [22].
In the near future, it is expected to develop a vessel-
bearing estimator that estimates vessel bearing accord-
ing to that value providing the best overall correlation
between the azimuth x-range position of the measured
scattering centers with respect to the position of the PePS
of the patterns.

Note that this rule is empirical, and it has been motivated by
the information that the algorithm has to deal with. It has been
adopted because it allows the evaluation of the performances
of the proposed method in an easy and quick way. Obviously,
better decision rules may be developed in the future.

IV. ANALYSIS WITH SIMULATED IMAGES

A. Description of the Simulation Environment

The performances of the Pauli–PolInSAR method have
been analyzed with GRECOSAR for the three vessel models



MARGARIT et al.: SINGLE-PASS POLARIMETRIC SAR INTERFEROMETRY FOR VESSEL CLASSIFICATION 3499

Fig. 6. Imaging geometry of GRECOSAR.

Fig. 7. Across-track interferometric geometry of GRECOSAR.

presented in Fig. 1. These models are built with paramet-
ric surfaces and meshed with a tessellation procedure that
assures a discretization error lower than 3 mm (more than
400 000 triangular facets were used). The imaging geometry of
GRECOSAR is presented in Fig. 6. Besides the typical pa-
rameters related with the acquisition process and, later, data
processing, the simulator can deal with some environmental
parameters, namely, as follows: 1) vessel bearing β; 2) vessel
cruising speed vt; and 3) vessel rotational and translational
motions due to ocean waves (see [11] for further details).
The adopted across-track interferometric geometry is illustrated
in Fig. 7.

Table I summarizes the main parameters of the selected
sensor. It is a stripmap single-pass PolInSAR system working at
X-band and based on TerraSAR-X [23]. It provides a resolution
of 2.3 m in azimuth and 1.3 m in range for an antenna that is
4.6 m long and 1 m wide. The system uses the so-called ping-
pong measurement to maximize the effective baseline. With
these values, the height sensitivity is

σh =
λ sin ϕr
4πB⊥

∂φ = 0.27σφ (9)

where r = 544 km is the sensor-to-target range, B⊥ = 30 m
is the perpendicular baseline, and λ = 0.03 m is the operating
wavelength. For the vessels processed in this paper, σh is
limited to 1 m, and hence, σφ has to be 4

◦.

B. Description of the Simulated Scenarios

Four different scenarios have been processed, all summarized
in Table II. In environments A and B, no sea surface is con-
sidered, whereas in environments C and D, a simple model is
adopted. This model considers the sea as a flat surface with a
variable reflection coefficient that simulates the effect of ocean
waves on the reflectivity values of the sea. This parameter is
fixed by the operating frequency, the effective wave height, the
elevation of the radar above the sea level, and the permittivity
and conductivity of the sea. From an electromagnetic point
of view, this model can compute the main contributions of
sea–ship interaction to RCS allowing the derivation of accurate
vessel SAR signatures [24]. This makes it possible to produce
most of the scattering mechanisms observed in real data and
to evaluate their influence in classification results. For the
objectives of this paper, this model is enough. However, it
presents a set of limitations that should be improved in future
versions of GRECOSAR. They are mainly related with the
absence of sea dynamics, wind conditions, and sea clutter.

In addition to the sea surface, environments B and D consider
pitching and rolling according to the linear terms provided in
Table II. For each environment and vessel, seven bearings have
been analyzed ranging from 295◦ to 355◦ in steps of 10◦. This
results on a total of 84 simulations, 28 for each vessel. Note
that, despite that environments A and B are quite unrealistic,
they are useful for isolating the effects of each environmental
phenomena in vessel classification.

C. Evaluation of the Results

The classification results are gathered in Fig. 8 via three sim-
ilar history plots. They compile the similarity values provided
by the algorithm for all patterns when the 28 simulations are
run for the SPA [Fig. 8(a)], ICE [Fig. 8(b)], and FER [Fig. 8(c)]
ships. They are grouped in four sections according to the four
sets of environmental conditions. In all cases, the red/blue/green
graph highlights with the marker +/ ◦ /× the similarity values
obtained for the SPA/ICE/FER model. Fig. 9 shows the log-
magnitude of the Pauli interferograms for simulation 1 and the
SPA model. Two versions are presented for different dynamic
ranges. They illustrate how the local maxima can be isolated
from the whole signature and how they can be related to the
PePS of the pattern.

As observed, the method is able to properly identify the
correct model in most situations, even when the environmental
conditions are notably adverse. In general, the overall rate
of positive matches is for each model higher than 80%. In
addition, the algorithm achieves a good performance in three
critical situations, namely, as follows: 1) the presence of vessel
motions; 2) the influence of sea surface; and 3) the usage of
vessel bearings almost parallel to the satellite track.
1) Influence of Vessel Motions: Regarding vessel motions,

the notable distortions that SAR images can experiment along
the azimuth direction becomes an important adverse factor for
vessel classification. Analysis of real and simulated SAR data
show that these phenomena can worsen the performance of
methods based on image features [10], [11]. Fig. 10 presents
the log-magnitudes of the Pauli interferograms retrieved for



3500 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 45, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2007

TABLE II
ENVIRONMENTAL CONDITIONS FOR THE SIMULATIONS PRESENTED IN SECTION IV

simulation 8 and the SPA model. The analysis of these images
in relation to those obtained for simulation 1 (the same bearing
is adopted) shows that the connection between the local maxima
and the PePS of the SPA pattern is not as evident as in the
case of free motion. In classical methods, this phenomenon
may cause important mismatches. But in the current method, it
does not appreciably modify the ratio of positive matches (see
motion environments B and D). Note that the high incidence
adopted in these images makes pitching to cause the largest
distortions. For grazing incidences, rolling appears to take more
significance [25].
2) Influence of the Sea Surface: The sea surface can also

modify classification results due to the new scattering processes
that it can generate with the structure of vessels and that can
alter the scattering information related to the imaged ships. For
current simulations, the influence of the sea is not important
due to the high incidence adopted and the absence of sea
clutter. Future versions of the simulator should include this
phenomenon as it can be an important source of noise for the
interferometric phase with rough sea.
3) Influence of Extreme Bearings: The usage of polarimetry

in vessel classification can also be affected by the bearing of
the ship. Particularly difficult are the orientations that put the
vessel almost parallel (or perpendicular) to the satellite track.
In those situations, the dihedral-like mechanisms generated at
the lateral sides of the cabin/hull provide a high backscattered
power that can mask some of the key mechanisms required for
a proper vessel identification. In this paper, this phenomenon
increases the density of fails around bearings β = 345◦ and
355◦, particularly for the ICE plot.

V. REQUIREMENTS FOR REAL SCENARIOS

In the previous section, the analysis of simulated data have
shown that the Pauli–PolInSAR method may be reliable for

vessel classification. However, tests with real imagery are
mandatory in order to fully validate this point. For such process,
useful ideas are outlined in this section.

According to simulation results, the Pauli–PolInSAR method
provides reliable results if single-pass PolInSAR sensors with
recommended resolutions in the 1–3-m range are adopted, in
despite that better resolutions will be always welcome. Nowa-
days, such resolutions are only available from some airborne
sensors and, probably, from the incoming TanDEM-X orbital
sensor (see Table I for guide parameters) [23].

For the application in mind, either orbital and airborne sen-
sors are valid. The synergy of both, if possible, may be the best
solution in order to find the best tradeoff between coverage and
revisiting time. Note, for example, that the expected coverage
for TerraSAR-X sensor in dual mode will not be larger than
15 km with a revisit cycle higher than one day.

Independent of the adopted sensor, it should operate at high
incidence because the influence of the sea is less noticeable.
Certainly, with this geometry, it is more difficult to observe
strong dihedral-like mechanisms that can mask the response
of vessels. Such mechanisms are more evident at medium
incidences in the lateral side of the hull.

In the previous simulations, the ping-pong measurement
mode is used due to restrictions on GRECOSAR. In real sce-
narios, the standard mode is more advisable, because the pulse-
repetition frequency requirements are less restrictive. However,
this implies to use real baselines twice the effective one. In this
sense, the value of 30 m previously adopted is translated to
60 m, which can be challenging for an orbital sensor. Some
tests show that effective baselines of 20 m may be also useful.

VI. CONCLUSION

In this paper, a new approach for vessel classification based
on single-pass PolInSAR has been presented. It infers a 3-D



MARGARIT et al.: SINGLE-PASS POLARIMETRIC SAR INTERFEROMETRY FOR VESSEL CLASSIFICATION 3501

Fig. 8. Similarity history plots retrieved for simulations 1–28 when the
(a) SPA, (b) ICE, and (c) FER ships are processed.

representation of the geometry of ships by combining Pauli data
analysis with height-retrieval techniques. The performances of
this method have been evaluated with simulated PolInSAR
datasets obtained from GRECOSAR. Different scenarios for
diverse environmental conditions have been analyzed for three
types of ships. The results prove the good performance of
the method for realistic systems, for instance, the incoming

Fig. 9. Log-magnitudes of the Pauli interferograms retrieved for the SPA
model in simulation 1. The upper images are presented with a dynamic range
of 20 dB, whereas the lower ones for a dynamic range of 5 dB.

Fig. 10. Log-magnitudes of the Pauli interferograms retrieved for the SPA
model in simulation 8. The upper images are presented with a dynamic range
of 20 dB, whereas the lower ones for a dynamic range of 5 dB.

TanDEM-X. In most cases, the processed ship has been prop-
erly identified even under adverse environmental conditions.
The reason is the relative height of scatters that is less affected
by the sea-induced SAR image distortions. This is an important
advantage in relation to classical methods.

All the results presented in this paper are based on simulated
data. In this way, the analysis of real data with reliable ground-
truth is essential to validate the results presented along this pa-
per and to identify their limitations. But before real data become
available, there is a set of interesting points that have to be
addressed. On the one hand, the current simulated database has
to be extended in order to consider more vessels and scenarios
as well as ship-material information. These data will allow to
explore the limits of the proposed method and to provide more
reliable estimates of the rate of positive matches. In this sense,
note that the low number of patterns adopted in this paper can
overestimate the results. On the other hand, sea models have to
be improved with more realistic features, such as sea dynamics,
wind conditions, and sea clutter. This last item can be added, for
instance, by considering the sea as a dynamic (changing during
the observation time) facet-based surface characterized by its
dielectric properties.

Besides these items, the decision rule is another field where
important research has to be done and will benefit of the larger
databases. The analysis of advanced rules based on neural
networks or genetic algorithms, computationally more efficient,
will be very fruitful when the database of vessels becomes
increased.



3502 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING, VOL. 45, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2007

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

The authors would like to thank the shipyard “Astillero
Armon” for providing the blueprints of the Spanish vessel.

REFERENCES

[1] Y. Zhang, J. Zheng, H. Liu, and L. Jiao, “An efficient method of radar
target classification,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Radar, Oct. 2001, pp. 502–505.

[2] S. Yang, “Classification of ship-radiated signals via chaotic features,”
Electron. Lett., vol. 39, no. 4, pp. 395–397, Feb. 2003.

[3] T. Thayaparan and J. MacDougall, “Evaluation of ionospheric sporadic-E
clutter in an arctic environment for the assessment of high-frequency
surface-wave radar surveillance,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
vol. 43, no. 5, pp. 1180–1888, May 2005.

[4] IMPAST project web page. [Online]. Available: http://fish.jrc.cec.eu.int/
fisheries/impast/index.html

[5] DECLIMS Project Web Page. [Online]. Available: http://intelligence.jrc.
cec.eu.int/marine/declims/front.html

[6] S. Musman, D. Kerr, and C. Bachmann, “Automatic recognition of
ISAR ship images,” IEEE Trans. Aerosp. Electron. Syst., vol. 32, no. 4,
pp. 1392–1404, Oct. 1996.

[7] L. Gagnon and R. Klepko, “Hierarchical classifier design for airborne
SAR images of ships,” in Proc. SPIE, Sep. 1998, vol. 3371, pp. 38–49.

[8] S. R. Cloude and E. Pottier, “A review of target decompositions theorems
in radar polarimetry,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 34, no. 2,
pp. 498–518, Mar. 1996.

[9] R. Touzi and F. Charbonneau, “Characterization of target symmetric
scattering using polarimetric SARs,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens.,
vol. 40, no. 11, pp. 2507–2516, Nov. 2002.

[10] R. Touzi, R. K. Raney, and F. Charbonneau, “On the use of perma-
nent symmetric scatterers for ship characterization,” IEEE Trans. Geosci.
Remote Sens., vol. 42, no. 10, pp. 2039–2045, Oct. 2004.

[11] G. Margarit, J. J. Mallorqui, J. M. Rius, and J. Sanz-Marcos, “On the
usage of GRECOSAR, an orbital polarimetric SAR simulator of complex
targets, for vessel classification studies,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote
Sens., vol. 44, no. 12, pp. 3517–3526, Dec. 2006.

[12] J. M. Rius et al., “High frequency RCS of complex radar targets in real
time,” IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 41, no. 9, pp. 1308–1319,
Sep. 1993.

[13] G. Margarit, X. Fabregas, and J. J. Mallorqui, “Study of the polarimetric
mechanisms on simulated vessels with SAR and ISAR imaging,” in Proc.
IEEE Eur. SAR Symp., EUSAR, May 2004, vol. 1, pp. 447–450.

[14] G. Margarit, J. J. Mallorqui, J. M. Rius, J. Sanz-Marcos, and X. Fabregas,
“Orbital single-pass interferometry for vessel detection and classifica-
tion,” in Proc. FRINGE Workshop, Dec. 1–6, 2005. CD-ROM.

[15] G. Margarit, J. J. Mallorqui, and X. Fabregas, “Tri-dimensional vessel
classification patterns inferred via single-pass Polarimetric SAR Interfer-
ometry,” in Proc. SEASAR Workshop, Jan. 2006, pp. 1–6.

[16] M. Zink, H. Fiedler, I. Hajnsek, G. Krieger, A. Moreira, and
M. Werner, “The TanDEM-X mission concept,” in Proc. IGARSS, 2006,
pp. 1938–1941.

[17] GiD Support Database, Barcelona, Spain: Int. Center Numerical Methods
Eng. (CIMNE). [Online]. Available: http://gid.cimne.upc.es/support_
team/

[18] K. Ouchi, M. Ichara, K. Morimura, S. Kumano, and I. Takami, “Non
uniform azimuth image shift observed in the Radarsat images of ships
in motion,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 40, no. 10, pp. 2188–
2195, Oct. 2002.

[19] G. Margarit, X. Fabregas, J. J. Mallorqui, and L. Pipia, “Orbital polarimet-
ric SAR interferometry simulator of complex targets,” in Proc. IGARSS,
Jul. 2005, vol. 3, pp. 2015–2019.

[20] R. Zandoná, K. P. Papathanassiou, I. Hajnsek, and A. Moreira, “Polari-
metric and interferometric characterization of coherent scatters in urban
areas,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 44, no. 4, pp. 971–984,
Apr. 2006.

[21] E. Colin, C. Titin-Schnaider, and W. Tabbara, “An interferometric co-
herence optimization method in radar polarimetry for high-resolution
imagery,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 44, no. 1, pp. 167–175,
Jan. 2006.

[22] G. Zilman, A. Zapolski, and M. Marom, “The speed and beam of a ship
from its wake’s SAR images,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 42,
no. 10, pp. 2335–2343, Oct. 2004.

[23] A. Roth and R. Werninghaus, “Status of the TerraSAR-X mission,” in
Proc. IGARSS, 2006, vol. 3, pp. 1918–1921.

[24] J. M. Rius, Manual of GRECO v8.6. [Online]. Available: http://
www.tsc.upc.edu/sar/pdfs/margarit_usersmanualo_.pdf

[25] K. Jamil and R. J. Burkholder, “Radar scattering from a rolling target float-
ing on a time-evolving rough sea surface,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote
Sens., vol. 44, no. 11, pp. 3330–3337, Nov. 2006.

Gerard Margarit (M’05) was born in Barcelona,
Spain, in 1979. He received the Diploma de-
gree in telecommunications engineering, the Ad-
vanced Studies Diploma, and the Master MERIT
Diploma degrees from the Universitat Politècnica
de Catalunya, Barcelona, Spain, in 2002, 2004, and
2006, respectively, where he has been working to-
ward the Ph.D. degree at the Remote Sensing Lab-
oratory Department under an official Spanish Grant
since 2002.

In 2004, he has hold the position of “Stagier” at
the Joint Research Centre, Ispra, Italy, for a period of four months. His main
research topics are 3-D SAR simulation of complex targets, polarimetric SAR
interferormetry, and vessel classification.

Jordi J. Mallorquí (S’93–M’96) was born in
Tarragona, Spain, in 1966. He received the Ingeniero
degree in telecommunications engineering and the
Ph.D. degree in telecommunications engineering for
his research on microwave tomography for biomed-
ical applications from the Universitat Politècnica de
Catalunya (UPC), Barcelona, Spain, in 1990 and
1995, respectively, where in 1991, he was with the
Department of Signal Theory and Communications
as a Ph.D. student.

In 1993, he became an Assistant Professor, and
since 1997, he has been an Associate Professor in the Telecommunications
Engineering School, UPC. His teaching activity involves microwaves, radio-
navigation systems, and remote sensing. In 1999, he spent a sabbatical year
at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, CA, working on interferometric
airborne SAR calibration algorithms. He is currently working on the application
of SAR interferometry to terrain-deformation monitoring with orbital and
airborne data, vessel detection and classification from SAR images, and 3-D
electromagnetic simulation of SAR systems. He is also collaborating in the
design and construction of a ground-based SAR interferometer for landslide
control. Finally, he is now developing the hardware and software of a bistatic
parasitic SAR for interferometric applications using ERS and ENVISAT as
sensors of opportunity. He has published more than 80 papers on microwave
tomography, electromagnetic numerical simulation, and SAR processing, inter-
ferometry, and differential interferometry in referred journals and international
symposia.

Xavier Fàbregas (M’90) received the B.S. degree
in physics from Barcelona University, Barcelona,
Spain, in 1988, and the Ph.D. degree in applied sci-
ences from the Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya
(UPC), Barcelona, in 1995.

Since 1996, he has been an Associate Professor
with UPC. In 2001, he spent an eight-month sab-
batical period at the HR Institute of the German
Aerospace Agency, Oberpfaffenhofen. His cur-
rent research interests include radar polarimetry,
polarimetric-retrieval algorithms, and polarimetric
calibration.


