








































Computational Particle Mechanics
(will be inserted by the editor)

Application of an enhanced discrete element method to oil and gas
drilling processes

Pere Andreu Ubach · Ferran Arrufat · Lev Ring · Raju
Gandikota · Francisco Zárate · Eugenio Oñate

Received: date / Accepted: date

Abstract The authors present results on the use of the discrete element method (DEM) for the simulation
of drilling processes typical in the oil and gas exploration industry. The numerical method uses advanced
DEM techniques using a local definition of the DEM parameters and combined FEM-DEM procedures.

This paper presents a step by step procedure to build a DEM model for analysis of the soil region coupled
to a FEM model for discretizing the drilling tool that reproduces the drilling mechanics of a particular drill
bit. A parameter study has been performed to determine the model parameters in order to maintain accurate
solutions with reduced computational cost.

Keywords Drilling · Discrete Element Method, Oil and Gas

1 Introduction

This paper presents results obtained in a research effort aimed at evaluating the feasibility of using the
discrete element method (DEM) and a combination of the DEM and the finite element method (FEM) for
solving real problems and gaining valuable insight in the field of oil and gas drilling engineering. The oil
drilling industry, for instance, faces great challenges as the traditional reservoirs become depleted and the
companies explore deeper in the Earth crust and further offshore. At greater depths, the drilling conditions
are harsher for the material, but also require a more efficient use of the techniques mastered by the drilling
companies.

Another consequence of drilling ever deeper holes is the increased cost of the investment for drilling the
well. The drilling process takes longer and therefore the associated cost rises and the financial risk increases.
Catastrophic failures of the material or the well itself could become prohibitive for the oil companies.
Therefore, the smart and efficient use of the engineering and scientific knowledge of all the processes involved
is even more critical.

The mechanics of the interaction of the drill bit with the geological formation are one of the aspects about
which the industry has traditionally relied on semi-empirical data for conducting its operations. But as the
companies explore new boundaries for their wells, that semi-empirical data becomes outranged. Therefore,

P.-A. Ubach, F. Arrufat, F. Zárate, E. Oñate
CIMNE - Centre Internacional de Metodes Numerics en Enginyeria
Campus Norte UPC, 08034 Barcelona, Spain
Tel.: +34-93-2057016
Fax: +34-93-4016517
E-mail: ubach,farrufat,zarate,onate@cimne.upc.edu

L. Ring
Weatherford International
E-mail: Lev.Ring@weatherford.com

R. Gandikota
MindMesh Inc. E-mail: rga@mindmeshinc.com



2 P.-A. Ubach, F. Arrufat, L. Ring, R. Gandikota, F. Zárate, E. Oñate

an important effort in generating advanced models able to reproduce every aspect of the behavior of drill
bits is required.

In this paper we study different factors which are relevant for the applications of the DEM to model the
mechanics of oil and gas drilling processes. In particular, we study the sensibility of the drill bit mechanics
to the damping factor, the rotational speed and the time step factor. The study is performed by simply
evaluating the effect of using different values of these parameters in the overall efficiency of the drilling
process. An assessment of the optimal particle size has also been performed.

The drilling tools are modelled in three dimensions (3D) with the finite element method (FEM) using 4-
noded tetrahedra, while the underlying soil is modelled with the DEM using spherical particles. An adequate
contact method is used to account for the interaction of DEM particles and the triangular element mesh
discretizing the surface of the drill.

The discrete element method has been tried in the past to address the analysis of drilling operations in
the oil industry. A number of issues have prevented the use of DEM in these applications. Computational
cost has always been a constant, and although the oil industry is not short on ressources, in many occasions
the technology simply was not there. This paper addresses this issue by explaining a methodology for
successfully preparing a simulation of a drilling operation. Another important issue in the past was the
accuracy of the results. DEM has long been viewed as a very promising computational method for its ability
to handle in a natural manner the breaking of the continuum. However, because of the very same nature
of the method, it has lagged in its ability to accurately represent the continuum. The authors have already
presented improvements on the DEM and demonstrated good accuracy results for the multifracture analysis
of geomaterials and concrete [14].

The final goal of this work is to show that the DEM and the combined FEM-DEM techniques described
can provide valuable results for laboratory and field engineering in the oil/gas drilling industry.

The layout of the paper is as follows. Section 2 provides a general overview of the DEM. In Sections
3 and 4 the procedure for the construction of the computational model and sensibility of analysis of the
drill bit mechanics are presented. This can be understood as general guidelines for creating practical DEM
models useful for the oil and gas drilling industry. The paper ends with the conclusions in Section 5.

2 Background on the DEM

The DEM is an effective and powerful numerical technique for reproducing multifracture and failure of
granular and cohesive geomaterials (soils, rocks, concrete), masonry and ceramic material, among others.
In the DEM it is typically assumed that the underlying material (either of granular or cohesive type) can
be represented as a collection of rigid particles (spheres or balls in 3D and discs in 2D) interacting among
themselves in the normal and tangential directions at the contact interfaces between adjacent particles.

The particular features of a DEM model depend basically on the constitutive expression for the normal
and shear stiffness parameters at the contact interface, the frictional coefficient, the damping parameter and
the failure conditions at the interface.

Two different approaches can be followed for determining the DEM constitutive parameters for a cohesive
material, namely the global approach and the local approach. In the global approach uniform global DEM
properties are assumed in the whole discrete element assembly. The values of the global DEM parameters can
be found using different procedures. Some authors [4, 6, 7] have used numerical experiments for determining
the relationships between DEM and continuum parameters expressed in dimensionless form. This method
has been used by the authors in previous works [9–12, 17–20]. Other procedures for defining the global
DEM parameters are based on the definition of average particle size measures for the whole discrete particle
assembly and then relating the global DEM and continuum parameters via laboratory tests.

A second approach used in this work, is to assume that the DEM parameters depend on the local
properties of the interaction particles, namely their radii and the continuum parameters at each interaction
point. Different alternatives for defining the DEM parameters via a “local approach” have been reported in
recent years [3–5, 12, 16, 21, 22].

In this work we use the local approach for defining the DEM parameters for an arbitrary cohesive
material following the procedure explained in [14].



Application of an enhanced discrete element method to oil and gas drilling processes 3

The DEM implementation uses spheres for the representation of the material in 3D. The mesh of spheres
is generated trying to minimize the volume of voids. The typical porosity values achieved are about 24%. The
particles are considered as rigid, but the contacts between them are visco-elastic [14]. Therefore, the contact
happens throughout a range of distances between the particles which can include gaps and penetrations.

The forces at the contact interface between particles are split into normal and tangential forces. The
kinematics of the spheres consider displacements and rotations and follow the standard equation of rigid
body dynamics. An explicit time integration scheme is used for computing the displacements, velocities and
accelerations of each particle, as well as its rotation, angular velocity and acceleration. Appropriate local and
global damping parameters are introduced. The material behaviour at the contact interface is considered
to be elasto-plastic under compression, with no yield point. Under tension, the material is considered to be
linear elastic perfectly brittle. In the tangential direction, the material also exhibits the same linear elastic
perfectly brittle behavior with the difference that a residual frictional strength can exist in the presence of
normal compressions. Details of the constitutive model are given in [14].

The particular values for the normal and tangential stiffness parameters at the contact interfaces and the
limit values of the interface strengths are determined for every material using the local constitutive model
described in [14].

3 Setup and modelling of the bottom-hole assembly

The challenge of analyzing and simulating with the DEM a real engineering drilling operation is an ex-
tremely complex problem. The use of an optimized geometry and a set of well balanced model parameters
is required to keep a reasonably refined discrete element model within the limits of what is feasible with the
computational resources available. At the same time, the focus has to be put on the validity and accuracy
of the results.

3.1 Drill-bit geometry

A drill bit assembly with casing was taken as the reference model used to recreate the geometry onto
which to perform the drilling simulations with the DEM. This tool is designed for drilling-with-casing in
medium/hard formations. The characteristic confined compressive strength of such formations can reach
up to 130MPa(15000 psi). The cutters are mounted on the face of the tool to achieve an efficient drilling
operation and maximize durability [1]. The drilling tools are modelled with 4-noded linear tetrahedral finite
elements. The material properties of standard steel have been chosen for the analysis (Young modulus: 210
GPa, density: 770 kg/m3, Poisson’s ratio: ν = 0.1). On the other hand, the soil has been modelled with the
DEM using spherical cohesive particles (Figure 1). The particle sizes used are described in Subsection 4.5.
Other problem data are given in Subsection 4.3.

Although the real design includes several drilling nozzles to increase the hydraulic power at the bit, these
have been removed in the simulation model, along with other detailed design features, in order to reduce
the geometric complexity and to improve the computational efficiency.

Specifications

Nominal size (in.) 7× 8− 1/2
Number of blades 5

Drilling diameter (in.) 8− 1/2
Tool length (ft) 4.18
Tool weight (lb) 271

Cutter diameter (in.) 0.51
Number of face cutters 31

Number of gauge cutters 10

Table 1 Drilling tool specifications



4 P.-A. Ubach, F. Arrufat, L. Ring, R. Gandikota, F. Zárate, E. Oñate

Fig. 1 Initially defined geometry for the drill-bit model. The drilling tools are modelled with 4-noded tetrahedral elements
and the soil with spherical particles.

3.2 Soil mechanical properties

The soil material chosen for the drilling simulation was characterized by an unconfined compressive strength
of 103MPa (15000 psi), a limit tensile strength of 10 MPa, a Young’s modulus of 345MPa (50000 psi), a
Poisson ratio ν = 0.25, and a density of 2400 kg/m3 (0.054 lb/in3).

3.3 Operating parameters

Two parameters define the operation of a drill bit: the rotation speed and the vertical force applied on the
bit. The rotary speed (RPM) specifications for the polycristalline diamond compact (DPC) bit [1] selected
ranges between 60 to 90RPM. The main simulations were performed with the bit angular velocity Ω set
at 80RPM. A nominal weight-on-bit of 15000 lbf was applied in all the simulations. The drill bit’s mass is
58.64 lb although the gravity effect on the tool and particles has not been considered in these simulations.

The key geometrical parameters of the drilling tool are shown in Table 1.

4 Sensibility analysis of the drill bit mechanics

The variability in the output of the simulation model can be due to different sources of uncertainty in its
inputs. Because of this, a sensitivity analysis is useful in order to identify model parameters that cause
significant variations in the output variables. This sensibility analysis also helps to understand the relation-
ships between input and output variables in the simulated model. At the same time, it allows a subsequent
simplification of the study by fixing model inputs that have no effect on the output.

4.1 Effects of the damping factor in the discrete element model

The first parameter analyzed is the damping factor to apply to the soil. By damping factor we understand
the coefficient that is applied to the theoretical critical global damping value for the assembled system of



Application of an enhanced discrete element method to oil and gas drilling processes 5

particles (DampCoef = αd · DampCritical) [14]. In our work we have considered three different values of
the damping coefficient αd. The observed effect of the particle damping in the drilling simulation is mainly
reflected on the decremental values of torque, probably due the modified chip flow around the drill-bit [8, 19]
(Figure 2).

Figure 3 shows the influence of the damping factor on the evolution of the axial displacement of the drill
tool.

Fig. 2 Torque comparison for each assigned particle damping. Simulations were run using the 12.44 in. geometry model (Figure
5) and 80 rpm.

Fig. 3 Axial displacement of the drill tool for each assigned particle damping. Geometry model with 12.44 in. diameter at 80
rpm.

As a result of the small influence observed in the general behavior of the tool, a damping factor of
αd = 0.9 was set for the ensuing simulations.

4.2 Influence of the rotational speed

With the damping value already set, simulations for 80 and 100 rpm were run reflecting the penetration
rate variation in the obtained velocity and displacement results. Results for the evolution of displacements
are depicted in Figure 4. A similar set of results was obtained for the velocity evolution.

No problems were detected while using different rotational speeds of the drill bit, verifying the function-
ality of the DEM model.



6 P.-A. Ubach, F. Arrufat, L. Ring, R. Gandikota, F. Zárate, E. Oñate

Fig. 4 Displacements comparison for 80 and 100 rpm for the 12.44 in. diameter geometry model. αd = 0.9.

4.3 Soil boundary conditions

The simulations were conducted in different sized soil samples. The purpose of this test was to evaluate
the effect of the distance to the boundary on the drilling response. Two sample diameters were simulated:
12.44 in. and 16 in. The total specimen depth was fixed at 7.87 in. For a graphical comparison of the two
models see Figure 5. The length of the case surrounding the drill-bit was extended to help controlling the
outflow of the flying soil material.

Rigid conditions at the containing boundary surface have been assumed. For this purpose the particles in
contact with that surface have been assumed to have zero motion in the normal direction to the boundary.
In the tangential directions the motion has been allowed using a simple Coulomb friction model with a
friction parameter of µ = 0.7.

Fig. 5 Analysis geometry for two different soil specimens. Left: ϕ = 12.44 in. Right: ϕ = 16 in.

In Table 2 we present a comparison of average torque values and average velocities of penetration for
the two samples with tight and loose base geometries with 12.44 in. and 16 in. in diameter, respectively. The
difference in velocity results are lesser than 0.5%, while the difference in torque results are of 15%. Given the
little variation of these results and provided the computational savings that the smaller geometry provides,
we decided to go on with the study using the 12.44 in. diameter sample.



Application of an enhanced discrete element method to oil and gas drilling processes 7

ϕ = 12.44 in. ϕ = 16 in.

Average Velocity (in/s) -4.85E-02 -4.87E-02
Average Torque (lbf.in) 1.16E+05 1.01E+05

Test field diameter (in.) 12.44 16
Drill boundary diameter (in.) 9 9

Drilling diameter (in.) 8.5 8.5

Table 2 Average values for each base geometry

4.4 Influence of the time step scale factor

Since the explicit method used for integrating in time the DEM equations of motion is conditionally stable,
we aimed to find the biggest possible time step to reduce calculation times. The critical time step (∆tcr)
is automatically calculated for a defined mesh and material. In order to optimize the time step (∆t) and
based on previous studies [15], four different scale factors were tested αt = {0.10 , 0.15 , 0.20 , 0.25} with

∆t = αt ·∆tcr (1)

The graphs in Figure 6 show the average results of torque and rate of penetration for each of the
considered values of αt. Average values were calculated and compared for different times at time intervals
of one second.

As shown in the graphs of Figure 7, the frequency peaks for αt = {0.10, 0.15, 0.20} were all consistent
and close to 6.5Hz. Those peaks location changed to 6.2Hz when using a higher value of αt = 0.25. Finally
and according to these evidences, a scale factor of αt = 0.20 was considered acceptable for the model.

This result is in accordance to previous studies in the literature where the value of αt has been studied
by different authors [15] with recommended values close to αt = 0.17 for 3D simulations (αt = 0.30 for the
2D cases).

4.5 Optimum particle size

In the context of the analysis of cohesive material the DEM can be perceived as a discretization method
where particles are used to model the mechanics of the underlying continuum. The selection and experimental
calibration of an appropriate local constitutive model for representing the particle interaction at the contact
interfaces makes the DEM relatively unsensitive to the number of particles [13]. In any case, the number of
particles chosen for the analysis affects the computational cost.

The particle size affects the computational cost in two ways. It affects directly by determining the number
of spheres used in the discretization of the geometric model. But it also affects indirectly the critical time
step according to Eq.(1) and the following relation:

∆tcr = min 2

√
mi
k

(2)

where k is the stiffness of the springs for all the contacts between spheres, and mi is the mass of particle i.
Therefore, assuming that the material density does not vary, the value of ∆tcr increases with the particle
size.

With the objective to minimize computational times, four models with different particle sizes were
tested. Particle sizes of {0.20, 0.22, 0.24, 0.26} inches were used as initial reference when generating the
particles (spheres) [9], although the model with 0.20 in. was discarded due its excessive computational cost.
Information of the simulation results can be found in Table 3.

The actual average particle size and the number of particles used in each of the simulations can also be
found in Table 3. A sample of the particle size distribution for the 0.24 in. mesh is shown in Figure 8. It can
be seen that the particle distribution follows a Gaussian function. However, the long tail for small sizes has
been trimmed in order to allow for an increase in the critical time step (∆tcr) associated to the model.



8 P.-A. Ubach, F. Arrufat, L. Ring, R. Gandikota, F. Zárate, E. Oñate

(a) Torque values

(b) Rate of penetration (ROP)

Fig. 6 Average values of torque and rate of penetration for each αt factor.

Particle size Average particle radius (inch) No of particles Frequency peaks (Hz) Amplitude (ft.lb)

0.22 inch 0.141 66000 6.0 480
0.24 inch 0.156 59000 5.9 850
0.26 inch 0.167 54000 6.5 500

Table 3 Torque frequency peaks & wave amplitudes for each reference mesh (15 Hz low-pass filtered data).

Figure 9 shows the comparison of the rate of penetration (ROP) for three of the particle sizes considered
in the study. Results have been smoothed with a local regression using a weighted least square method and
a second degree polynomial approximation.

A frequency analysis with a fast Fourier transformation (FFT) was done for each of the different particle
size models (Figure 10) and similar frequency peak values are observed for the 0.22 in. and 0.24 in. models.
The actual values of this study may seem to contrast with the values of the frequency peaks obtained in
the study relative to the time step factor αt, since the mesh size used back in that section was 0.26 in. Also



Application of an enhanced discrete element method to oil and gas drilling processes 9

(a) αt = 0.10

(b) αt = 0.15

(c) αt = 0.20

(d) αt = 0.25

Fig. 7 Torque frequency peaks for each αt factor. Boxes show a detail of the peaks for the low frequencies range.

a 15Hz low-pass FFT filter was applied to the torque-time diagram for each generated mesh (Figure 11) in
which simulations for both r1 = 0.22 in. and r2 = 0.24 in. yielded similar results. This is consistent with the
observation above, thus suggesting that an average particle radius of r2 = 0.24 in. will provide an adequate
accuracy with the least computational cost.

Based on all these results, the mesh generated with a reference average size of the spheres of 0.24 in. was
chosen for the subsequent tests. This mesh yielded similar results both in magnitude and frequency peak to



10 P.-A. Ubach, F. Arrufat, L. Ring, R. Gandikota, F. Zárate, E. Oñate

Fig. 8 Mesh quality of the 12.44 in. diameter geometry model shown as the distribution of radius sizes of the spheres in the
mesh.

Fig. 9 Rate of penetration (ROP) comparison smoothed with a local regression using weighted linear least squares and a 2nd
degree polynomial model.

those of the mesh with a reference average size of 0.22 in. On the other hand, the 0.26 in. mesh size results
differed both in magnitude and peak frequency.

4.6 Steady state

Having studied the main model parameters that could potentially affect the performance of the model,
several preliminary outputs were obtained from the initial simulations. One key issue in the modelling of a
bottom-hole assembly (BHA) and its response while under load is being able to ensure that some conditions
are met. In particular, the steady state condition must be achieved.

It is estimated that the steady state will be attained (i.e. the effect of the initial conditions is can be
disregarded) when the full length of the cutting blades are buried into the soil material (see Figure 12). For
this reason we decided to increase the simulation time from the initial 10 seconds to 40 seconds. With this
extension we estimated that the depth of the drill would reach the 10 in. needed to bury the blades in the
soil sample. The results are illustrated in the depth-time diagram shown in Figure 13. The drilling response
beyond the 10 s threshold confirmed additional simulation time was absolutely required in order to achieve
a steady behavior. In fact, the rate of penetration slows considerably as the flat bottom of the drilling
tool reaches the sample (Figure 14). Note that after 40 seconds of simulation, only 3 in. of penetration are
achieved. This is in contrast with the 10 in. we were looking for. The evolution from the transient state to
the steady state (t > 40s) can also be observed in the torque results (Figure 15).



Application of an enhanced discrete element method to oil and gas drilling processes 11

(a) mesh size = 0.22”

(b) mesh size = 0.24”

(c) mesh size = 0.26”

Fig. 10 Torque frequency peaks for each reference mesh size.

5 Conclusions

Results obtained in the study of the drill-bit region using the DEM indicate that this method is applicable
to study the mechanical performance of oil and gas drilling operations. The information provided by the
method is richer than the existing semi-empirical models. However, further validation of the method with
a wide range of soils and geological formations is required. The model presented here reproduces well the
behavior of the soil as a linear elastic and perfectly brittle material. The local DEM model used has algo
demonstrated a good behaviours for other geomaterials that show a more ductile behaviour. This is a
promising result for future applications of the DEM in the oil and gas drilling industry.



12 P.-A. Ubach, F. Arrufat, L. Ring, R. Gandikota, F. Zárate, E. Oñate

Fig. 11 15Hz low-pass FFT filtered torque comparison for each reference mesh size.

Fig. 12 Considered steady state depth of cut.

Fig. 13 Vertical displacement of the drill bit for the first 40 seconds of simulation. Average ROP for t = [10 s–40 s] is
v = −0.046 in/s

Another line of improvement will be the acceleration of the simulation software through the use of
parallel computers and the development of advanced numerical techniques. These include: enhanced contact
search algorithms and fast database management, besides enhanced and robust numerical solvers.



Application of an enhanced discrete element method to oil and gas drilling processes 13

(a) t = 0.30 s (b) t = 4.00 s

(c) t = 20.00 s (d) t = 36.00 s

Fig. 14 Visualization of the drilling process evolution in the drill-bit region using a longitudinal cut of the soil sample. The
colors represent the damage of the soil particles (i.e. the number of broken bonds).



14 P.-A. Ubach, F. Arrufat, L. Ring, R. Gandikota, F. Zárate, E. Oñate

Fig. 15 Evolution of the torque reactions for the model using a soil sample of 0.24 in. diameter. The upper graph shows
the unfiltered data. The lower graph shows the same data after applying a 15Hz low pass filter. Steady-state conditions are
assumed to occur at t > 40s

Fig. 16 Drilling process modelled with an adaptive FEM-DEM technique



Application of an enhanced discrete element method to oil and gas drilling processes 15

A very promising technique to reduce the required computational times is to combine the FEM with the
DEM for modelling the multifracture in the soil in the drill-bit region. The idea is to model the intacted
soil region with the FEM and to introduce the DEM in the fractured zone in an adaptive and progressive
manner. Examples of this FEM-DEM approach have been reported by the authors [13]. As an example,
Figure 16 shows the evolution of the cutting tool in a soil mass initially modelled with the FEM using 4-
noded tetrahedra. DEM particles are progressively created in the drill tip region as the stress level increases
in this area. The FEM-DEM approach has the advantage of reducing the number of degrees of freedom of
the overall model and thus decreasing the computational time needed to run the simulations. [12, 13, 23].

Drilling systems permanently experience torsional vibrations. One feature of the long drill string system
is its torsional elasticity, which combined with the dynamics of the drilling mechanics can produce the
undesired stick-slip phenomenon. Stick-slip events are an important cause for drillstring failures and drill
bit breakages. The implementation of a 3D beam element able to reproduce the behavior of a drillstring
in a rotary drilling system will allow us studying the motion responsible for self-excited vibrations, and its
effect on the delivered torque and weight-on-bit [2].

6 Acknowledgements

Financial support for this work was provided by Weatherford. The authors thank Dr. C. Labra for many
useful discussions.

The numerical results presented in this work have been obtained with the code DEMPACK developed
at CIMNE (www.cimne.com/dempack).

REFERENCES

1. Defyer DPC Series. Weatherford International Ltd., 515 Post Oak Blvd. Houston, Texas, 2005. 4674.02.
2. J.M. Carbonell, N. Abedrabbo, M.A. Celigueta and E. Oñate. A 3D beam element for analysis of the

drill string mechanics in boreholes. Research Report CIMNE, PI411, Barcelona, October 2015.
3. F. Donzé, F. Richefeu and S. Magnier. Advances in discrete element method applied to soil, rock and

concrete mechanics. Electronic Journal of Geotechology Engineering 08, 144, Special volume, Bouquet,
2009.

4. A. Fakhimi and T. Villegas. Application of dimensional analysis in calibration of a discrete element model
for rock deformation and fracture. Rock Mechanics and Rock Engineering, 40(2):193–211, 2007.

5. S. Hentz, L. Daudeville and F. Donzé. Identification and validation of a discrete element model for
concrete. J. of Engineering Mechanics, 130(6):709–719, 2004.

6. Y.-M. Hsieh, H.-H. Li, T.-H. Huang and F.-S. Jeng. Interpretations on how the macroscopic mechanical
behavior of sandstone affected by microscopic properties revealed by bonded-particle model. Engineering
Geology, 110, 2008.

7. H. Huang. Discrete element modeling of tool-rock interaction. Ph.D. Thesis, December, University of
Minnesota, 1999.

8. C. Labra, J. Rojek, E. Oñate, and F. Zarate. Advances in discrete element modeling of underground
excavations. Acta Geotechnica, 3:317–322, 2008.

9. C. Labra and E. Oñate. High-density sphere packing for discrete element method simulations. Commu-
nications in Numerical Methods in Engineering, 25(7):837–849, 2009.

10. C. Labra, J. Rojek, E. Oñate and F. Zárate. Advances in discrete element modelling of underground
excavati ons. Acta Geotechnica, 3(4):317–322, 2009.

11. C. Labra. Advances in the development of the discrete element method for excavation processes. Ph.D.
Thesis. Technical University of Catalonia, UPC, July 2012.

12. E. Oñate and J. Rojek. Combination of discrete element and finite element methods for dynamic analysis
of geomechanics problems. Comput. Meth. Appl. Mech. Engrg., 193:3087–3128, 2004.

13. E. Oñate, C. Labra, F. Zárate, and J. Rojek. Modelling and simulation of the effect of blest loading
an structure using an adaptive blending of discrete and finite element method. 3rd International Week



16 P.-A. Ubach, F. Arrufat, L. Ring, R. Gandikota, F. Zárate, E. Oñate

on Risk Analysis, Dam Safety, Dam Secutiry and Critical Infraestructure Management. Valencia, Spain,
17–18 October 2011.

14. E. Oñate, F. Zárate, J. Miquel, M. Santasusana, M.A. Celigueta, F. Arrufat, R. Gandikota, Khardar
and L. Ring. A local constitutive model for the discrete element method. application to geomaterials and
concrete. Comput. Particle Mech., 2(2):139–160, 2015.

15. C. O’Sullivan and J. Bray. Selecting a suitable time step for discrete element simulations that use the
central difference time integration scheme. Engineering Computations, 21:278–303, 2004.

16. D. Potyondy and P. Cundall. A bonded-particle model for rock. International Journal of Rock Me-
chanics and Mining Sciences, 41(8):13291364, Rock Mechanics Results from the Underground Research
Laboratory, Canada, 2004.

17. J. Rojek, E. Oñate and F. Zarate, and J. Miquel. Modelling of rock, soil and granular materials using
spherical elements. In 2nd European Conference on Computational Mechanics ECCM-2001, Cracow,
26-29 June, 2001.

18. J. Rojek and E. Oñate. Multiscale analysis using a coupled discrete/finite element model. Interaction
and Multiscale Mechanics, 1(1):1–31, 2007.

19. J. Rojek, E. Oñate, H. Kargl, C. Labra, J. Akerman, U. Restener, E. Lammer, and F. Zarate. Prediction
of wear of roadheader picks using numerical simulations. Geomechanik und Tunnelbau, 1:47–54, 2008.

20. J. Rojek, C. Labra, O. Su and E. Oñate. Comparative study of different micromechanical parameters.
Int. J. of Solids and Structures, 49:1497–1517, 2012.

21. F.A. Tavarez and M.E. Plesha. Discrete element method for modelling solid and particulate materials.
International Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering, 70(4):379–404, 2007.

22. V.T. Tran, F.-V. Donzé and P. Marin. A discrete element model of concrete under high triaxial loading.
Cement & Concrete Composites, 33:936–948, 2011.

23. F. Zárate and E. Oñate. A simple FEM-DEM technique for fracture prediction in materials and struc-
tures. Submitted to Computational Particle Mechanics, DOI: 10.1007/s40571-015-0067-2, 2015.


