
















































 
 

 
Software Solutions for ICME 

 
G.J. SCHMITZ,1,9 A. ENGSTROM,2 R. BERNHARDT,3 U. PRAHL,4 

L. ADAM,5 J. SEYFARTH,5 M. APEL,1 C.AGELET DE SARACIBAR,6 
P. KORZHAVYI,7 J. Å GREN,7 B. PATZAK8 

 
1. Access e.V., Aachen, Germany.  2. Thermo-Calc Software AB, Stockholm, Sweden. 3. Simufact 

Engineering GmbH, Hamburg, Germany. 4. Steel Department of RWTH Aachen Univer-sity, Aachen, 
Germany. 5. e-xstream Engineering SARL, Luxembourg, Luxembourg. 6. Centre Internacional de 

Mètodes Numèrics a l’Enginyeria (CIMNE), Barcelona, Spain. 7. Royal Institute of Technology KTH 
Stockholm, Stockholm, Sweden. 8. Czech Technical University, Prague, Czech Republic. 9. e-mail: 

g.j.Schmitz@micress.de 
 
 

ABSTRACT 
 

The Integrated Computational Materials Engineering expert group (ICMEg), a coordination 
activity of the European Commission, aims at developing a global and open standard for 
information exchange between the heterogeneous varieties of numerous simulation tools. 
The ICMEg consortium coordinates respective developments by a strategy of networking 
stakeholders in the first International Workshop on Software Solutions for ICME, compiling 
identified and relevant software tools into the Handbook of Software Solutions for ICME, 
discussing strategies for interoperability between different software tools during a second 
(planned) international workshop, and eventually proposing a scheme for standardized 
information exchange in a future book or document. The present article summarizes these 
respective actions to provide the ICME community with some additional insights and resources 
from which to help move this field forward. 
 
 

INTRODUCTION 
 
Integrated computational materials engineering (ICME) by its name and its nature draws on the 
combination and the simultaneous or consecutive use of a variety of software and modeling 
tools. This simple phrase immediately raises a number of questions, like the following: How 
does one combine tools? How does one select suitable tools? How does one decide on a specific 
tool? Eventually, before answering these questions, some even more direct issues arise, such as 
follows: Which tools are available at all? How does one become aware of suitable tools? 
 
ICMEg, the Integrated Computational Materials Engineering expert group [1], a coordination 
activity of the European Commission, aims at developing a global open standard for 
information exchange between the heterogeneous varieties of numerous simulation tools. Once 
established, such an open and easily accessible formulation of a global standard will 
 

• significantly  facilitate  the  exchange  of  data between different tools; 
• create new options and functionalities of the present tools; 
• allow for easy integration between commercial and academic approaches and 

models; 
• provide the pathway for life-cycle modeling of components/products; 
• allow for global optimization of process chains instead of individually optimized 

models; and 
• stimulate many further new developments, e.g., by including temperature and 

mailto:g.j.Schmitz@micress.de


 

composition dependencies of data not being considered by now; by integration of 
data originating from electronic, atomistic, or mesoscopic models; and by stronger 
interaction with experimental data sets. 

 
The ICMEg consortium [1] coordinates respective developments by a strategy of networking 
stake-holders in the first international workshop, compiling identified and relevant software 
tools into the Handbook of Software Solutions for ICME, discussing strategies for 
interoperability between different software tools during a second (planned) international 
workshop, and eventually proposing a scheme for standardized information exchange in a 
future book or document. The present article summarizes these respective actions to provide the 
ICME community with some additional insights and resources from which to help move this 
field forward. 
 
 

FIRST INTERNATIONAL WORKSHOP ON SOFTWARE SOLUTIONS FOR ICME 
 

Despite ICME currently emerging as a new and powerful discipline, coupling of different 
software tools is however still in its infancy and represents an issue consuming significant effort 
in terms of time and workforce, if a coupling is realized at all. The scope and goals of the first 
ICMEg workshop (see www.icmeg.info) were as follows (I) to convene and to network 
software providers/developers, both commercial and academic, interested in providing their 
solutions to the growing ICME community; (II) to create awareness about solutions and models 
currently available along all processing steps and across all scales; (III) to generate a 
comprehensive overview and a thematically structured inventory of such software solutions; 
(IV) to identify options emerging for individual codes by coupling them to other models/tools; 
(V) to identify needs for model functionalities upstream in the process chain, on the basis of 
requirements by models downstream in the value chain; and (VI) to discuss necessary steps to 
create a global and open standard for information exchange between different models/tools. 

The workshop attracted more than 160 participants from 24 countries in 4 continents. 
About 40% of the attendees originated from academia. Many software companies had 
representation either in person or via different contributions, e.g., on bene- fits of 
standardization for software providers, thermodynamic databases for ICME, and simulation of 
casting/forming processes. Also, the strong interest of the user industry became obvious by 
participation and/or contributions of several individuals from aerospace companies and power 
utilities, steel and aluminum producers, and others. All abstracts were collected in an abstract 
booklet [2] 
 
 

ASSESSING THE FIRST WORKSHOP’S GOALS AGAINST OUTCOMES 
 
In the following discussion, the outcome of the workshop is assessed by comparing it with its 
scope and goals (in italics): 
 

To convene and to network software providers/developers, both commercial and academic, 
interested in providing their solutions to the growing ICME community 

 
In the end, more than 160 people attended the workshop. Sponsoring support from the 

software providers also clearly indicated the strong interest of the computational tool 
developers in ICME. Most participants provided extremely positive feedback in terms of 
having, e.g., made new business contacts and   in   terms   of   interesting   discussions   with 
scientists from other areas. This indicates the utility of the networking and knowledge transfer 

http://www.icmeg.info/


 
 

at this workshop, which is further supported by the participants’ desire to attend the next 
meeting. 

 
To create awareness about solutions and models currently available along all processing 

steps and across all scales 
 
During the workshop, many simulation tools were presented and an even bigger number 

was at least briefly mentioned throughout the various talks presented. Additionally, several 
models/tools mentioned in the presentations were unknown to many participants. Actually the 
Handbook of Software Solutions for ICME, which is now being edited within the ICMEg 
project (see later discussion) summarizes the major available solutions and provides a 
thematically structured overview. 

 
To identify needs for model functionalities upstream in the process chain, on the basis of 

requirements by models downstream in the value chain 
 
Most ‘‘downstream’’ modeling tools suffer from a lack of specification of suitable initial 

conditions for simulations. These can most probably be provided (in the future) by simulation 
models in the ‘‘upstream’’ portion of the process chain. The workshop emphasized this idea and 
triggered respective activities. 

 
To discuss necessary steps to create a global and open standard for information exchange 

between different models/tools 
 
As one of the first and most important steps toward standardization, an important question 

was raised during the final panel discussion. It referred to the willingness of the attending 
software companies/software providers to implement a communication standard. About 25 
software tool representatives (both academic and commercial) were identified, and almost all 
(>90%) were positive about implementing a future standard once it is defined. Based on this 
feedback, participants were asked for some actions to continue the mutual discussions and, thus, 
to foster and extend a new modelers network and to work toward the formulation of the 
standard: (i) to use and contribute to the forum on ICME available on the website www. 
icmeg.eu and (ii) to fill out the questionnaires on ‘‘Market Survey’’ [3] and ‘‘Modelling 
Tools.’’ [4]. 

 
To identify options emerging for individual codes by coupling them to other models/tools 
 
These options should be mutually identified by the participating scientists and engineers 

developing/operating the individual codes and models, and there were many respective 
discussions. 
 
 

CONCLUSION FROM THE FIRST WORKSHOP 
 

In addition to the evaluation of the workshop’s goals, an overview of many of the conclusions 
extracted from the ICMEg talks and interactive discussions is condensed here. 
 
Thermodynamics 
 
There is clearly a strong interest and willingness to couple different software tools, as well as a 
need to facilitate such coupling. A major issue is the need for uncertainty estimates on 

http://www.icmeg.eu/
http://www.icmeg.eu/


 

thermodynamics, as well as phase-based property data in general. It was mentioned that some 
work addressing the former issue had recently been initiated at the U.S. National Institute of 
Standards and Technology (NIST). A related well-known issue is that different phase names are 
used depending on the community and that there is a need for unique identifiers. It was 
proposed during the workshop that the space group together with Wyckoff positions will 
provide a unique phase identifier that could be used by various software tools internally, and 
this seems at the moment as a feasible solution. To avoid problems related to the use of 
different definitions for thermodynamic quantities, it was suggested that the definitions 
provided in the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC) Quantities, Units 
and Symbols in Physical Chemistry (Green Book) should be looked at and possibly 
recommended. With respect to standards, a thermodynamic ‘‘Exif’’ format that relates to 
input/output (I/O) of calculated thermodynamic data was discussed. However, it was further 
stated that due to CPU requirements, there will likely be a need for more than one coupling 
solution. 
 
Industrial Needs for ICME 
 
During the workshop, it turned out that simulation on the macroscale is widely accepted and in 
use in industry for a Technology Readiness Level (TRL, according to the European 
Commission definition) of 8–9. Microstructure evolution codes and even more detailed 
electronic, atomistic, and mesoscopic models by now have reached a TRL of approximately 4–5 
or even less. Respective approaches are thus only used in specialized laboratories. Nevertheless, 
the benefit for microscale/mesoscale/mesoscopic simulations is widely accepted and the need 
for downscaling is clearly formulated from the industrial side. A more detailed summary of 
industrial needs for ICME is depicted in a separate publication in the present issue [5]. 
 
Integration Platforms: Future Perspectives and Standardization 
 
There is a need to clearly define the user of the platform (designer, multi-domain expert, etc.) as 
this basically defines the requirements on the platform functionality. There is further a strong 
need to establish a common and standardized language (ontology) of the problem domain. This 
will help to identify and describe the entities in the model space as candidates for components. 
The I/O-based approach and component approaches were compared and discussed. The 
advantage of component-based approaches consists primarily in their ability to support 
naturally multiple data formats by representing data as components, as well as their natural 
ability to support distributed resources. The component interfaces should be defined strictly as 
problem independent. Individual components representing exchanged data (such as fields and 
properties) should have attached metadata about physical meaning, units, etc. The end user 
should primarily be a multi-domain expert capable of defining a workflow in a workflow editor 
or by using a platform language. The process should result in a recommendation that contains 
the definitions of standardized components and their interfaces. 
 
Microstructure Models 
 
In view of a future common language for ICME, a widely accepted definition of 
‘‘microstructures as the carrier of material properties’’ was given. It was stated that there is no 
process–property correlation. Instead, two correlations, process-microstructure and 
microstructure-properties, must always be considered. A proper treatment of microstructure 
evolution thus is inevitable and a key issue in ICME settings. A microstructure definition as 
‘‘all internal structural features that affect material properties’’ was given, and it was stated that 
these features are ‘‘not confined to a mesoscopic or microscopic level.’’ A compact and 



 
 

comprehensive overview about numerous models on the length scale of the microstructure was 
given in the plenary talk and further refined in the topical and cross-topical sessions. Different 
needs and options in the area of microstructure simulations were discussed. A specific example 
is the opportunity of storing simulated microstructures in digital microstructure database- s—
even together with experimental data—and making them retrievable. Other options to improve 
microstructure models refer to the use of data being calculated by small-scale, discrete models 
associated with, for example, interfacial mobilities, anisotropic interfacial energies, 
thermomechanical properties of pure phases, and several others. On the scale of microstructure, 
especially for simulations of all solid-state processes, the specification of initial microstructures 
is demanding as the ‘‘incoming’’ material has already experienced a history that is 
‘‘integrated’’ in the microstructure. Missing initial conditions for ‘‘downstream’’ simulations 
can in the future possibly be filled by microstructure databases comprising both experimental 
and/or simulated microstructures. ‘‘Ideal’’ microstructures being designed synthetically, so-
called synthetic microstructures, may complement these databases and provide new insights. 

In view of storing microstructure data and their standardized description, two major 
directions have been identified: (I) considering the microstructure as carrier of properties and 
thus using quantitative descriptions of the microstructure (in 2D and/or 3D) to handle the 
information or (II) remaining entirely on a level of microstructure models and just handle/store 
the model parameters. The first concept has the advantage that real and simulated 
microstructures can be treated in a transparent manner. However, severe problems in 
quantitatively describing the microstructures in an efficient manner and in extracting the 
relevant information may be encountered. The second concept represents a smart and lean 
solution but requires a standardized set of limited models and bears the risk of losing relevant 
microstructure information. 

Along with defining a standard for data exchange—aiming to realize the ‘‘plug & 
play’’ vision for ICME—standards for benchmarks and error estimates (as are already being 
established in the thermodynamic and small-scale communities) are needed as well. 
 
Determination of Effective Properties 
 
Discussions about effective properties covered two principle questions: (I) How can we derive 
effective properties from microstructure information? (II) How can we transfer those effective 
properties to the component level? Those questions were dealt with in covering the topics of 
targeted properties, methods to derive effective values, and the issue of data transfer (I/O) for 
the means of setting up coupled analyses. 

Effective material properties to be described from the microstructure need to cover a 
full range of different performances. Among those mentioned were mechanical, thermal, and 
electrical, as well as magnetic properties and permeability. Information of the individual 
effective response shall be generic and include means to describe both linear and nonlinear 
behavior, as well as stationary or un-stationary scenarios. The methods discussed to reach this 
goal were various. A principle differentiation was made between two different approaches. 
Those are numerical methods (finite element, fast Fourier transform, asymptotic, etc.) and 
analytics (mean field, bounding methods, etc.). During the discussions, it turned out that first-
order descriptions are the base, but also second-order descriptions might be needed and thus 
must be considered. 

The input and output for those methods will have to include a clean header of metadata 
information describing the data. Such header information shall contain at least the general 
nature of the data, including a description via a generic nomenclature understood between 
different communities; trace- ability of the data, including from which measurement/method   
are   the   data   originating;   and additional and essential material information in addition to 
basic values, and how to apply them in terms of orientation, symmetry, etc. 



 

For data storage and exchange, a differentiation was made between essential and 
complementary data types. Those types can be stored either by means of pure tabular values of 
properties obtained or by means of a model that comes along with input parameters to compute 
those effective properties. Among the essential data were found the constitutive material 
properties, morphology (such as volume fraction), and boundary conditions. Complementary 
data types include, for example, information about interfacial properties and additional data 
concerning morphology (shape, statistical distributions, etc.). The needs for other enhancements 
of the data were also raised. Deterministic as well as statistical descriptions must be possible. 
Also, error indicators need to be included. An overall hierarchical structure of the data is 
required. 

The transfer of data starts with a clearly defined assignment of input (microstructure 
information) and output (effective properties/model). This will have to include the issue of 
mapping over different ‘‘meshes’’ as well as the possibilities to cover re-meshing. Assignment 
to different entities of meshes must be covered (node, element, etc.). Finally, it is in general the 
coupling scheme that determines the nature of description of effective properties. During the 
workshop, the clear focus/need was set on coupling between the microscopic and the 
macroscopic level. Different principle approaches were thought of, including (I) weak 
coupling/linking, in which the larger scale is not aware of the microstructure; (II) strong 
coupling, in which effective properties are computed during runtime; and (III) partial coupling, 
where the macroscopic model is identified and depends on micro-level parameters. 

In terms of the microstructure, effective proper- ties can include homogenized data 
(such as overall stiffness), but also localized quantities (e.g., stress distribution in the material to 
assess failure). Both types of data shall be accessible in the exchange scheme. Furthermore, the 
issue of self-consistency of models between the microscopic and macroscopic scales was 
discussed. 
 
Discrete Models 
 
The increasing importance of discrete modeling in materials research, especially since the 
advent of the Materials Genome Initiative (MGI) and ICME, calls for the development of 
standardized and efficient interfaces connecting the diverse models into integrated software 
tools. Standardized inter- faces between such tools and the end user are equally important. 

At the end of electronic structure calculations, the first concern is always about the 
accuracy of density functional theory (DFT) functionals and other approximations involved, as 
well as about the numerical precision of the method employed to solve the Kohn–Sham 
equations. Standard molecular and solid-state tests have been developed by the scientific 
community and are routinely applied to test newly developed functionals. To test the precision 
of a DFT-based method, one can use, as a standard, a well-converged result obtained by using a 
highly precise method (e.g., by a full-potential all- electron technique). Numerical error in the 
course of high-throughput calculations can be automatically controlled (as, for example, it is 
done in the PyCMD error reduction tool). Standardization and automation are useful in practice 
of such research studies as they allow the researchers to delegate routine jobs to computers, 
make human tasks more intelligent, bring the analyses to a higher level, and reduce the risk of a 
human error. 

However, these measures cannot fully guarantee the scientific correctness of the results 
obtained as there are always difficult cases that cannot be foreseen. However, there are some 
ways to misuse even a highly sophisticated scientific tool. To establish control over such cases, 
a quality assessment procedure (similar to the assessment procedure used in CALPHAD) has 
been proposed. To implement this, quality standards need to be established and maintained by 
the research community. 

Storage of the results of ordinary or high-through- put studies in databases, with the 



 
 

purpose of delayed analysis or reuse, has been discussed as an important and resource-saving 
activity. Currently existing examples are user-specific databases in simulation packages, such as 
MedeA (Materials Design) and Materials Studio (BIOVIA/Accelrys), or public-access 
databases, such as the online library AFLOWLIB.ORG developed by the Quantum Espresso 
community. Formats and content of the stored data were discussed in several presentations by 
the academic and commercial software developers. The importance of storing the essential 
parameters of each computation, such as the details about the type and the number of basis 
functions, density of real-space and reciprocal space grids, exchange–correlation functional and 
other approximations used, and even the name of the research- er(s), was emphasized. In 
addition, one can use digital identifiers and checksums for checking the mutual compatibility of 
any two entries coming from the same or from two different database(s). 

To be used in atomistic simulations, the information obtained on the level of electronic 
structure needs to be translated into interatomic interaction potentials (or force-fields). 
Achievements and challenges in deriving and using such potentials have been discussed. Taking 
into account that many different formalisms exist, and that there are certain degrees of freedom 
in definitions, introducing standards in this field may be very useful. Practical issues of storing 
the force-fields in databases (such as the ATLAS database or Inter- atomic Potential Repository 
at NIST) have been discussed. Standardization work needs to be per- formed to reach consensus 
on the units, definitions, terminology, assessments of accuracy/quality, and data formats. 

General scientific issues such as how to keep the essential physical information upon 
coarse-graining or homogenization, or how to keep the accuracy when switching from one 
model of the same system to another, was a hot topic of discussion. Similar problems arise 
practically in all areas of modeling, ranging from the electronic structure to the mesoscopic 
levels. Standardization and automation are expected to have a positive influence on the 
following characteristics of discrete models used in materials simulations: scientific 
rigorousness and reliability, robustness (including reproducibility of modelling results), and 
compatibility. 
 
Process Modeling Software in ICME Settings 
 
Numerous discussions during the workshop and even after the event clearly show that ICME is 
an emerging field that attracts more and more interest, but there are still some uncertainties and 
obstacles to overcome. Currently, some of the main drivers for ICME developments include 
academia, government laboratories, and the aerospace and automotive industries. Maritime 
applications are in the early stages of using ICME. Overall, the approach is not yet widely 
spread across the entire supply chain. This is essentially caused by a lack of both human and 
financial resources. The supply chain is mostly dominated by small and midsized enterprise 
(SME) companies. Involving them in ICME and making them drivers for future developments 
will be the big challenge for ICME, but it will also provide a great opportunity. 

Commercial software providers participating in the workshop discussed additional 
perspectives. Beyond the technical capabilities of the different simulation tools they identified 
four main aspects— costs, complexity, interface structure, and harmonization—which have to 
be considered as follows: 
 
Costs 
No software provider can provide all the numerous solutions (case dependent) needed to be 
combined to tackle complex ICME problems. The necessity of procuring and maintaining a 
number of software solutions automatically leads to cost issues with respect to licensing costs. 
Hence, new licensing and business models like pay per use or short-term subscriptions need to 
be considered. In the same context, hardware requirements were discussed. Computational 
efforts are and will be higher than for standard applications and thus require additional CPU 

http://aflowlib.org/


 

capacity. Cloud solutions were discussed as one future alternative to enhance computational 
capacity temporarily. 

 
Complexity 
No individual user will be able to operate all the different tools and solutions in a proper way. 
ICME by its nature is thus and always will be a team effort. This fact could be a show stopper 
especially for the SME-based companies already mentioned. Hence, new approaches for joint 
services, consultancy, training, and education become an issue for both academia and for 
industrial users. 

 
Interface Structure 
It is clear that desired interface standards must be more than simple I/O converters. The 
community needs to have smart and intelligent tools fulfilling certain criteria, such as follows: 
flexible format conversion considering widely spread engineering and calculation tools like MS 
Excel and data exchange via clouds; visualization (viewer, postprocessor); documentation and 
testing; search functions (machine readable); batch and queue functionality; adaptable, modular 
structures; workflow management; and traceability and parsing of data. 

 
Harmonization 
This point becomes essential to the success of ICME, and it should not be limited to a common 
nomenclature and taxonomy. It comprises also a common understanding and implementation of 
material models. Harmonization is important with respect to the parallelization of codes, or in 
simple words, adjustment of computation times plays a role especially in the industrial world. 
Last but not least, the community needs to harmonize data mining methods and databases for 
common use. 

 
Numerical Methods 
 
Different aspects related to the application of numerical methods in the computational 
simulation of multi-physics and multiscale problems were addressed as follows: (I) The 
importance of the consistency of the material models used all along the numerical simulation of 
a manufacturing process chain, to ensure a proper communication between the different 
models/software used,  and the use of physical-based material models; (II) the efficiency of 
different numerical methods for data transfer between different meshes, either in re-meshing 
using a Lagrangian formulation or when using an Arbitrary Lagrangian–Eulerian (ALE) 
formulation; (III) general coupling strategies for multi-physics problems involving different 
space and time scales, e.g., fluid–structure interaction (FSI), fluid–structure–temperature 
interaction (FSTI), fluid–structure–contact interaction (FSCI), electromechanical–fluid–
structure interaction (EMFSI), applying different independent codes that communicate using 
MPI within an HPC context; (IV) multiscale approaches for the numerical simulation of 
material forming processes involving a manufacturing chain; (V) a simulation platform, 
involving several software codes, to design new materials and systems within a multiscale 
framework, from atoms to structures, using discrete and continuum models; (VI) requirements 
and solutions for a complete process simulation; (VII) different numerical methods for the 
solution of engineering problems, such as finite difference method (FDM), finite element 
method (FEM), boundary element method (BEM), discrete element method (DEM), mesh-free 
method (MFM), particle finite element method (PFEM), extended finite element method 
(XFEM), isogeometric analysis (IGA) method, model order reduction (MOR), finite volume 
method (FVM), molecular dynamics (MD), representative volume element (RVE), and level set 
method (LSM). 
 



 
 

First Workshop Summary 
 
From the presentations and discussions during the first workshop, the following overarching 
concluding remarks and gaps can also be pointed out: 
 

• There is a lack of concreteness in the discussions. This is most likely linked to the 
intrinsic generic nature of ICME as a concept. To get more specific discussions in the 
future, sand-box scenarios for dedicated and well-specified problems of industrial 
relevance were proposed for the second workshop. 

• The computational simulation of multi-physics and multiscale problems usually requires 
high- performance computing (HPC). This topic was not sufficiently addressed during 
the workshop, and it could be a more relevant topic for the next workshop. 

• The validation and comparison of different soft- ware codes, solvers, methods, models, 
algorithms, and so on, in a series of simple, yet interesting, benchmarks for mapping and 
data transfer between different meshes, was missing. The participation of entities, such 
as National Agency for Finite Element Methods and Standards (NAFEMS), for instance, 
was also missing, and they could be invited to participate in the next workshop. 

 
 

HANDBOOK OF SOFTWARE SOLUTIONS FOR ICME 
 
As one of the outcomes of the first workshop, a Handbook of Software Solutions for ICME, 
which is being edited by G.J. Schmitz and U. Prahl, will be published by Wiley–VCH 
Weinheim. All workshop participants were strongly encouraged to contribute to this book, and 
the editors in the end recorded more than 70 volunteers from at least 12 countries eventually 
contributing as authors. 

The Handbook is scheduled to appear at the time of the second international workshop 
in Barcelona, Spain, in April 2016. 
 
 

SECOND INTERNATIONAL WORKSHOP ON SOFTWARE SOLUTIONS FOR ICME 
 
The first workshop clearly emphasized the multiple benefits arising from combining models 
and tools. The workshop also got the different players in the different model worlds mutually 
acquainted. 

The scope of the Second Workshop on Software Solutions for ICME [6] to be held in 
Barcelona in April 2016 will be on elaborating ‘‘How to combine different models and  tools in 
practice’’ and  this scope can be summarized in one word: Interoperability. 

This implicitly covers aspects like information exchange (standardized protocols), 
license issues, steering of multiple codes (platforms), examples of industrial applications, and 
many others. 

The topics of this upcoming workshop will comprise but are not limited to (I) metadata, 
metadata schemata (e.g., metadata to describe microstructures, thermodynamics, properties, and 
models); (II) organizing and storing of data; (III) data structures for interoperability (e.g., file-
based interoperability, HDF5 data structures, and MongoDB); (IV) work- flows, simulation 
platforms; (V) handling of datasets at different scales/hierarchical data structures; (VI) future 
roadmaps toward interoperability; and (VII) numerics and interoperability, which includes 
scenarios for interoperability among different mesh kinematic frameworks, re-meshing and 
mapping schemes, scenarios for interoperability between different mesh discretizations, 
scenarios for inter- operability between different types of numerical methods (e.g., FDM, FEM, 
BEM, DEM, MFM, and PFEM), and scenarios for parallel processing in multi-platforms. 



 

To account for the lessons learned from the first workshop, much more time will be 
devoted to discussions and the range of stakeholders will be slightly widened. To discuss ‘‘How 
to perform ICME in practice’’ and to have more specific examples in the generic ICME 
methodology, a number of sand-box scenarios of technological/industrial interest will be 
defined. In contrast to foundational engineering problems and test-case/simulation-bench- 
marks, it is however not intended to solve the respective problems. Focus is on the 
identification of tools being needed or being beneficial to tackle the respective topic and 
especially on the identification of the required information flow between these different tools 
and of a suitable metadata structure to describe the information. Such sandbox scenarios are 
foreseen, for example, in additive manufacturing technologies, plastic composites, a steel 
component, and an electronic assembly. Details about these scenarios are available on the 
ICMEg website. Some presentations during the first workshop evoked the impression that with 
respect to platforms and the ‘‘I’’ in ICME, most issues seem to be almost solved. Most of these 
presentations, however, referred to integrated computational engineering (ICE) and did not 
really address the ‘‘M’’. A conclusion is that focusing on any subsystem of ICME (e.g., ICE 
and CME) will defocus the real objective of ICME. Much work has already been done in any of 
the subsystems. The real ICME challenge is to get all these subsystems into one single, coherent 
structural framework. 

 
REFERENCES 

 
[1] G.J. Schmitz and U. Prahl, Integr. Mater. Manuf. Innov. 3, 2 (2014). 
[2] ICMEg. 1st International Workshop on Software Solutions for Integrated Computational 

Materials Engineering. http:// web.access.rwth-aachen.de/MICRESS/ICMEg1/abstracts. 
html. Accessed 15 Oct 2015. 

[3] ICMEg. ICMEg questionaire (Market Study Simulation Software). 
https://docs.google.com/forms/d/130ajVA_b5_ 
tqUf9DCixhzX0tIg0Ieo6MWLU_wDYMAAQ/view form?usp=send_form. Accessed 15 
Oct 2015. 

[4] ICMEg. ICMEg questionaire (Survey on Modeling/Simulation Tools). 
https://docs.google.com/forms/d/186kvoljlL 
dUZ0tr4PANkJYbhau9tAQ67xnqTUX1P3M8/view form?usp=send_form. Accessed 15 
Oct 2015. 

[5] A.W.A. Konter, H. Farivar, U. Prahl, and J. Post (in this issue). 
[6] ICMEg. 2nd International Workshop on Software Solutions for Integrated Computational 

Materials Engineering. http:// congress.cimne.com/icme2016/frontal/default.asp. Accessed 
19 October 2015. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

http://web.access.rwth-aachen.de/MICRESS/ICMEg1/abstracts.html
http://web.access.rwth-aachen.de/MICRESS/ICMEg1/abstracts.html
http://web.access.rwth-aachen.de/MICRESS/ICMEg1/abstracts.html
https://docs.google.com/forms/d/130ajVA_b5_tqUf9DCixhzX0tIg0Ieo6MWLU_wDYMAAQ/viewform%3fusp%3dsend_form
https://docs.google.com/forms/d/130ajVA_b5_tqUf9DCixhzX0tIg0Ieo6MWLU_wDYMAAQ/viewform%3fusp%3dsend_form
https://docs.google.com/forms/d/130ajVA_b5_tqUf9DCixhzX0tIg0Ieo6MWLU_wDYMAAQ/viewform%3fusp%3dsend_form
https://docs.google.com/forms/d/186kvoljlLdUZ0tr4PANkJYbhau9tAQ67xnqTUX1P3M8/viewform%3fusp%3dsend_form
https://docs.google.com/forms/d/186kvoljlLdUZ0tr4PANkJYbhau9tAQ67xnqTUX1P3M8/viewform%3fusp%3dsend_form
https://docs.google.com/forms/d/186kvoljlLdUZ0tr4PANkJYbhau9tAQ67xnqTUX1P3M8/viewform%3fusp%3dsend_form
http://congress.cimne.com/icme2016/frontal/default.asp
http://congress.cimne.com/icme2016/frontal/default.asp

