











































Impact damage prediction in carbon fiber-reinforced laminated composite using the
matrix-reinforced mixing theory

M. A. Péreza,d,∗, X. Martínezb,e, S. Ollerb,d, L. Gila,d, F. Rastellinib,c, F. Floresb,f

aLaboratory for the Technological Innovation of Structures and Materials (LITEM), Colon 11 TR45 08222 Terrassa, Barcelona, Spain
bInternational Center for Numerical Methods in Engineering (CIMNE), Gran Capità s/n, Edifici C1, 08034 Barcelona, Spain

cQuantech ATZ S.A. Gran Capità 24, Edifici Nexus, 08034 Barcelona, Spain
dDepartament de Resistència de Materials i Estructures a l’Enginyeria, Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya - BarcelonaTech

eDepartament de Ciència i Enginyeria Nàutiques, Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya - BarcelonaTech
fDepartamento de Estructuras, Universidad Nacional de Córdoba, C.C. 916, Córdoba 5000, Argentina

Abstract

The impact damage tolerance of fiber-reinforced laminated composite materials is a source of concern, mainly due to internal
induced damage which causes large reductions on the strength and stability of the structure. This paper presents a procedure
based on a finite element formulation that can be used to perform numerical predictions of the impact induced internal damage in
composite laminates. The procedure is based on simulating the composite performance using a micro-mechanical approach named
matrix-reinforced mixing theory, a simplified version of the serial/parallel mixing theory that does not require neither the iterative
procedure nor the calculation of the tangent stiffness tensor. The numerical formulation uses continuum mechanics to simulate
the phenomenon of initiation and propagation of interlaminar damage with no need to formulate interface elements, resulting in a
computationally less demanding formulation. To demonstrate the capability of numerical procedure when applied to a low-velocity
impact problem, numerical results are compared with the experimental ones obtained in a test campaign performed on 44 laminates
specimens subjected to an out-of-plane and concentrated impact event, according to ASTM test method. Results are in good
agreement with experimental data in terms of delamination onset and the internal spatial distribution of induced damage.

Keywords: Low-velocity impact, Composite laminates, Damage mechanics, Finite element analysis

1. Introduction

Laminated composites offer decisive advantages when being
compared to more traditional materials, particularly in struc-
tural applications where weight is a design-limiting factor.
However, these materials have also shown a susceptibility to
impact damage due to lack of plastic deformation, to the low in-
terlaminar strength and to the laminated construction to reduce
the anisotropic nature of the plies. This physical phenomenon
limits the widespread application of composite laminates par-
ticularly into structures prone to impacts during service [1].
Therefore, in recent decades the topic has become a source of
interest and concern that has promoted intensive research.

Impacts are generally classified according to ranges from low
to high-velocity impacts. The structural response of composites
differs significantly between the two ranges. The response of a
laminate subjected to high-velocity impact is dominated by the
propagation of compression waves generated in the vicinity of
the contact point and transmitted through the thickness, result-
ing in localized damages [2, 3]. Despite that low-velocity im-
pacts are simple events, they induce complex effects, compro-
mising the residual bearing capacity of the structural compo-
nent. Low-velocity impact induced damage is a complex mix-

∗Corresponding author.
Email address: marco.antonio.perez@upc.edu (M. A. Pérez)

ture of three main failure modes: matrix cracking, delamina-
tion and fiber breakage. Among them, delamination has been
found to be the most pernicious damage mode. The situation
has been proven critical even when the damaged surface located
in the contact area is not representative of the induced damage,
causing a collapse under unacceptable compressive load levels
[4]. Therefore, to successfully design damage tolerant compos-
ite structures, it is necessary to have a reliable analysis tool to
aid understanding the complex phenomena that take places, and
capable of estimating the consequences of an impact.

The prediction of the impact response and induced damage
extentded onto composite laminates subjected to low-velocity
impacts, has been widely treated in literature in terms of ana-
lytical, experimental and numerical approaches [5–11]. The an-
alytical formulations proposed are, notwithstanding, restricted
to particular cases [12–14]. This is mainly due to the complex-
ity of physical phenomena involved, which require an accurate
modelling of dynamics response, contact formulations, failure
modes as well as the influence of multiple test conditions. Nev-
ertheless, despite the extensive research effort and significant
advances in this area, the goal has not yet been reached. On
the other hand, the high-cost and difficult experimentation pre-
clude a completely empirical study for the impact damage pre-
diction. Numerical methodologies based on Finite Element ap-
proach are a more flexible alternative, which provide detailed

Preprint submitted to Composite Structures May 29, 2013



information on the spatial and temporal evolution of damage
during the impact event.

Numerous contributions have been made to numerical mod-
elling of impact damage involving composite materials. These
studies include impact from low to high velocity, and have been
focusing on the prediction of the onset, propagation and ex-
tent of damage. A detailed survey of the numerical treatment
of composite structures and procedures used nowadays to deal
with it can be found in references [15, 16]. Different numer-
ical approaches can broadly be classified into four categories
[17]: failure criteria, fracture mechanics, plasticity theory and
damage mechanics. Failure criteria approaches used polyno-
mial expressions in terms of stress and/or strain, which allow to
determine the failure envelopes of the material [15, 18]. How-
ever, their use is limited because they do not allow the location
of the damage, neither the prediction of the crack size nor the
progressive degradation of the material. The fracture mechan-
ics approaches are based on the comparison between the strain
energy dissipated in the crack front of a known size, and the
critical values of the strain energy release rates [19–21]. The
disadvantage of using fracture mechanics lies in that for its ap-
plication it requires to predefine an initial crack region in the
numerical model. Regarding the plasticity approach, the key
concept is the assumption that the micromechanical dislocation
process can be treated at a macromechancial level by homog-
enizing over a volume of material and described by the plas-
tic strain tensor [22]. However, it should be noted that this
approach has been proved to be more suitable for composites
exhibiting ductile behaviour such as thermoplastics. The con-
tinuum damage mechanics approaches [17, 23–25] are based
on material degradation models that allow simulating the ma-
terial behaviour after the onset of damage. These approaches
have proved being successful if they are used with an appropi-
ate failure criteria and fracture mechanics to predict different
composite failure modes, including matrix cracking, delamina-
tion and fiber breakage [16].

The authors of main works available in the open literature
agree on solving the problem of the simulation of quasi-static
loading and low velocity impacts events in layered composites,
by representing the two processes taking place: first the onset
of matrix damage or crack initiation and afterwards its propa-
gation through the laminate, the so-called delamination. The
onset of damage can be predicted by several means, such as
stress and/or strains failure criteria or fracture mechanics us-
ing the energy release rate [15]. However, major efforts have
been focused on the treatment of delamination [26]. Among
the different strategies for the simulation of delamination pro-
cess, the most common approaches are the virtual crack closure
technique (VCCT) [27] and the cohesive zone models (CZM)
[28–35]. The VCCT calculates energy-release rate, with the
assumption that during the crack growth the energy needed to
open the crack is the same as the energy needed to close it.
The CZM uses cohesive elements placed in the interfaces of
the laminae to describe the interlaminar cohesive forces. When
damage growth occurs, these cohesive elements open in order
to simulate the fracture propagation. It has been shown that
both approaches are capable of characterizing the strength of

the interface, allowing the simulation of the transient behaviour
of a laminate into impact event and obtaining successful re-
sults of progressive failure of the constituent materials and at
the plies interface. However, it should be pointed out that both
approaches rely on predefined interfaces that constrain the in-
terlaminar crack path. Consequently, the crack propagation
strongly depends on the presence (or absence) of a fracture sur-
face or cohesive zone elements, implying that the crack path is
mesh dependent [36]. When the crack path is unknown, fracture
surface or cohesive elements must be placed in all the interfaces
of the layers of the laminate, which may result, depending on
the size of the problem to be solved, computationally unafford-
able.

Most of the formulations used nowadays to simulate com-
posite laminates treat them as a single material, with proper-
ties inherited from their constituents. This has proven to be
inaccurate, as most of the failure mechanisms of composites
are because of the micro-structural interaction between its con-
stituents. An example of these interactions can be found in the
formulation developed by Martinez et al. in [37] to characterize
the compression strength of composites. Therefore, as compos-
ites can be considered more as a micro-structural system rather
than a material, new formulations and theories are required to
predict their mechanical performance accurately.

In contrast with the large number of publications dealing the
simulation of low-velocity impact based on failure, fracture,
and plasticity, the present work uses a continuum mechanics
approach to simulate the phenomenon of initiation and propaga-
tion of interlaminar damage with no need to formulate interface
elements that predefine the crack path. The proposed procedure
is based on simulating the laminate composite by using a micro-
mechanical approach named matrix-reinforced mixing theory
(MR RoM). This paper enters in the continuity of the work con-
ducted by the authors [38–40]. These works demonstrate that
micro-structural interaction between the composite constituents
can be included in the mixing theory by modifying their consti-
tutive performance. The model used in the present work con-
sists of a simplified version of the serial/parallel mixing theory
(SP RoM), which reduces the computational cost without af-
fecting significantly its simulation performance, in particular,
its ability to predict delamination process.

The MR RoM is based on the differentiation and separation
of the composite mechanical performance into a parallel and
serial component, corresponding the first to the reinforcement
direction and the second to the remaining directions. The MR
RoM acts as a constitutive equation manager and has proven
capable of predicting the composite behaviour even when one
of its constituents gets into the non-linear range. The valid-
ity of the proposed procedure to successfully predict mechani-
cal structural performance of a laminate composite subjected to
low velocity impact damage, is assessed with the comparison of
the numerical results with those obtained experimentally from
the impact ASTM test method.

The following section describes the numerical formulation of
the MR RoM, together with the damage model used to predict
the matrix mechanical performance. In the next section details
and requirements of the experimental impact test procedures are

2



given. In the following, the numerical model developed to in-
vestigate the capability of the proposed numerical formulation
when applied to a low-velocity impact problem is presented.
The numerical results obtained are compared with the experi-
mental ones. Comparisons include predictions of the contact
time and the internal spatial distribution of damage. Finally,
the conclusions of the study are presented.

2. Numerical formulation

2.1. Matrix-reinforced mixing theory

The matrix reinforced mixing theory (MR RoM) has its ori-
gin in the serial/parallel mixing theory (SP RoM)1. The SP
RoM is based on the definition of two different compatibility
equations that define the stress equilibrium and establish the
strain compatibility between the composite constituent mate-
rials. It defines an iso-strain condition in the fiber (parallel)
direction and an iso-stress condition in the transversal (serial)
direction.

For that purpose, the composite strain tensor (cε) is decom-
posed into its parallel (cεP) and serial (cεS ) components by us-
ing fourth-order projector tensors PP and PS , respectively, as
follows:

cε = cεP +
cεS (1)

where
cεP = PP : cε and cεS = PS : cε (2)

being PP = (e1 ⊗ e1) ⊗ (e1 ⊗ e1), PS = (I − PP), e1 the vector
which defines the parallel behaviour (fiber direction), and I the
identity.

In the proposed numerical model, the response of the com-
posite material is considered to be directly related to the volume
fractions of its constituent materials, and phases in the compos-
ite are assumed to be homogeneously distributed. The equi-
librium and compatibility equations describing the interaction
between the constituent materials are:

Parallel behavior:
{

cεP =
fεP =

mεP
cσP =

f k · fσP +mk ·mσP
(3)

Serial behavior:
{

cεS =
f k · fεS +mk ·mεS

cσS =
fσS =

mσS
(4)

where the superscripts c, f and m stands for composite, fiber and
matrix, respectively and ik is the volume-fraction coefficient of
each composite constituent. Parallel strains of fiber and matrix
are obtained straightforward from the composite strains. How-
ever, the compatibility equations are not fulfilled so easily in the
serial direction, being necessary to make an initial prediction on
the fiber or matrix serial strain. Once the strains of both com-
ponents are known, their stress tensor can be calculated using
any given constitutive law. Therefore, it is possible to simulate
the composite constituents with any kind of non-linear material

1The formulations used are thoroughly described in references [38, 41] and
will not be elaborated here except for their main aspects which are briefly de-
scribed in the following.

behaviour, such as damage or plasticity. With this approach,
if one of the component materials becomes non-linear, the ini-
tial prediction may be inacurate and it is necessary an iterative
procedure to fulfill equations Eq. 3 and Eq. 4.

Given that an explicit time integration scheme evaluates the
material constitutive equation at each time step, this procedure
may be unfeasible depending on the size of time step and/or the
size of the problem. With this scenario, the MR RoM was pro-
posed in [38] as a method computationally less demanding to
perform large simulations of composite structures. It states that
in multilayer laminates the contribution of fibers to the stiffness
and strength in the transverse direction (serial) of a single layer
can be neglected, especially if the laminate has several layers
oriented in different directions. This assumption leads to the
following compatibility equations:

Parallel behavior:
{

cεP =
fεP =

mεP
cσP =

f k · fσP +mk ·mσP
(5)

Serial behavior:
{

cεS =
mεS

cσS =
mσS

(6)

Under this assumption, it is noted that both serial and paral-
lel strains of fiber and matrix can be obtained straightforward
from the composite strains, avoiding the iterative procedure. As
a further consequence, it will not require the evaluation of the
tangent stiffness tensor of the composite components, which re-
sults in a significant reduction of the computational cost.

As per impact induced damages, the weakening of the matrix
due to excessive shear stresses, will result in the inability to de-
velop either longitudinal, transverse or shear stresses. Accord-
ing to the above compatibility equations, when matrix reaches
a critical stress state and its strength and stiffness is reduced,
the whole composite stresss and stiffness will be also reduced
in the serial direction. If shear stresses are defined with the se-
rial condition, the composite shear strength and stiffness will
be reduced as occurs in a delaminated composite. It has been
already proved that this is equivalent to a delamination failure
mode [38].

2.2. Matrix damage model

Material degradation in a continuum solid due to fracture
process can be simulated with a damage formulation. This for-
mulation takes into account the reduction of the effective area
of the material, reducing its stiffness properties. The procedure
proposed in this work to simulate impact uses a damage consti-
tutive law to predict the matrix mechanical performance. The
damage model considered is the isotropic continuum damage
formulation developed by Oliver et al. [42].

Within the framework of the micromechanical analysis of
composite materials, damage formulation is also derived us-
ing a local approach. Matrix degradation is characterized by
an isotropic damage formulation using one-parameter scalar
md ∈ [0, 1], such as md = 0 in undamaged configuration and
md = 1 when the matrix is completely damaged. It is notewor-
thy that once the materials contained in an element are fully
degraded, this element can not provide further strenght to the

3



model and may become excessively distortioned, inducing nu-
merical convergence difficulties forcing the reduccion of the
time step. In the simulation procedure proposed below, instead
of removing such elements from the finite element mesh, a max-
imum value that can reach the damage paremeters are defined,
i.e.: md ≤ 0.99 and f d ≤ 0.99. This is equivalent to defining
a residual stiffness result of the friction between the laminate
layers.

Although a scalar damage model does not account for di-
rectionality of damage, anisotropic damage effects on the
macroscale are taken into account by means of the stacking se-
quence. The scalar degradation parameter is used to transform
the real damaged stress tensor mσ, into an effective stress ten-
sor mσ0 corresponding to the matrix undamaged configuration.
This relationship can be written as:

mσ ≡
[
(1 −md) I

]
: mσ0 = (1 −

md) ·mσ0 = (1 −
md) ·mC0 : mε

(7)
A yield function F (mσ0,mq) is used to define an elastic do-

main F < 0 in which no further degradation takes place:

F (mσ0,mq) = f (mσ0) − c(md) ≤ 0 with mq ∼md (8)

Eq. 8 is written generically because the proposed procedure can
use any given yield surface (i.e. Von-Mises, Mohr-Coulomb,
etc.). A detailed description of several yield surfaces can be
found in [43]. The term f (mσ0) depends on the stress tensor
and c(md) corresponds to the evolution of the damage parameter
besides defining the threshold of damage growth when c(md) =
mσmax, defined as a material property. Accordingly damage on-
set occurs the first time that equivalent stress f (mσ0) = c(md).

Matrix damage onset is predicted by the norm of the principal
stresses by using a different degradation path for tensile and
compressive stresses:

f (mσ0) = ρ · ‖
mσI‖ (9)

being mσI the principal stress tensor and ρ a weighting function
of the tensile and compressive stresses applied to the material.
It is defined as:

ρ =

∑3
I=1〈

mσI〉∑3
I=1|

mσI |

mσc
mσt

+

1 − ∑3I=1〈mσI〉∑3
I=1|

mσI |

 (10)
where mσt and mσc are the tensile and the compressive matrix
ultimate strength, respectively, and 〈.〉 is the Macauley bracket
defined as 〈x〉 := 12 (x + |x|).

The variation of the damage parameter is obtained by using
the damage consistency parameter and the Kuhn-Tucker condi-
tion, being possible to explicitly integrate the damage internal
variable to obtain:

c(md) = max
[mσmax,max{ f (mσ0)}] (11)

being
md = G

[
f (mσ0)

]
(12)

where G
[
f (mσ0)

]
defines the strain-softening evolution of the

matrix material. The present work uses an exponential strain-

softening law [42], expressed as:

G
[
f (mσ0)

]
= 1 −

mσmax
f (mσ0)

e
A

1− f (
mσ0)

mσmax


(13)

where the parameter A depends upon the material fracture en-
ergy as follows:

A =
1

mGmE0
l f mσ2max

−
1
2

(14)

being mE0 the matrix elastic stiffness, mG the fracture energy
and l f the fracture length. The latter parameter deserves some
further attention to avoid mesh-dependent results: in a finite
element implementation the fracture length value must corre-
spond to the smallest value in which the laminate is discretized,
i.e. the length represented by an integration point. By doing so,
the degradation process becomes mesh independent, as proved
in [37].

The above formulation has been implemented into the ex-
plicit finite element package ComPack, result of the collabo-
ration between CIMNE and Quantech ATZ. The results of the
validation of the formulation are presented in the following sec-
tions.

3. Drop-weight impact test

The test conditions are decisive on the impact response of a
laminate composite. Insofar as possible, impact tests should re-
produce the same failure modes induced when the structure is in
service. Both failure mechanisms and damage morphology are
influenced by intrinsic parameters of the experimental test, such
as: mass, shape, diameter, material and the incident velocity of
the impactor as well as geometry, layup and the boundary con-
ditions of the coupon. In order to minimize the problems arising
from the diversity of test protocols, in this research a test cam-
paign based on standard device has been raised. An ASTM2

standard test method for measuring the damage resistance of
a fiber-reinforced polymer matrix composite to a drop-weight
impact event [44] is followed. Deviations about the standard
test are documented and justified. The test method is used to
determine the damage resistance of multidirectional composite
laminated plates subjected to an out-of-plane and concentrated
impact event. The composite damage resistance is quantified
in terms of the extent and damage morphology, and the failure
modes induced in the laminated specimen.

The test device and the geometry of the coupon are schema-
tised in Fig. 1. It consists of a plate-like fixing support with
a rectangular and centered hole cut-out, upon which the sam-
ple is placed. The specimen is fixed by four horizontal tog-
gle clamps3. In order to prevent damaging the sample with the
force applied by the tip, they are covered with an elastomer.

2American Society for Testing and Materials.
3AMF model 6830-3.

4



Toggle clamp!

Test specimen !
150x100 mm2!

Rubber tip!

Guiding pin!

Cut-out !
125x75 mm2!

Fixture base!

Impactor d = 16 mm!

Figure 1: Scheme of the impact support fixture and boundary conditions of the coupon according to ASTM standard test method (left). Frame capture from
high-speed video recording corresponding to an instant after contact in the impact test performed (right).

Above the fixing support and perpendicular to it, a cylindri-
cal tube system is installed acting as a guide during the drop-
weight. The test procedure consists in releasing the weight from
a height which determines the incident kinetic energy. One im-
pact on each specimen is admitted, so that rebound must be
intercepted. The impactor is composed of a steel4 cylinder of
200 mm length and 44 mm diameter, and a smooth hemispher-
ical striker tip with a diameter of 16 mm and a hardness of 40
HRC5. The total mass of the impactor is 2248 gr. This mass
value is significantly lower than the 5.5±0.25 kg specified in
the standard test method. However, the standard also specifies
that the minimum height of the drop-weight must be 300 mm.
In the case of a minimum level of required incident energy is
not reached with these parameters, it specifies that the mass of
the impactor may be 2±0.25 kg.

The experimental program was conducted for a total of
44 monolithic composite plates specimens with a size of
150×100×5.2 mm3. In the manufacturing process unidirec-
tional prepreg laminae composed of carbon fibers6 were used
embedded in a resin epoxy matrix7, whose properties are sum-
marized in Table8 1. The quasi-isotropic laminates plates are
made of 40 unidirectional laminae with a balanced and sym-
metric stacking sequence [45◦/0◦/ − 45◦/90◦]5S resulting in a
nominal thickness of around 5.2 mm with uniform cross-section
over the entire surface. The laminated plate layup is defined
such that the 0◦ fiber orientation is aligned with the lengthwise
dimension. Laminate curing was performed by a standard au-
toclave procedure. After the curing process, each coupon was
examined by using a non-destructive ultrasonic inspection to
assess the grade of compaction and discarding the presence of

4UNE F-1150.
5The hardness of the impactor is less than that specified in the standard (60-

62 HRC), however no anomalies were observed after impact tests.
6Grafil TR30S 3K.
7Resin epoxy HSC Epikote 4652.
8Nominal values provided by manufacturers.

defects, porosities or delaminations.

Table 1: Mechanical properties of the composite constituents and lamina.
Matrix properties Fiber properties
Nominal density 1200 kg/m3 Nominal density 1790 kg/m3

Elastic modulus 4520 MPa Elastic modulus 235 GPa
Poisson’s ratio 0.36 Poisson’s ratio 0.21
Tensile strength 68 MPa Tensile strength 4410 MPa
Fracture energy 780 J/m2 Elongation at failure 1.9 %
Volume-fraction 44.8 % Volume-fraction 55.2 %
Unidirectional lamina properties
Weight 200 g/m2

Cured ply thickness 0.130 mm
Resin content (weight) 35 %

To evaluate the impact damage resistance of laminated com-
posites plates, specimens were impacted with incident energies
levels varying in the range from 6.6 to 70 J, in intervals of 5 J,
with a minimum of two and maximum of four specimens for
each impact energy. The impact device used to conduct the test
makes unfeasible the measurement of contact force during the
impact event9. However, it should be pointed out that the in-
terest of this research is not the characterization of the impact
event but rather the extent and damage morphology induced.
Nevertheless it was considered desirable to measure the contact
time and the incident and rebound velocities in order to esti-
mate the energy absorbed during the impact. For this purpose,
a strain gauge10 attached to the bottom layer and a high-speed
camera11 were used (see Fig. 1). The sample rate of the strain
gauge data acquisition system was set at 9600 Hz, which corre-
sponds to a temporal resolution of 104 µs. The camera record-
ing frequency was 2012 Hz, which represents a time resolution
of 497 µs per frame.

9It should be noted that on the standard test method the use of velocity and
force instrumentation are declared as optional.

10Strain gauge HBM 1-LY41-6/350. Data recording of the measurements
has been performed using MGCplus data acquisition system.

11MotionBLITZ Cube4.

5



The term state of damage implies knowledge of the type, ex-
tent and location of damage and it is three-dimensional in na-
ture. Ultrasonic phased array testing provides a precise through
thickness damage information useful for determining the depth,
size and distribution of internal delaminations. After the impact
event, the extent of damage is mesured by using non-destructive
ultrasonic inspection equipment12. Using data from B and C-
scan, depth and extent of projected area of the induced delami-
nations are determined.

4. Numerical simulation of drop-weight impact test

A numerical study is undertaken to investigate the capabil-
ity of the proposed numerical formulation when applied to a
low-velocity impact problem. The aim of the numerical simula-
tion is to obtain a prediction map of the impact induced internal
damage in multidirectional composite laminates plates, as well
as assessing the extent of damage over a range of incident en-
ergies. A geometrical model, depicted in Fig. 2, was built and
appropriate boundary conditions were defined to reproduce the
experimental setup described in the above section.

Composite virtual coupon consist of a 75×50×5.2 mm3 rect-
angular plate which corresponds to one quarter of the overall
geometry of the laminate. This simplification assumes a double
symmetry in the internal damage distribution to favor a consid-
erable reduction of the computational cost. The virtual coupon
is simply supported on the base and is fixed with a toggle clamp,
preventing the movement in the out-of-plane direction during
the impact of a hemispherical projectile. The impactor diame-
ter is 16 mm, according to the standard test method. The fix-
ture base and the impactor are modeled as solid rigid bodies.
Only the holder and the composite virtual coupon are consid-
ered deformable parts. The holder and the imapctor have a con-
centrated mass of 0.025 kg and 0.562 kg respectively, thus the
mass value assigned to the impactor is one quarter of the pro-
jectile mass.

The fixture base, the impactor and the holder are meshed
with surfece elements, nonetheless the mesh of the laminate
plate deserves some further attention. Delamination failure is
a phenomenon inherently three-dimensional, hence hexahedral
continuum solid elements with eight nodes and full integration
are used to model the composite coupon since all components
of the strain and stress tensors are included in the formulation.
In the present study an initial attempt was made discretizing the
composite by placing an element in each layer, however it was
not be feasible because of the number of laminae. Thus, in or-
der to reduce the number of solid elements and consequently the
computational cost, several laminae were compacted in a single
element. This procedure is of common practice in laminate sim-
ulations and it may not compromise the results accuracy as it is
shown in [38].

However, although it is possible to collapse some layers in a
single element, the through-thickness discretization of the com-
posite virtual coupon plays a major role in the results accuracy

12OmniScan MX with standard phased array probe 5 MHz linear array 64
elements.

(either if the coupon is a composite laminate or if it is a single
single isotropic material). The lower the number of elements is,
the lower resolution of the map of the internal damage will be
and the model will exhibit an overly stiff behaviour. A larger
number of finite elements is preferable but it leads ineluctably
to a significantly increase of the computational time required
to perform the simulation. In the present work, a finite ele-
ment mesh of 60× 40 with 12 linear hexahedral elements in the
through-thickness direction is selected to achieve an optimal
performance, as it provides accurate results with a reasonable
computational cost. The resulting mesh has a total of 32513
nodes. Thus, in each hexahedral element 103 laminae are col-
lapsed. The mesh generated is depicted in Fig. 2. Contacts
were defined to set up the set of contact parts pairs, in order to
avoid interpenetration between parts.

The composite virtual coupon has a quasi-isotropic stacking
sequence [45◦/0◦/ − 45◦/90◦]5S as described in the above sec-
tion. The mechanical properties of each constituent composite
are summarized in Table 1. The fiber behaviour is assumed
to be linear up to tensile failure, whereas the matrix damage
behaviour is modelled following the exponential softening law
described in section 2.

Numerical simulations are carried out for each level of the
incident energy conducted on the experimental program. The
impactor is modeled before the impact event, by defining the
initial position of 1 mm onto the laminate and a vertical pre-
scribed velocity consistent with the incident impact energy. A
concentrated load of 1800 N in the holder reference point is ap-
plied according to the manufacturer specifications. To illustarte
the computational requirements of the model, it can be said that
the simulations were performed using a personal computer13.
Each simulation takes less than 6 hours to be completed.

5. Results and discussion

The capability of numerical procedure when applied to a low-
velocity impact problem is assessed comparing numerical re-
sults with the experimental ones obtained in a test campaign
performed. In particular, attention will be given to the impact
energy, impact force and the impact induced damage on the
laminate.

5.1. Impact energy
The impact damage resistance of laminated composites

plates is evaluated for impact energies ranging from 6,6 to 70 J.
The lower limit is determined by the minimum height condition
imposed by the standard test method. The upper limit was de-
fined considering a hypothetical energy level below penetration
and perforation thresholds.

During the impact event the impactor’s kinetic energy is
transferred to the composite plate once contact is made until
it reaches in equilibrium. Part of this energy is stored as elas-
tic strain energy and part is absorbed. The absorbed compo-
nent results from the sum of the contributions given by non-
conservative forces and the energy dissipated due to the failure

13Intel Core i5 650 - 3,20 GHz RAM 4 Gb.

6



50  mm!
75 mm!

5,2 mm!

Rubber tip!
Clamping force: 1800 N!

Diameter: 10 mm!
Concentrated mass: 0.025 kg!

!

0o!

Composite virtual coupon!
Stacking sequence: [45º/0º/-45º/90º] 
Boundary conditions: simply supported !
Boundary conditions: double symmetry!
Mesh: 60"40"12 hexahedral elements!
Mesh: 32513 nodes!Fixture base!

Size: 175"125 mm2!
Cut-out: 125"75 mm2!

Solid rigid!

Impactor!
Diameter: 16 mm!
Concentrated mass: 0.562 kg!
Prescribed velocity!
Solid rigid!

5S!

2!
2!

Figure 2: Finite Element model built for the numerical simulation of drop-weight impact test.

mechanisms. Finally, the stored elastic energy is transferred
back to the impactor causing a rebound.

Fig. 3 shows the comparison between the experimental and
numerical absorbed-incident energy relationships. Experimen-
tal data of the absorbed energy is estimated from the difference
between incident and rebound kinetic energy by measuring the
respective velocities of the impactor using the high-speed video
recording. Data plotted represent the mean values with stan-
dard deviation bars for each energy level. Numerical data are
obtained from predicted impact force-time histories. It can be
seen that both absorbed energy curves follow a quadratic re-
lationship. These results are consistent with the observations
made by Feraboli and Kedward [6]. It should be noticed that
the highest incident energy (70 J) is located below the penetra-
tion threshold, represented with a diagonal line corresponding
to a null velocity rebound, as intended. Although both curves
exhibit similar trends, the deviation from experimental and nu-
merical curves is evident. Difference is mainly due to the fact
that on the numerical model, the dissipated energy by friction
effects, material damping, permanent indentation, etc. is ne-
glected. The energy dissipation of the model is done through
the matrix material and is controlled by the fracture energy pa-
rameter (mG). This parameter is provided by the manufacturer
and corresponds to the matrix as a bulk material, therefore it
cannot account for effects such as friction, etc. In order to take
these effects into account, the fracture energy parameter should
be calibrated accordingly. The graph presents some indica-

tions that refer to the so-called barely visible impact damage
(BVID) and the numerical NIDO and experimental EIDO inter-
laminar damage onset, respectively. The later is determined by
the ultrasound inspection results.

0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70
0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

N
IDO

E
IDO

 Experimental
 Numerical

A
bs

or
be

d 
en

er
gy

 (J
)

Incident kinetic energy (J)

Barely visible 
impact damage: 

Indentation < 0,3mm

Figure 3: Experimental and numerical absorbed-incident energy relationships.
EIDO and NIDO refer to the experimental and numerical interlaminar damage
onset, respectively.

7



5.2. Impact force

Fig. 4 shows an example of numerical prediction of the con-
tact force histories for three different impact energies on com-
posite virtual coupon. The prediction curve of the lower (sub-
critical) impact energy value (EI = 10 J) tends to an elas-
tic response, whereas the other two predicted curves show an
abrupt drop of the contact force value after the contact initia-
tion. This corresponds to the delamination onset NIDO, whose
critical force has been previously shown to be independent of
the impact energy [6]. Discrepancy between the peak forces can
be attributed to the numerical oscillations. The contact force
amplitude variations of the virtual coupon composite curve im-
pacted at 50 J, reveals the onset of fiber breakage when it
reaches the maximum contact force (equilibrium). The contact
time depends on the impact energy level, therefore the higher
the impact energy was, the higher the contact time is. This rela-
tionship was also observed in the experimental results showing
a nonlinear trend. It is shown that after the delamination onset,
the contact duration increases due to the lower stiffness of the
specimen, which experiences progresse damage.

Since the impact device used in the experimental campaign
did not allow contact force measurement during the impact
event, the pertinent comparisons between experimental and nu-
merical contact force responses are not carried out. Never-
theless, these findings are in good agreement with existing
observations resulting from impact tests previously published
[7, 11, 45].

0 1 2 3 4 5 6
0
2
4
6
8

10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26

EI = 50J

EI = 20JC
on

ta
ct

 fo
rc

e 
(k

N
)

Contact time (ms)

EI = 10J

Interlaminar damage 
onset (NIDO)

Figure 4: Numerical prediction of the contact force histories for 10 J, 20 J and
50 J impact energies on composite virtual coupon. NIDO corresponds to critical
force of the delamination onset.

5.3. Impact induced damage

One of the main results sought in current research was to ob-
tain the internal delamination in composites due to an impact
load. In the experimental test this damage is obtained by ul-
trasounds. The validity of the numerical model presented will
depend upon if it is capable of reproducing the internal impact
induced damage shown by the experimental results.

As an example, Fig. 5 presents the evolution of the through-
thickness distribution of damage for a 50 J simulated impact on
the composite virtual coupon. The variable plotted corresponds
to the average damage de on each gauss point of the finite ele-
ment e, which is defined as:

de =
1
Ve

n∑
i=1

Li ke
Li de

(
md, f d

)
(15)

being Ve the volume of the element, n the number of laminae
collapsed in the element, Li ke the volumetric participation of the
i-lamina and Li de the damage of the i-lamina which is a function
of the matrix md and fiber f d damage paremeters.

The views depicted correspond to a quarter section of the ge-
ometry during the loading step. Following contact, damage is
induced on the top region at the impact site. As the load level
increases, the damage on the bottom region progressively in-
creases due to the bending stress. Starting from contact time
0.25 ms, a growth and propagation of interlaminar damage pa-
rameter is observed until the impactor reaches the equilibrium
at the point of maximum deflection. During the unloading step,
no damage evolution is observed. It should be noticed the
sudden increase of interlaminar damage between contact times
0.25 and 0.34 ms. This result is in concordance with the abrupt
drop of the contact force depicted in Fig. 4 above.

By observing the kinematic motion described by the element
nodes located in the region of interlaminar failure, a state of
tensile stress and shear stress is deduced, corresponding to a
mixing opening-sliding fracture mode. Moreover, as discussed
above, once an element is fully degraded it can not provide fur-
ther strenght to the model and may become excessively distor-
tioned, inducing numerical convergence difficulties forcing the
reduction of the time step. In order to avoid excessive mesh
distortion, a residual stiffness remaining in the materials was
imposed as set forth in section 2.2.

Numerical results from the simulation are evaluated by com-
paring experimental measurements and observations. The main
conclusion regarding the experimental results is that the pro-
cedure and the test device used for impact damage resistance
evaluation, allowed to reproduce the three main failure modes:
matrix cracking, delamination and fiber breakage. A compar-
ison between numerically predicted and experimentally mea-
sured impact induced internal damage at the end of the impact
event is shown in Fig. 6. The extent and spatial distribution of
internal damage was determined by using non-destructive ul-
trasonic inspection as described previously. In general terms,
numerical simulation results are in good agreement with exper-
imental data. The amount of induced damage is more extensive
as increases the impact energy, as expected. A conical shape of
the internal distribution of damage is observed. It should be no-
ticed that the cross section view of numerical results is depicted
symmetrical. Since experimental results confirm the high de-
gree of symmetry of the internal damage distribution, the sim-
plification to one quarter of the overall geometry is considered
acceptable to obtain an initial prediction. This simplification is
not acceptable when it is necessary to predict the oblong shapes
extended along the fibers of each layer.

8



Contact time 0.01 ms!

Contact time 0.08 ms!

Contact time 0.17 ms!

Contact time 0.25 ms!

Contact time 0.34 ms!

Contact time 0.76 ms!

Contact time 1.18 ms!

Contact time 1.61 ms!

Figure 5: Quarter section view of the evolution of the through-thickness distri-
bution of damage for a 50 J simulated impact on [45◦/0◦/ − 45◦/90◦]5S lami-
nate. The variable plotted corresponds to the element average damage.

The ultrasonic image results identify a region (shaded in
Fig. 6) located below the delaminations near top surface which
has no available experimental data for comparison. This result
is due to an inherent limitation of the experimental technique
whose effect has been termed the shadow cone. Once ultrasonic
wave reaches a delamination, it is reflected back toward the sur-
face, impeding the identification of deeper damages. Numerical
predictions indicate a fiber breakage and matrix cracking on the
bottom region due to the bending stress, which is consistent

with the visual observations made after the experimental tests.
In general, the numerical model is able to predict internal

damage induced by low-velocity impact. The extent and dis-
tribution of damage is reasonably well predicted. Minor differ-
ences in depth of damage arise due to the mesh refinement in
the through-thickness direction. It should be noticed that some
delaminations are not captured by the numerical model. This is
because the simulation uses a continuum phenomenological ap-
proach, in which the layers are not defined as a specific element.
With this approach damage is extended continuously and not
only in the interlaminar region. The experimental results prove
that more than one delamination is induced at different depths,
even for lower energy levels thus supporting the conclusion that
in strategies using interface elements, multiple cohesive-type
elements must be placed on different layers, which inevitably
leads to a significant increase of computational cost.

Quantitative comparison of the damage extension is done in
terms of the projected delaminated area. Fig. 7 shows a com-
parison between numerical prediction of projected delaminated
area resulting from the superposition of all internal delamina-
tions and experimental measured induced damage by means of
C-scan ultrasonic images, as a function of impact energy. Ex-
perimental data plotted represent the mean values with stan-
dard deviation bars for each energy level. As Fig. 7 demon-
strates, numerical prediction of the projected delaminated area
correlates reasonably well with the trend of experimental data,
although it tends to underestimate damage extension. When
comparing the slopes of the linear curve fitting data across the
low energy range -starting from the interlaminar damage on-
set up to 50 J- there is an absolute error of 7.2%. The average
difference on the predicted delaminated area across the whole
energy range is 151 mm2.

It is known that mechanical properties of the composite con-
stituent have great influence on the accuracy of the numerical
results, particularly delamination toughness is mainly driven by
the matrix fracture energy parameter (mG) as it is shown in
[40]. Hence, the delaminated area will increase when matrix
fracture energy decreases. And, with increasing matrix fracture
energy, more energy is dissipated during delamination growth.
In spite of using the properties provided by the manufacturer
it is warned about the possible significant variation depending
on the laminate cure cycle. According to these observations,
it is fair to assume that matrix fracture energy parameter used
may not accurately correspond with the parameter of the tested
laminates.

Fig. 7 also shows that while linear law predicts the low en-
ergy range, the experimental and numerical delaminated ar-
eas deviates from the linear behaviour as the energy increases,
reaching an asymptotic value. This result stands in apparent
contrast to those of previous publications [20, 46]. A possi-
ble cause may be that in the present work the incident energies
range is significantly higher. In this sense, it is worth noting
that -as experimentally ascertained- the change in slope cor-
responds with the onset of fiber breakage. Another important
aspect to consider is the influence of the boundary conditions
of the test device. According to ASTM standard test method,
the maximum damage diameter should be less than half of the

9



a) 10 J 

b) 20 J 

c) 30 J 

d) 40 J 

e) 50 J 

f) 60 J 

EI  = 10 J!

EI  = 20 J!

EI  = 30 J!

EI  = 40 J!

EI  = 50 J!

EI  = 60 J!

Cone of shadow! Impact point!

Figure 6: Central cross section view of numerically predicted distribution of internal damage (left) and B-scan ultrasound images (right) for different EI impact
energies on [45◦/0◦/ − 45◦/90◦]5S laminates. The height corresponds to the thickness of the laminate (5.2 mm) whereas the length corresponds to the size of the
ultrasonic probe (60 mm), not the width of the laminate (100 mm).

unsupported specimen width (i.e. 37.5 mm). C-scan ultrasonic
images indicated that this condition is not fulfilled in those lam-
inates that were impacted with energies higher than 50 J, since
the width of the damage is approximately 45 mm. This ob-
servation is in agreement with prevoius published studies from
other authors [47]. At these energy levels it was shown that the
stress states generated on contact surfaces of the specimen nei-
ther induce additional damage nor interacts in the propagation
of interlaminar damage.

Focusing on the interlaminar damage onset, the numerical
simulation indicated that delamination threshold energy level
is roughly estimated at 20 J, which is in line with the delami-
nation onset observed experimentally as shown in Fig. 6. Pro-
jected area values below this energy level correspond to sur-
face damages, not delaminations. Interlaminar damage onset is
then considered when the internal extent of damage is greater
than the outer extent of damage. A closer examination shows
that the numerical model slightly overpredicted the interlami-
nar damage onset. Besides fracture energy, another cause may
be the mesh resolution since it is not enough to discern between
matrix damage and interlaminar damage.

6. Conclusions

A new procedure based on a continuum mechanics approach
used to perform numerical predictions of impact induced in-
ternal damage in composite laminates has been presented and

discussed in this paper. The procedure simulates the composite
performance by using a proposed micro-mechanical approach
named matrix-reinforced mixing theory (MR RoM), in which
is consider that matrix is only reinforced in fiber direction and
that transverse composite behavior is only governed by the ma-
trix. MR RoM is a simplified version of the serial/parallel
mixing theory that does not require neither the iterative pro-
cedure nor the calculation of the tangent stiffness tensor, be-
coming a suitable formulation for an explicit algorithm. An
isotropic scalar damage model with an exponential evolution
law is proven to be suitable for characterizing matrix degrada-
tion processes. Layered 3D solid elements are used to model
the composite coupons.

The performance and the capability of numerical procedure
are assessed through comparisons with impact test measure-
ments. Results and discussions regarding the absorbed-incident
energy relationships and numerical predictions of contact force
histories are presented. Quantitative comparison of the extent
of damage is done in terms of the projected delaminated area. In
general, results are in agreement with experimental data regard-
ing the delamination onset and the internal spatial distribution
of induced damage. It is found that numerical model slightly
overpredicts the interlaminar damage onset and tends to under-
estimate the extent of damage. The matrix fracture energy pa-
rameter and mesh refinement in the through-thickness direction
highly influences the accuracy of the numerical results.

Despite these limitations, the proposed procedure proves to

10



0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70
0

250

500

750

1000

1250

1500

 Experimental
 Numerical

Pr
oj

ec
te

d 
de

la
m

in
at

ed
 a

re
a 

(m
m

2 )

Incident kinetic energy (J)

Barely visible 
impact damage: 

Indentation < 0,3mm

E
IDO

N
IDO

Figure 7: Experimental and numerical prediction of the projected delaminated
area versus incident kinetic energy. EIDO and NIDO refer to the experimental
and numerical interlaminar damage onset, respectively.

be capable of successfully simulate the composite structural
performance when applied to a low-velocity impact problem,
and particularly to predict the phenomenon of initiation and
propagation of interlaminar damage with no need to formulate
interface elements that predefine the interlaminar crack path,
resulting in a computationally less demanding formulation as
compared to previously published formulations and procedures.
The implementation of the MR RoM into a finite element code
and its capabilities proves to be promising as a numerical tool to
perform large scale impact simulations of composite structures.

Acknowledgements

This work has been supported by the Spanish Ministry of
Science and Innovation through Grant No. UNPC08-4E-007,
RECOMP project, ref. BIA2005-06952 and DELCOM Project
ref. MAT2008-02232/MAT., by the Spanish Ministry of Pub-
lic Works (project "Retrofitting and reinforcement of reinforced
concrete structures with composite materials. Numerical and
experimental developments applied to joint of bars and compos-
ites anchorage proposal") by AIRBUS (Spain) through the Con-
tract No. PBSO-13-06 FEMCOM and ACCIONA Infraestruc-
turas (Spain) through the project SPHERA. All these support
are gratefully acknowledged.

References

[1] S. Reid, G. Zho, Impact behaviour of fibre-reinforced composite materials
and structures, CRC Press, 2000.

[2] D. Varas, J. Artero-Guerrero, J. Pernas-Sánchez, J. López-Puente, Analy-
sis of high velocity impacts of steel cylinders on thin carbon/epoxy woven
laminates, Compos. Struct. 95 (2013) 623 – 629.

[3] J. Artero-Guerrero, J. Pernas-Sánchez, D. Varas, J. López-Puente, Nu-
merical analysis of CFRP fluid-filled tubes subjected to high-velocity im-
pact, Compos. Struct. 96 (2013) 286 – 297.

[4] J. Hodgkinson, Mechanical testing of advanced fibre composites, CRC
Press, 2000.

[5] S. Abrate, Modeling of impacts on composite structures, Compos. Struct.
51 (2001) 129 – 138.

[6] P. Feraboli, K. T. Kedward, A new composite structure impact perfor-
mance assessment program, Compos. Sci. Technol. 66 (2006) 1336 –
1347.

[7] C. S. Lopes, O. Seresta, Y. Coquet, Z. Gürdal, P. P. Camanho, B. Thuis,
Low-velocity impact damage on dispersed stacking sequence laminates.
part I: Experiments, Compos. Sci. Technol. 69 (2009) 926 – 936.

[8] V. Tita, J. de Carvalho, D. Vandepitte, Failure analysis of low veloc-
ity impact on thin composite laminates: Experimental and numerical ap-
proaches, Compos. Struct. 83 (2008) 413 – 428.

[9] M. Aktaş, C. Atas, B. M. Işten, R. Karakuzu, An experimental investiga-
tion of the impact response of composite laminates, Compos. Struct. 87
(2009) 307 – 313.

[10] C. Li, N. Hu, Y. Yin, H. Sekine, H. Fukunaga, Low-velocity impact-
induced damage of continuous fiber-reinforced composite laminates. Part
I. An fem numerical model, Composites Part A 33 (2002) 1055 – 1062.

[11] E. V. Gonzàlez, P. Maimí, P. P. Camanho, A. Turon, J. A. Mayugo, Simu-
lation of drop-weight impact and compression after impact tests on com-
posite laminates, Compos. Struct. 94 (2012) 3364 – 3378.

[12] I. H. Choi, Low-velocity impact analysis of composite laminates under
initial in-plane load, Compos. Struct. 86 (2008) 251 – 257. Fourteenth
International Conference on Composite Structures (ICCS/14).

[13] R. Olsson, Analytical prediction of large mass impact damage in com-
posite laminates, Composites Part A 32 (2001) 1207 – 1215.

[14] R. Olsson, M. V. Donadon, B. G. Falzon, Delamination threshold load for
dynamic impact on plates, Int. J. Solids Struct. 43 (2006) 3124 – 3141.

[15] A. Orifici, I. Herszberg, R. Thomson, Review of methodologies for
composite material modelling incorporating failure, Compos. Struct. 86
(2008) 194 – 210. Fourteenth International Conference on Composite
Structures (ICCS/14).

[16] M. Hinton, A. Kaddour, P. Soden, Failure criteria in fibre-reinforced-
polymer composites, Elsevier, 2004.

[17] M. V. Donadon, L. Iannucci, B. G. Falzon, J. M. Hodgkinson, S. F. M.
de Almeida, A progressive failure model for composite laminates sub-
jected to low velocity impact damage, Comput. Struct. 86 (2008) 1232 –
1252.

[18] S. Oller, E. Car, J. Lubliner, Definition of a general implicit orthotropic
yield criterion, Comput. Method Appl. M 192 (2003) 895–912.

[19] J. Wang, P. Qiao, On the energy release rate and mode mix of delaminated
shear deformable composite plates, Int. J. Solids Struct. 41 (2004) 2757
– 2779.

[20] Z. Zou, S. Reid, S. Li, P. Soden, Application of a delamination model to
laminated composite structures, Compos. Struct. 56 (2002) 375 – 389.

[21] F. Shen, K. Lee, T. Tay, Modeling delamination growth in laminated
composites, Compos. Sci. Technol. 61 (2001) 1239 – 1251.

[22] E. Car, S. Oller, E. Oñate, A large strain plasticity model for anisotropic
materials - composite material application, Int. J. Plast. 17 (2001) 1437 –
1463.

[23] K. V. Williams, R. Vaziri, A. Poursartip, A physically based continuum
damage mechanics model for thin laminated composite structures, Int. J.
Solids Struct. 40 (2003) 2267 – 2300.

[24] L. Iannucci, Progressive failure modelling of woven carbon composite
under impact, Int. J. Impact Eng. 32 (2006) 1013 – 1043.

[25] P. Maimí, P. Camanho, J. Mayugo, C. Dàvila, A continuum damage
model for composite laminates: Part I: Constitutive model, Mech. Mater.
39 (2007) 897 – 908.

[26] N. Pagano, G. Schoeppner, Delamination of polymer matrix composites:
Problems and assessment, in: A. Kelly, C. Zweben (Eds.), Comprehen-
sive Composite Materials, Pergamon, Oxford, 2000, pp. 433 – 528.

[27] R. Krueger, Virtual crack closure technique: history, approach and appli-
cations, Appl. Mech. Rev. 57 (2004) 109–143.

[28] M. Ortiz, A. Pandolfi, Finite-deformation irreversible cohesive elements
for three-dimensional crack propagation analysis, Int. J. Numer. Methods
Eng. 44 (1999) 1267 – 1282.

[29] A. Turon, P. Camanho, J. Costa, C. Dàvila, A damage model for the
simulation of delamination in advanced composites under variable-mode
loading, Mech. Mater. 38 (2006) 1072 – 1089.

[30] A. Turon, P. Camanho, J. Costa, J. Renart, Accurate simulation of de-
lamination growth under mixed-mode loading using cohesive elements:
Definition of interlaminar strengths and elastic stiffness, Compos. Struct.

11



92 (2010) 1857 – 1864.
[31] Q. Yang, B. Cox, Cohesive models for damage evolution in laminated

composites, Int. J. Fract. 133 (2005) 107–137.
[32] P. Camanho, C. Dàvila, M. De Moura, Numerical simulation of mixed-

mode progressive delamination in composite materials, J. Compos. Mater.
37 (2003) 1415–1438.

[33] C. Balzani, W. Wagner, An interface element for the simulation of de-
lamination in unidirectional fiber-reinforced composite laminates, Eng.
Fract. Mech. 75 (2008) 2597 – 2615.

[34] R. Borg, L. Nilsson, K. Simonsson, Modeling of delamination using a
discretized cohesive zone and damage formulation, Compos. Sci. Tech-
nol. 62 (2002) 1299 – 1314.

[35] C. Lopes, P. Camanho, Z. Gürdal, P. Maimí, E. Gonzàlez, Low-velocity
impact damage on dispersed stacking sequence laminates. Part II: Numer-
ical simulations, Compos. Sci. Technol. 69 (2009) 937 – 947.

[36] A. Turon, C. Dàvila, P. Camanho, J. Costa, An engineering solution for
mesh size effects in the simulation of delamination using cohesive zone
models, Eng. Fract. Mech. 74 (2007) 1665 – 1682.

[37] X. Martinez, S. Oller, Numerical simulation of matrix reinforced compos-
ite materials subjected to compression loads, Archives of Computational
Methods in Engineering 16 (2009) 357–397.

[38] X. Martínez, F. Rastellini, S. Oller, F. Flores, E. Oñate, Computation-
ally optimized formulation for the simulation of composite materials and
delamination failures, Composites Part B 42 (2011) 134 – 144.

[39] F. Rastellini, S. Oller, O. Salomón, E. Oñate, Composite materials non-
linear modelling for long fibre-reinforced laminates: Continuum basis,
computational aspects and validations, Comput. Struct. 86 (2008) 879 –
896.

[40] X. Martínez, S. Oller, E. Barbero, Study of delamination in composites by
using the serial/parallel mixing theory and a damage formulation, in: Me-
chanical Response of Composites, volume 10 of Computational Methods
in Applied Sciences, Springer Netherlands, 2008, pp. 119–140.

[41] X. Martínez, S. Oller, F. Rastellini, A. H. Barbat, A numerical procedure
simulating RC structures reinforced with FRP using the serial/parallel
mixing theory, Comput. Struct. 86 (2008) 1604 – 1618.

[42] J. Oliver, M. Cervera, S. Oller, Isotropic damage models and smeared
crack analysis of concrete., Proceedings of SCI-C 1990 (1990) 945–958.

[43] J. Lubliner, Plasticity Theory, Dover Books on Engineering Series, Dover
Publications, 2008.

[44] ASTM-D7136, Standard test method for measuring the damage resistance
of a fibre-reinforced polymer matrix composite to a drop-weight impact
event, Tech. rep. West Conshohocken (PA, USA): American Society for
Testing and Materials (ASTM), 2007.

[45] Y. Shi, T. Swait, C. Soutis, Modelling damage evolution in composite
laminates subjected to low velocity impact, Compos. Struct. 94 (2012)
2902 – 2913.

[46] C. Li, N. Hu, J. Cheng, H. Fukunaga, H. Sekine, Low-velocity impact-
induced damage of continuous fiber-reinforced composite laminates. Part
II. Verification and numerical investigation, Composites Part A: Applied
Science and Manufacturing 33 (2002) 1063 – 1072.

[47] E. Gonzàlez, P. Maimí, P. Camanho, C. Lopes, N. Blanco, Effects of
ply clustering in laminated composite plates under low-velocity impact
loading, Composites Science and Technology 71 (2011) 805 – 817.

12


