



















































FAMENA Template


Brodogradnja/Shipbilding  Volume 66 Number 4, 2015. 

39 

 

Inmaculada Ortigosa 

Julio García-Espinosa 

Marcel·la Castells 

 

ISSN 0007-215X 

eISSN 1845-5859 

A REAL TIME DECISION SUPPORT SYSTEM FOR THE 

ADJUSTMENT OF SAILBOAT RIGGING 

 

UDC 629.5.525.4:629.5.072 

Original scientific paper 

Summary 

The operational complexity and performance requirements of modern racing yachts demand the 

use of advanced applications, such as a decision support system (DSS) able to assist crew 

members during navigation. In this article, the authors describe a near-time computational 

solver as the main piece of a DSS which analyses and monitors the behaviour of sails and 

rigging. The solver is made up of two different interconnected tools: an iterative Fluid-

Structure Interaction algorithm and an advanced Wireless Sensor Network to monitor rigging. 

The real-time DSS quantifies crew manoeuvres in physical terms, which are reproduced by a 

simulation program. It can be used in the design phase of sailing yachts and as an aid for real-

time boat performance optimisation and accident prevention. This novel DSS is a useful tool 

for navigation, especially in races. 

Key words: racing yacht; trim parameters; decision support system; rigging monitoring; 

1. Introduction 

The enormous improvements made in yacht design in the last decades have resulted in 

significantly enhanced performance of these vessels. However, growing competitiveness 

among designers has increased the demand for detailed experimental and computational 

research to better understand the behaviour of racing yachts and optimise their design. 

Moreover, the operational complexity and performance requirements of modern racing yachts 

require the use of advanced applications.  

Some applications are used for optimal selection of a mast and standing rigging [1] 

whereas others focus on the development of expert decision support systems for ship design 

[2]. Other contributions have addressed computer-aided design of ship systems automation [3, 

4, 5 and 6]. Two more examples of applications are a decision support system (DSS) for vessel 

fleet scheduling [7] and a knowledge-based DSS for shipboard damage control [8].  



Inmaculada Ortigosa                          A real Time Decision Support System for the adjustment of Sailboat Rigging  
Julio García-Espinosa 

Marcel·la Castells      

       

40 

 

The above works have helped build the background to ship design, building and 

management requirements so that research on DSS applied to ship security and control is 

increased. However, none of these studies are focused on any specific type of ships, e.g. racing 

yachts. 

Sailing is the art of controlling a boat with large foils called sails. A sailor manages the 

force of the wind on the sails by adjusting the rigging in order to control the direction and speed 

of the boat. Sails are designed to be able to take the optimal shape for all sailing conditions. To 

obtain the best sail shape, the crew adjust the traveller position and sail twist and camber. The 

fluid-structure interaction of sails and rigging is related to these manoeuvres.  

The performance of the sail/rigging configuration can be analysed by two aerodynamic 

parameters, i.e. lift coefficient and drag coefficient. [9] investigated the relation between 

changes in sail loads and in trim. The results showed that sail turn (change in traveller position) 

has an effect on lift and drag whereas camber has no influence on the former and only a slight 

influence on the latter. In order to study the behaviour of sails and rigging during navigation, it 

is necessary to consider all manoeuvrability variables. No software for operational computation 

of structure response to wind conditions considering variations in trim parameters introduced 

by the crew is currently available. One of the motivations of this work was to develop a novel 

operational navigation tool using variations in trim parameters to support crew decision 

making.  

Structural failures of racing yachts are not infrequent. Just as an example, the Groupama 

team broke the mast during the last Volvo Ocean race. A real-time monitoring and structure 

analysis tool could help prevent damage to the structure and injuries to the crew. The 

automation of emergency management operations is today driven by complex technology 

architectures called damage control system (DSC) [10]. A DCS is an information-retrieval and 

equipment-control system that gives ship personnel the ability to detect, analyse and handle 

various types of damage situations based on the collection and processing of vast quantities of 

shipboard information. However, no DCS addressed specifically designed for sailing yachts has 

yet been developed.  

The main goal of this article is to present an operational tool that can be the main piece of 

a decision support system (DSS) to assist the sailing yacht crew during navigation, as well as to 

prevent accidents, just as a DCS does. 

Our work focuses on the development of a program for monitoring/simulation of the 

behaviour of upwind sails and rigging which helps the crew optimise real-time yacht 

performance. Rigging is monitored to obtain the boat structure trim introduced by the crew, and 

the aerodynamic coefficients and structure response to wind conditions and trim, which is 

valuable information for the crew, are computed. 

 The monitoring/simulation program requires the development of a solver composed of 

two interrelated tools:  

- A Wireless Sensor Network (WSN) to monitor rigging and sails and capture trim. 
- A Fluid-Structure Interaction (FSI) algorithm to compute the performance of 

sail/rigging configurations. It integrates two solvers: (1) a fluid dynamics solver based 

on the Boundary Element Method (BEM) [11] to calculate the aerodynamic forces for a 

given sail shape in upwind conditions; (2) a Finite Element Analysis (FEA) solver [12 

and 13] of the structural behaviour of rigging and sails which considers aerodynamic 

forces and shroud and stay tension, as well as sheet tension.  

 



A real Time Decision Support System for the adjustment of Sailboat Rigging        Immaculada Ortigosa 

                                                                                                                                                Julio García-Espinosa 

                                                                                                                                                      Marcel·la Castells 

The WSN quantifies crew manoeuvres in physical terms. These data is used as boundary 

conditions for the FSI tool. The model geometry is adapted according to the trim parameters, 

and then the performance of the new configuration is computed in real time.  

Because of difficulties in dynamically measuring boundary conditions with precision and 

reproducing a manoeuvre in real time, only stationary conditions are analysed. This is an 

acceptable simplification because it can be assumed that, at the end of a manoeuvre, the sailing 

yacht operates in a quasi-stationary regime. 

The resulting solver, named Sailing, provides real-time information (aerodynamic 

coefficients) about the trim and rigid structure to avoid problems such as breakage of the mast. 

Real-time monitoring is an innovation in navigation, especially in races. 

Two of the most important requirements for Sailing are reduced computational cost and 

ability to adapt the analysis to the real position of sails. They are the main guidelines to select 

the calculation algorithms. 

The two interconnected tools that make up Sailing are presented further in this paper. 

The most relevant and original aspects of this work are the communication between the 

sensors and the FSI algorithm, and the methods to adapt the structure to real-time trim 

parameters. The sensors capture the trim parameters and these are communicated to the FSI 

algorithm to adjust the boundary conditions for structural analysis. That is, there is real-time 

consideration of the manoeuvre parameters in the determination of fluid-structure interaction. 

Near-time analysis is then conducted so that the results are immediately available to assist 

skippers in their decisions. 

Next, simulation data are used to adjust an Artificial Neural Network in order to know in 

advance the best trim angle for certain wind conditions. 

The FSI solver is coded in C++ and then the resulting code is integrated with the 

pre/post-process system GiD1. The FSI code is extended with a TCL2 interface to provide the 

necessary communication routines with the sensor network. 

The outline of this paper is as follows. In section 2, the FSI solver is presented. Section 3 

focuses on the sensor network. The interface that connects the FSI program with the sensor 

network data is described in section 4. Section 5 gives some application examples. The paper 

ends with a discussion section and some conclusions. 

2. The fluid structure interaction solver 

Sails are air foils that work by using an airflow set up by the wind and the motion of the 

boat. The performance of a specific sail configuration is obtained by the coupled effect of the 

airflow around the sails and structure response to the generated forces.  

Rigging adjustments to achieve the desired amount of camber and twist are interrelated. 

That is the reason why structural analysis of all rigging elements in a fluid-structure interaction 

algorithm is necessary for the study of sail performance. 

As said before, the FSI simulation algorithm integrates two solvers: (1) a fluid dynamics 

solver to calculate the aerodynamic forces for a given sail shape in upwind conditions; (2) a 

Finite Element Analysis (FEA) solver of the structural behaviour of rigging and sails. The 

aerodynamic forces and shroud and stay tension, as well as sheet tension, are taken into 

account.  

                                                 
1 GiD: The universal, adaptive and user-friendly pre and postprocessor http://gid.cimne.upc.es/ 

 
2 TCL: Tool Command Language http://www.tcl.tk/ 

 

http://gid.cimne.upc.es/
http://www.tcl.tk/


Inmaculada Ortigosa                          A real Time Decision Support System for the adjustment of Sailboat Rigging  
Julio García-Espinosa 

Marcel·la Castells      

       

42 

 

In order to study sail and rigging performance of a boat, the first necessary step is the 

definition of the flying sail shape to be analysed. In this work, the flying sail is obtained by the 

fluid-structure interaction solver, but the iterative solution process starts with the designed sail 

plan geometry. A Graphic User Interface (GUI) based on GiD is developed to create or import 

the structure (sail and rigging) and define analysis data.  

Flow and structural analysis, validation cases and interaction algorithm are detailed 

below.  

2.1 Flow Analysis 

The first numerical simulation of sails was conducted at the Massachusetts Institute of 

Technology in the 60s, when [14] developed Vortex Lattice Method (VLM) and flat wakes to 

investigate upwind sails. Since potential flow approximation is a reasonable approach for 

predicting upwind sail performance, provided that separation is restricted to small areas within 

the vicinity of the mast or leading edge, VLM is one of the computational methods commonly 

used to predict flow over sails [15, 16]. This method is relatively fast and suited for computing 

flow over combinations of highly cambered, thin lifting surfaces likes sails.  

Provided that separation of the flow over the sail is restricted to small areas within the 

vicinity of the mast or leading edge, potential flow approximation is a reasonable approach. 

Thus, fluid flow must fulfil the Laplace equation as long as the boundary conditions are a zero 

normal velocity component and the Kutta condition at each trailing segment. The Laplace 

equation solution can be obtained by distributing elementary solutions over the problem 

boundaries (body surface SB and wake surface Sw). In our case of study, the sail surface 

carrying the continuous distribution of doublicity is discretised into a set of vortex ring 

elements, each one carrying a locally constant value of doublicity (Γ). The Biot-Savart law is 

used to evaluate the velocity at each collocation point by each ring element. The boundary 

condition of zero normal velocity at each of the collocation points results in a set of algebraic 

equations. The solution of this set of equations results in the vector , which 

represents the doublicity of each ring element.  

A preconditioned Bi-Conjugate Gradient method (BiCG) is used to solve the system of 

linear equations. Once the circulation of each singularity element is known, it is possible to 

calculate total flow velocity, pressures and loads. 

[17] presented an alternative interpretation and implementation of the Vortex Lattice 

Method studied by [15]. The difference between this method and a general one, such as that 

proposed by [11], lies in the calculation of pressures and forces. The velocity induced by the 

doublicity distribution at the collocation point is split into two components: one normal   
indn

u
,

 

to the surface (where n  indicates the normal direction) and the other  
indlindm

uu
,,

,  in the 

tangent plane of the surface at the collocation point (where m and l indicate the two directions 

in the tangent plane of the surface). The free stream velocity,


Q , is transformed into the 

coordinates of the vortex ring element  



,,,

,,
nlm

qqqQ . 

In order to obtain the velocity at the collocation point on both sides of the sail, half of the 

velocity jump is added to the mean velocity to give the upper surface velocity, and half of the 

velocity jump is subtracted to give the lower surface velocity. On the other hand, the velocity 

jump along direction s , which is s


, is obtained using a simple finite difference 

approximation.  



A real Time Decision Support System for the adjustment of Sailboat Rigging        Immaculada Ortigosa 

                                                                                                                                                Julio García-Espinosa 

                                                                                                                                                      Marcel·la Castells 

The free stream and the velocity induced by the doublicity distribution are combined with 

the velocity jump to obtain the velocity at each collocation point on both sides of the sail. 





















0,

2

1
,

2

1
,,,,

l

Γ
uq

m

Γ
uq

indllindmmup
V

 

 

(1) 





















0,

2

1
,

2

1
,,,,

l

Γ
uq

m

Γ
uq

indllindmmdown
V

 

 

 

(2) 

In this way, the method computes pressure at each side of the sail: 

 22
2

1
  QVpp upup

     (3) 

 22
2

1


 QVpp
downdown

     (4) 
2

1 












Q

V
C

up

up

     (5) 
2

1 












Q

V
C down

down

     (6) 

The method was codified into the solver to calculate coefficients and forces generated by 

a flow around a thin lifting surface.  

Some validation cases were made to test the flow analysis. An example was the 

reproduction of an experiment carried out in the wind tunnel of the Chungnam National 

University of Korea [18]. The same geometry was tested using the flow analysis presented in 

this paper achieving an accuracy measurement of 90% for the lift and 75% for the drag.  

2.2 Structural Analysis 

The description of flow is supplemented by considering fluid-structure interaction. The 

particularity of sails is due to their high flexibility, and therefore a non-linear theory must be 

developed for the structural calculation [19, 20]. Rigging adjustments to achieve the desired 

amount of camber and twist are interrelated. That is why structural analysis of all rigging 

elements in a fluid-structure interaction algorithm is necessary for the study of sail 

performance. 

Once the aerodynamic forces are evaluated, the next step is to compute the structure 

response to them. The method selected to analyse the structure and compute its response is the 

well-known Finite Element Method (FEM). 

The rigging structure of a typical sailing yacht mainly consists of mainsail, jib, mast, 

spreaders, forestay, backstay, shrouds, main sheet and jib sheet. The different parts of the 

rigging and sails are modelled with membrane, truss and beam structural elements. 

The solution algorithm is based on the minimisation of the potential energy. Potential 

energy 
TOT

E includes (a) the strain energy of elastic distortion )(x , which is calculated 

depending on the type of element (membrane, cables and beams), and (b) the potential of 

applied loads  , by which they have the capacity to do work in case of displacement of the 

structure. The structures are analysed after each configuration change made by the crew, but the 



Inmaculada Ortigosa                          A real Time Decision Support System for the adjustment of Sailboat Rigging  
Julio García-Espinosa 

Marcel·la Castells      

       

44 

 

resulting configuration is considered in a stationary state. Therefore, the equilibrium 

configuration is defined by the principle of stationary potential energy. 

A description of all the elements is provided in the following subsections. 

2.2.1 Sails 

The behaviour of sails requires large displacement analysis of very thin structures. The 

models used to study sails are geometrically nonlinear, and since strains in modern sails remain 

low, constitutive laws of the material can be considered as linear, and stresses on the structure 

as linear functions of local strains. It is assumed that sails can be accurately modelled as 

membranes. Three-node triangular elements are used to discretise sails. The calculation method 

was presented by [21].  

One of the validation tests was the reproduction of the Hencky’s problem, which 

considers the deformation of an initially flat circular membrane with fixed edges, loaded with a 

constant pressure. The maximum deformation of the membrane reached 0.0330m in the centre 

part. This value almost matches the maximum deformation of 0.0331m obtained by Pauletti 

[22].  

2.2.2 Cables 

A sailboat’s rigging is composed of many ropes and cables, mainly main sheet, jib sheet, 

forestay, backstay and shrouds. These elements can be modelled using bar finite elements. 

They can only transmit axial forces, which mean that the nodes of bar elements only have 

translational degrees of freedom. Therefore, it is possible to discretise a cable with a set of 

articulated bar elements. The resulting truss will be a cable that only transmits traction forces.   

The model implemented in this work was presented by [23]. It includes a total 

Lagrangian description using the standard strain definition and assumes an elastic material. The 

cables are discretised with two-node linear elements, where the strain is assumed constant 

along the element and the material is considered to be homogeneous and isotropic. 

The cables used in our structure are pre-stressed, as a result of the stress applied to trim 

the sail. This action leads to a cable strain. By exerting a constant stress on a cable element and 

considering a linear stress strain relationship, the potential strain energy and its gradient can be 

easily computed. 

One of the validation cases considered a cable with fixed ends loaded with its own 

weight. Initially the cable had a V-shape, and the expected deformation was to obtain a U-

shape. The reactions at the ends should be equal to the weight of the cable. 

The properties of the material considered were E=5.01·106N/m2 and ρ=100kg/m2, the 

length of the cable was L=14.1421 m and the area of the cable was A=0.0005 m2. Considering 

the density of the material and the dimensions of the cable, the weight of the cable was 

P=69.36N. The reactions in each end were 34.681N and the total reaction was 

R=2·34.681=69.372N, obtaining the expected results. 

2.2.3 Beams 

The other elements of the structure (mast, spreaders and boom) resist axial and 

transversal forces, and bending moments. Therefore, they are modelled using beam theory [12, 

24].  The beams are modelled as a two-node beam element with six degrees of freedom per 

node. The mast and the boom are connected by a hinge to allow rotation of the boom around 

the mast. To introduce the capability of releasing a degree of freedom, the algorithm presented 

in [25] to obtain the condensed stiffness matrix is adapted to simulate the hinge between the 

mast and the boom.  



A real Time Decision Support System for the adjustment of Sailboat Rigging        Immaculada Ortigosa 

                                                                                                                                                Julio García-Espinosa 

                                                                                                                                                      Marcel·la Castells 

One of the validation cases was the simulation of a vertical cantilever with a horizontal 

load. The problem had the following parameters: length L=14m, A=21.36cm2, Ix=5.8·10
-6m4, 

Iy=1.35·10
-5m4, J=1.9·10-5m4, G= 3.946·1010 N/m2 and E=1.105·1011N/m2. 

The lowest node had restricted translations and rotations in all directions, and the top 

node had a punctual load of 500 N applied in the x direction. 

It was possible to calculate the displacement of the top node with the following analytical 

expression:  

cm
IE

LF
Y

y

7.30
10·35.1·10·105.1·3

14·500

··3

·
511

33

max 0


     (7) 

The displacement of the top node obtained was 30.6 cm and the reaction was R=500N, 

which are both expected results. 

2.2.4 Equilibrium configuration 

The solution procedure involves generating the structure model with the above elements, 

imposing boundary or support conditions and solving the equations to obtain nodal quantities 

by imposing the minimisation of the potential energy.  

A conservative mechanical system has an energy potential,
TOT

E , which includes the 

strain energy of elastic distortion ( ) x  and the potential of applied loads  .  

In the problem at hand, the airflow applies external loads on the structure, causing the 

displacement and strain of the elements. Given the nodal displacement vector x  and nodal 

flow forces f , the potential of applied loads is xf
T

 . 

The strain energy  x  is calculated according to the finite element analysed (membrane, 
truss or beam).  

The total potential energy is 

  xfx T
elements

TOT
E  

 

(8) 

And thus the equilibrium configuration is found from the stationary value of the total 

potential energy: 

  0



 fx

x elements

TOT
E

  
 

   (9) 

This non-linear system of equations is solved by a Quasi-Newton iterative procedure. The 

computer code uses the limited memory Broyden-Fletcher-Goldfarb-Shanno method (BFGS) to 

tackle large scale problems, as described by [26]. A line search procedure as described by [27] 

is implemented, too. 

2.3 Fluid-Structure Interaction Algorithm 

Complete modelling of sail steady equilibrium involves a fluid-structure interaction 

analysis. The presence of the sail modifies the flow, whilst the latter applies aerodynamic 

forces on the former, changing its geometry.  

[28, 29, 30, 31] dealt with the numerical problem by coupling FEM and VLM solvers. 

[32] pointed out that one of the reasons for poor convergence of the FEM-VLM is the use of 

the same discretisation scheme for the FEM and VLM. That is why this work uses different 

discretisation schemes for these solvers.  



Inmaculada Ortigosa                          A real Time Decision Support System for the adjustment of Sailboat Rigging  
Julio García-Espinosa 

Marcel·la Castells      

       

46 

 

The VLM selected to compute flow forces on the sails uses quadrilateral elements, even 

though these elements can create both structured and unstructured meshes. The membrane 

element selected to compute sail response is based on three-node triangular elements. In order 

to fulfil the requirements of both methods, a structured mesh of quadrilateral3 elements is 

generated and split internally by the program into triangular elements (Fig. 1). This procedure 

allows the two meshes to have coincident nodes facilitating data transfer between the two 

meshes. 

 
 

Fig. 1 Fluid Solver mesh and Structural Solver mesh 

This fluid-structure interaction method is iterative: starting from an initial geometry, the 

flow forces are calculated, from which sail displacements are then evaluated, and finally the 

flow simulation is repeated with the updated geometry and the structural calculation is in turn 

repeated with the updated flow forces until convergence is achieved. The grid is thus modified 

at each fluid-structure iteration. Lagrangian advance techniques are used to fit the sail grid 

surface from the deformed sail calculated in the previous iteration. Lagrangian updating of the 

grid is done automatically by the algorithm as a hidden procedure for users. 

The first step of the calculation is to apply the trim parameters to the basic structure as 

initial loads and boundary conditions. In order to modify these parameters in execution time, a 

TCL interface is implemented. This interface includes several communication routines 

allowing solvers to be connected with a network of sensors located on the rigging to obtain the 

trim parameters in real time. 

From the interaction method in [33], an embedded iteration scheme is used to achieve 

convergence of the iterative procedure of the potential flow solution process, as well as the 

solution of the non-linear system of equations to calculate equilibrium in the structural code. 

External flow is computed by taking into account the sail configuration (aerodynamic step). 

Once the flow field is given, the new configuration is computed (structural step). This leads to a 

new external flow because of the updated geometry of the sail and so on. The sequence of 

aerodynamic/structural steps is repeated until the stopping condition is satisfied.  

If the difference between the nodal forces computed at two consecutive iterations of the 

flow solver is less than a tolerance, it is sufficient to consider that the change in geometry will 

be small compared to the previous step. Then, the stopping criteria will be met. Since k  and 

1k are two consecutive iterations between the fluid solver and the structural solver, the 

stopping criteria will be 

tolnode
k

kk







f

ff
1

 

 

(10) 

Different numerical tests showed that a tolerance of 0.1 has little influence on the result. 

In practice, most nodes have small change (1·10-5-1·10-8). The error norm is usually defined by 

the nodes at the upper end of the mainsail, where the results of two consecutive iterations differ 

more than for the other sail nodes.  



A real Time Decision Support System for the adjustment of Sailboat Rigging        Immaculada Ortigosa 

                                                                                                                                                Julio García-Espinosa 

                                                                                                                                                      Marcel·la Castells 

The scheme of the calculation process, including the grid updating algorithm inserted in 

the iteration process between the fluid solver and the structural solver, is shown in Fig. 2. 

 
 

Fig. 2 Fluid-Structure interaction algorithm 

3. Monitoring System 

Despite the efforts invested in the development of monitoring systems for racing yachts 

in the last decades, to the author’s knowledge, no flexible system able to be adapted to any 

rigging design and measure the structural response of elements and identify current operating 

configurations in real time is yet available. Therefore, a new monitoring system was developed 

[34].  

 

Fig. 3 Sensor element for monitoring traveller position (3DRRM) 



Inmaculada Ortigosa                          A real Time Decision Support System for the adjustment of Sailboat Rigging  
Julio García-Espinosa 

Marcel·la Castells      

       

48 

 

The electronics of the device are based on the platform Waspmote3, commercialised by 

Libelium. The sensor, named ‘3D Remote Rigging Monitor’ or 3DRRM (Fig. 3), was designed 

to measure stress on any rigging element.  

Experimental tests were designed to demonstrate that standard instrumentation using 

strain gauges is sensitive enough to accurately monitor current rigging elements. Furthermore, 

it was necessary to proof whether the output obtained by these means was also sensitive to the 

orientation between the gauge and the principal strain directions.  

Eight strain gauges configured in two full Wheatstone bridges were installed in the 

3DRRM. Different tensile tests were carried out to evaluate the operation of the device, 

showing a positive performance in all tested cases. Experimental setup for these two 

configurations is shown in Figure 4. 

 

                                                 
3 Waspmote http://www.libelium.com/products/waspmote 

 

  

 

Fig.4 Experimental setup of 3DRRM tests (configuration modes: Force and Angle, left image, and Force, 

right image) 

 

The designed sensors could process measured strain data by applying Artificial Neural 

Networks (ANN) algorithms [35, 36] to unambiguously establish the direction and magnitude 

of the traction force acting on the element. The function to be approximated by the ANN in this 

case had two inputs (strains ε1 ε2, measured on each side of the device) and two outputs; load 

and pull angle of the sheet   
21

,,  fF . 

 The ANN structure used had one hidden layer of perceptron neurons. The 

learning/validation was carried out for different number of neurons in the hidden layer. The 

best fitting with the validation data was the criteria used to select the optimum number. 

 

To test the neural network, 320 FEM analysis and 76 points obtained in the laboratory 

tests were made available. For the validation task, 80% of the simulation data and 46 points of 

the experimental data were selected randomly as training data. The remainder data was used for 

validation purposes. The training data was used to adjust the hidden internal parameters of the 

neural network. Once the neural network was adjusted to the data, it was executed with the 

inputs of the validation data, and these results were compared with the validation data results. 

This comparison was done by creating a linear regression and calculating the coefficient of 

determination.  



A real Time Decision Support System for the adjustment of Sailboat Rigging        Immaculada Ortigosa 

                                                                                                                                                Julio García-Espinosa 

                                                                                                                                                      Marcel·la Castells 

Several network configurations were used but the optimal fitting was obtained with four 

neurons at the hidden layer. The neural network fitting was almost perfect, obtaining a 

coefficient of determination of 0.996.  

This way, it was possible to identify the operating conditions of the rigging. 

4. Integration of a monitoring system with the FSI Algorithm 

As stated above, our main goal was to develop a near-time simulation tool of the 

behaviour of sails and rigging to help the crew optimise real-time yacht performance. To do 

this, the actual configuration of the sail structure must be known in advance. 

The parameters defining this configuration are the so-called trim parameters. The trim 

parameters considered in this work are angle to the wind, backstay load, forestay load, shroud 

load, main sheet load and angle, and jib sheet load and angle. 

 Shroud and stay stress is adjusted at dock. During sailing, the crew trim the sails by 

varying traveller position (twist) and adjusting sheet stress (camber). Structural and potential 

flow calculation depends on these adjustments. Their initial values are inserted into the GUI as 

initial data. This information is used to update the geometry and then compute the performance 

of this new configuration with the coupled fluid-structure interaction algorithm. 

To measure the trim parameters, a 3DRRM [34] element is attached to any rope or cable 

of the sailing yacht (main sheet, jib sheet, shrouds or stays) for monitoring. The wireless 

monitoring elements provide the trim parameters (shroud load, stay load, main sheet load and 

angle, jib sheet load and angle, main traveller and jib traveller position) applied by the crew and 

the wind intensity and angle.  

Data acquired by the WSN are transmitted to perform the aerodynamics/structural 

calculation via a C++ interface to interpret TCL scripts. This information is used as inputs and 

boundary conditions to the calculation/simulation system. The TCL interface reads the 

‘external initial conditions’ and calls the C++ functions required to update the geometry.  

Furthermore, this system can access ‘real time’ data obtained by the WSN and update the 

boundary conditions to be used by the FSI solver accordingly.  

Shroud load, stay load, main sheet load and jib sheet load exert a constant stress on cable 

elements. In addition, when the crew move the travellers (main traveller and jib traveller), their 

angle must be ‘virtually’ reproduced by our geometry. In order to introduce in our solver 

provide our solver with the capability to adapt sail position into the solver, an algorithm was 

created using the ideas in [34]. A particular sail trim is carried out by wrapping the jib sheet 

around the forestay and the mainsail around the mast. 

Trim performance is analysed for a certain wind condition and structure configuration. If 

the wind condition changes or the crew change the structure configuration, a new performance 

analysis will be made. A rigging monitoring tool able to communicate in real time with the FSI 

solver is designed. This tool allows finding the boundary conditions which define the new 

structure configuration. Using these data, the performance of this trim is computed. Some 

validation cases were carried out to verify the results of this tool.   

5. Results. An application case 

One of the original aspects of the program is the communication between the sensors and 

the FSI algorithm. The sensors capture the trim parameters, which are communicated to the FSI 

algorithm for their adjustment. However, the performance of the complete tool cannot be 

validated with experimental data because these are very scarce. This is mainly due to two 

factors: (a) the difficulty in measuring the deformed shape of sails and the wind pattern 

producing the strain, and (b) the transient character of the phenomena involved, which makes 



Inmaculada Ortigosa                          A real Time Decision Support System for the adjustment of Sailboat Rigging  
Julio García-Espinosa 

Marcel·la Castells      

       

50 

 

the measurement of the exact instantaneous sail shape/wind pattern difficult. Performing a full 

scale test of sails and rigging is out of the question due to the dimensions necessary for the 

wind tunnel. Also, a model test would not be reliable for full scale extrapolation due to the 

difficulty in simulating sail and rigging elasticity. Thus, the benchmark validation performed in 

this work is the only way to check results. In the case under study, the accuracy of this model 

could be sufficient for practical purposes. 

The application examples presented in this section are based on the Totalboats GP42 

yacht, where the WSN was tested. The sail plan geometry and rigging of this boat were 

reproduced in our pre-processor system GiD (see Fig. 6). Next, the required structural 

properties of every element, the boundary conditions (desk nodes, free rotating nodes such as 

the join between the mast and cable element loads) and other data were entered.  

 

 
 

Fig. 5  Model of the GP42. Source Totalmar        Fig. 6  Model of the GP42 in GiD 

 

Case 1 

 

The following parameters were used for rigging case: 

 

- Apparent wind velocity is 8 m/s and apparent angle is 15°.  

- Main traveller position is (6.22, 0.34, -0.59). Hence, mainsail trim angle is 3.25
F

   . 

- Jib traveller position is (0.41, 0.88, -0.50). Hence, jib trim angle is 8.9
M

   . 

- Main sheet and jib sheet loads are 1500 N and 700 N, respectively.  

- Backstay load is 10000 N. 

- Forestay load is 20000 N.  

- Shroud load is 1000 N.  

The results for this first configuration with an apparent wind angle of 15° are shown in Fig. 7. 



A real Time Decision Support System for the adjustment of Sailboat Rigging        Immaculada Ortigosa 

                                                                                                                                                Julio García-Espinosa 

                                                                                                                                                      Marcel·la Castells 

 

  

 

 

 

 

Fig. 7. Results for the first configuration: Displacements, Cp and abnormal area for an apparent wind angle of 15º 

 

Areas where the pressure coefficient has an abnormal value, i.e. a negative value, are 

worth noting. This abnormal value can be attributed to two reasons: flow is turbulent or 

separated in these areas or these areas are flapping. 

In order to study the effect of apparent wind angle, in the second configuration, the 

apparent wind angle is 20°. The wind condition then changes, and therefore the crew trim the 

sails. The new trim parameters are detected by the integrated WSN: 

 

- Apparent wind velocity is 9 m/s and apparent angle is 20°. 

- Main traveller position is (6.22, 0.63, -0.59). 

- Jib traveller position is (0.37, 1.095, -0.5). 

- Main sheet and jib sheet loads are 2000N and 1000N, respectively. 

- Shroud load is 1200 N. 

- Backstay load is 15000 N. 

- Forestay load is 22000 N. 

These changes are introduced into Sailing by the TCL interface and the ‘virtual 

geometry’ is adjusted to these trim parameters. The performance of this new configuration is 

then computed. 



Inmaculada Ortigosa                          A real Time Decision Support System for the adjustment of Sailboat Rigging  
Julio García-Espinosa 

Marcel·la Castells      

       

52 

 

The response of this structure is shown in Fig. 8.  

 

 

 

 

 

Fig. 8 Results for the second configuration: Displacements, Cp and abnormal area for an apparent angle of 20º 

It is possible to see the changes in the pressure coefficient and the areas with abnormal 

values. 

Case 1 proves the versatility of the 3DRRM. The different configurations (shrouds, 

backstay, forestay, main sheet and jib sheet) were presented and analysed to obtain loads at 

each one of them by the 3DRRM. In this way, all the rigging elements could be monitored. 

Data obtained by the 3DRRM were communicated through the TCL interface, and the 

geometry could be virtually trimmed. FSI software calculation was executed with the new 

parameters to determine the appropriateness of the model. 

 

Case 2 

 

Separated or turbulent flow around the head of the sails is related to the effect of jib trim 

angle 
J

 and mainsail trim angle
M

 . Marchaj [37] suggested that the best position for the 

foresail relative to the mainsail and its trim angle varies with the apparent wind angle. The 

recommended close-hauled angle of the foresail trim was º20º7 
J

 . After several tests at 

Southampton University wind tunnel, Marchaj proved that, in order to obtain high aerodynamic 

efficiency, flow on the leeward side of the sail must be attached and steady. These tests 

demonstrated that at the small apparent wind angle of 20°, when º10
J

  and º5
M

 , 

attached flow is around most of both sails, and when the apparent wind angle increases to 25° 

and the trim angles are the same, turbulent or separated flow regions increase. 



A real Time Decision Support System for the adjustment of Sailboat Rigging        Immaculada Ortigosa 

                                                                                                                                                Julio García-Espinosa 

                                                                                                                                                      Marcel·la Castells 

Considering this and maintaining the values of the rest of variables and varying the 

apparent wind angle, the influence of jib trim angle,
F

 , is evaluated: 

 

- Apparent wind velocity is 8 m/s. 

- New main traveller position is (6.22, 0.63, -0.59). Mainsail trim angle is 5.78
M

   . 

- Main sheet and jib sheet loads are 2000N and 1500N, respectively. 

- Shroud load is 1200 N. 

- Backstay load is 15000 N. 

- Forestay load is 22000 N. 

 

The driving force for different apparent wind angles is shown in Fig. 9. 

 

Fig. 9 Driving Force when varying jib trim angle for different apparent wind angles 

 

As can be seen in Fig. 9, higher driving forces are obtained for jib trim angles closer to 

the centre line of the ship and larger apparent wind angles. It is important to emphasise that the 

program is intended for use in upwind conditions; therefore, the angles of incidence must be 

less than 35°. Apparent wind angles of 50° and 60° are too large to be considered as close 

hauled sailing. For these angles, flow is usually not attached to the sail and the approximation 

of potential flow is not correct. 

 

Moreover, when 
J

  is larger than 10º, the driving force decreases, which could be 

explained by Marchaj’s theory.  

Example 2 shows calculations to generate a driving force database based on trim 

parameters and wind conditions for the development of a Decision Support System (DSS) to 

help skippers during navigation. 

 



Inmaculada Ortigosa                          A real Time Decision Support System for the adjustment of Sailboat Rigging  
Julio García-Espinosa 

Marcel·la Castells      

       

54 

 

6. Conclusions 

The main objective of our work was to develop a simulation program of the behaviour of 

sails and rigging to help the crew optimise real-time yacht performance and prevent accidents. 

For this purpose, a tool named Sailing integrating a fluid solver, a structural solver and a TCL 

communication interface with a wireless rigging monitoring system was designed. This tool is 

able to compute the performance of sail/rigging configurations and monitor the state of the 

rigid structure.  

A flexible sensor, 3DRRM, was developed to measure stress on any rigging element of 

the boat. The concept of the sensor is based on measuring strain at different points of the 

device. These strain values are processed to unambiguously establish the direction and 

magnitude of the traction force acting on the element. 

A network of these sensors can be integrated with the FSI solver by means of a TCL 

communication interface. Using the information from the WSN, the trim parameters are entered 

into the solver as boundary conditions.  

Sailing provides the crew with real-time information (aerodynamic coefficients) to help 

them find the best trimming conditions, just like a DSS. Additionally, it informs about the state 

of the rigid structure to prevent accidents. Real-time monitoring is an innovation for navigation, 

especially for races. 

Sailing can also perform different simulations by systematically varying trim parameters 

to obtain a database of structure and driving force responses depending on wind conditions and 

trim parameters. This database would be the first step to develop a decision support system. 

With this DSS, sailing yacht skippers would be able to decide in advance the optimum 

trimming for a specific wind condition. 

 

7. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

This study was partially supported by the Ministry for Industry of Spain in the DSSAIL 

project TSI-020100-2008-647. This R&D project was promoted and developed by Totalmar, 

Compass IS, Barcelona School of Nautical Studies and the International Centre for Numerical 

Methods in Engineering. 

The authors also want to acknowledge Juan Miguel Boned, Francesc Campà, Alberto 

Fernández, Clara García, Jordi Jiménez, Albert Montserrat, and Alberto Tena for their support 

and collaboration in this work. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



A real Time Decision Support System for the adjustment of Sailboat Rigging        Immaculada Ortigosa 

                                                                                                                                                Julio García-Espinosa 

                                                                                                                                                      Marcel·la Castells 

REFERENCES 

[1] Zamarin, A., Matulja, T. and Hadjina, M. (2013) Methodology for Optimal Mast and Standing Rigging 

Selection of a Racing Yacht Using AHP and FEM. Brodogradnja, 64(1), 11-21. 

[2] Park, J.-H., Storch, R.L. (2002). Overview of ship-design expert systems. Expert Systems with Applications, 

19(3), 136-141. 

[3] Arendt, R. (2004). The application of an expert system for simulation investigations in the aided design of ship 

power system automation. Expert Systems with Applications, 27(3), 493-499. 

[4] Arendt, R., van Uden, E. (2011). A decision-making module for aiding ship system automation design: A 

knowledge-based approach. Expert Systems with Applications, 38(1), 410-416. 

[5] Kowalski, Z., Arendt, R., Meler-Kapcia, M., Zielnski, S. (2001). An expert system for aided design of ship 

systems automation. Expert systems with Applications, 20(3), 261-266. 

[6] Kowalski, Z., Meler-Kapcia, M., Zielinski, S., Drewka, M. (2005). CBR methodology application in an expert 

system for aided design ship’s engine room automation. Expert systems with Applications, 29(2), 256-263. 

[7] Fagerholt, K. (2004). A computer-based decision support system for vessel fleet scheduling- experience and 

future research. Decision Support Systems, 37(1), 35-47. 

[8] Calabrese F., Corallo A., Marghenta A., Zizzari, A.A. (2012). A knowledge-based decision support system for 

shipboard damage control. Expert systems with Applications, 39 (9), 8204-8211. 

[9] Keebber, B., Hochkirch, K. (2006) Numerical investigation on the effects of trim for a yacht rig. Proceedings 

on 2nd High Performance Yacht design Conference. Auckland, Australia. 

[10] Runnerstrom, E. (2003). Human systems integration and shipboard damage control. Naval Engineers Journal, 

115(4): 71-80. 

[11] Katz, J., Plotkin, A. (2006). Low speed aerodynamic (2nd edition) New York: Cambridge University Press. 

ISBN-13 978-0-521-66219-2. 

[12] Oñate, E. (2009) Introduction to the finite element methods for structural analysis. Linear static. Springer and 

CIMNE, Barcelona. 

[13] Zienkiewicz, O. (1982) El método de los elementos finitos. Reverte, Barcelona. 

[14] Milgram, J. (1968). The aerodynamics of sails. Proceedings of the 7th Symposium of Naval Hydrodynamic. 

1397-1434. 

[15] Jackson, P.S., Fiddes, S. (1995). A new view of the vortex lattice method. Technical Report. University of 

Bristol, Department of Aerospace Engineering. 

[16] Couser, P. (1998) Computational methods for investigating sail forces – a case study. Proceedings of Yacht 

Vision. 

[17] Fiddes, S., Gaydon, J. (1996) A new vortex lattice method for calculating the flow past yacht sails. Journal of 

Wind Engineering and Industrial Aerodynamics, 63(1-3), 35-60. 

[18] Yoo J. and Kim, H.T. (2006) Computational and experimental study on performance of sail of a sailing yacht. 
Ocean Engineering, 33, 1322-1342. 

[19] Jackson, P.S. (1983). A simple model for elastic two-dimensional sails. AIAA Journal, 21(1), 153-155. 

[20] Jackson, P.S. (1985). The analysis of three-dimensional sails. Proceedings of the 10th Canadian Congress of 

Applied Mechanics. Ontario, Canada. 



Inmaculada Ortigosa                          A real Time Decision Support System for the adjustment of Sailboat Rigging  
Julio García-Espinosa 

Marcel·la Castells      

       

56 

 

[21] Arcaro, V. (2004a) A simple procedure for shape finding and analysis of fabric structures. UNICAMP/FEC 

Web. http://www.arcaro.org/tension/main.htm. Accessed 2010. 

[22] Pauletti R.M, Mariani Guninardi, D. and Camilo Deifeld, T.E. (2005) Argyris Natural Membrane Finite 

Element. Barcelona : STRUCTURAL MEMBRANES CIMNE, 2005. 

[23] Arcaro,V. (2004b) A simple procedure for analysis of cable network structures. UNICAMP/FEC Web. 

http://www.arcaro.org/tension/main.htm. Accessed 2010. 

[24] Cook, R., Malkus, D., Plesha, M., Witt, R. (2002) Concepts and applications of finite element analysis. John 

Wiley and Sons, Wisconsin. 

[25] Cook, R. (1995) Finite Element Modeling for Stress Analysis. John Wiley and Sons, New York. 

[26] Nocedal, J., Wright, S. (1999) Numerical optimization. Springer-Verlag. 

[27] Gill, P., Murray, W. (1974) Newton type methods for unconstrined and linearly contrained optimization. 

Mathematical Programming, 7, 311-350. 

[28] Jackson, P.S., Christie, G. (1987) Numerical analysis of three-dimensional elastic membrane wings. AIAA 

Journal, 25(5), 676-682. 

[29] Schoop, H. (1990) Structural and aerodynamic theory for sails. European Journal of Mechanics, A/Solids, 

9(1), 37-52. 

[30] Muttin, F. (1991) Structural analysis of sails. European Journal of Mechanics, A/Solids, 10(5), 517-534. 

[31] Fukasawa, T., Katori, M. (1993) Numerical approach to aeroelastic response of three-dimensional flexible 

sails. Proceedings of the 11th Chesapeakes Sailing Yacht Symposium. 

[32] Schoop, H., Bessert, N. (2001) Instationary aeroelastic computation of yacht sails. International Journal for 

numerical methods in engineering, 52, 728-803 

[33] Renzsch, H., Müller, O., Graft, K. (2008) FlexSail: A fluid-structure interaction program for the investigation 

of spinnakers. Proceedings in the International Conference on Innovations in High Performance Sailing Yachts.  

[34] García, J., Ortigosa, I. and Fernández, A. (2015) Development of a Decision Support System for Optimization 

of the Performance of Sailing Yachts. Revista Internacional de Métodos Numéricos para Cálculo y Diseño en 

Ingeniería, 31 (3), 146-153. 

[35] Haykin, S. (1999)  Neural Networks – A Comprehensive Foundation (2nd ed), USA: Prentice-Hall Inc.  

[36] Graf, K., Renzsch, H. (2006) RANSE Investigation of Downwind Sails and Interaction into Sailing Yacht 

Design Process. Proceedings in 2nd High Performance Yacht Design Conference. 

[37] Marchaj C.A. (2003) Sail Performance. techniques to Maximise Sail Power. Adlard Coles Nautical. ISBN 0-

7136-6407-X. 

 

 

Submitted: 25.02.2015. 

 

Accepted: 03.12.2015. 

Inmaculada Ortigosa, iortigosa@cen.upc.edu, PhD,  

Julio García-Espinosa, PhD, 

Marcel la Castells, PhD. 

The International Center for Numerical Methods in Engineering (CIMNE) 

Department of Nautical Sciences and Engineering 

Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya (UPC), BarcelonaTech, Barcelona, 

Spain 

 


