












































01-80_Final.indd


S. Oller et al. Advanced Composite Material Simulation

2 Ciência e Tecnologia dos Materiais, Vol. 20, n.º 1/2, 2008

S. Oller et al. Advanced Composite Material Simulation

2 Ciência e Tecnologia dos Materiais, Vol. 20, n.º 1/2, 2008

ADVANCED COMPOSITE MATERIAL SIMULATION

S. OLLER*, X. MARTÍNEZ*, A. BARBAT*, F. RASTELLINI** 

*Departamento de Resistencia de Materiales y Estructuras en la Ingeniería (RMEE)

Universidad Politécnica de Cataluña 

**International Center for Numerical Methods in Engineering (CIMNE)

Building C1, Campus Nord UPC

Jordi Girona, 1-3. 08034-Barcelona, Spain. 

e-mail: sergio.oller@upc.edu

ABSTRACT: A computational methodology is presented for modeling the non-linear mechanical behavior of composite 
structures made of FRP (Fiber-Reinforced Polymers) laminates.

The model is based on the appropriate combination of the constitutive models of compounding materials, considered to 

behave as isolated continua, together with additional “closure equations” that characterize the micro-mechanics of the 

composite from a morphological point of view. To this end, any appropriate constitutive model may be selected for each 

phase. Each component is modeled separately and the global response is obtained by assembling all contributions taking 

into account the interactions between components in a general phenomenological way.

To model the behavior of a single uni-directional (UD) composite laminated, a Serial-Parallel continuum approach has been

developed assuming that components behave as parallel materials in the fibers alignment direction an  d as serial materials in

orthogonal directions. Taking into account the internal morphology of the co rmposite material, it is devised a strategy for 

decoupling and coupling component phases. This methodology [Rastellini 2006], named "compounding of behavior", allows

to take into consideration local non linear phenomenon in the compounding ma aterials, like damage, plasticity, etc. in a aa

coupled manner. It is based on the proper management of homogenous constitutir  ve models, already available for each

component. In this way, it is used all developments achieved in constitutive modeling for plain materials, what makes

possible the transference of this technology to composites. A laminated theory comp  lemented with the proposed UD model is

employed to describe the mechanical behavior of multi-directional laminates. A specif  ic solution strategy for the general nonff

linear case is proposed. It provides quick local and global convergences, what makes the model suitable for large scale

structures. The model brings answers on the non-linear behavior of composites, where classical micro-mechanics formulas

are restricted to their linear elastic part. The methodology is validated through seaa d veral numerical analyses and contrasted

against experimental data and benchmark tests.

Keywords: Composite Materials, Numerical Simulation, Continuum Mechanics, Constitutive Modeling.

RESUMO: Apresenta-se uma metodologia computacional para moldar o comportamento mecânico não linear de
estruturas laminadas compósitas de FRP (Fiber-Reinforced Polymers).

O modelo está baseado em uma combinação apropriada de mo  delos constitutivos de materiais compostos, considerando o

comportamento mecânico de cada componente, junto de equações adicionais de compatibilidade ou “equações de

fechamento" que caracteriza a micro-mecânica do composto desde um ponto de vista morfológico. Com esta finalidade,

pode-se atribuir a cada fase ou componente qualquer modelo constitutivo apropriado a seu próprio comportamento. Cada 

componente modela-se separadamente e a resposta global é obtida compondo adequadamente as contribuições de cada

componente e suas interações com os restantes, tudo isso de um ponto de vista fenomenológico.

Para moldar uma simples lâmina composta unidirecional (UD), desenvolveu-se uma formulação contínua Série-Paralela,

que supõe que os componentes se comportam em paralelo na direção em que se alinham as fibras e como materiais em

série na direção ortogonal. Levando em conta a morfologia interior do material composto, introduziu-se uma estratégia

para desajustar e depois acoplar as fases que compõem o material composto. Esta metodologia [Rastellini 2006], 

denominada "composição de comportamentos", permite levar em conta o fenómeno de não linearidade local nos materiais

componentes, tais como o dano, plasticidade, etc. de uma maneira acoplada. Isto está baseado na gestão apropriada de

modelos constitutivos homogêneos, já disponíveis para cada componente. Desta maneira, usam-se todos os

desenvolvimentos conseguidos para os materiais básicos,   o que faz possível a transferência desta tecnologia aos

compostos. Uma teoria laminada complementada com o modelo de UD proposto emprega-se para descrever o 

comportamento mecânico de laminados multidireccionales.  Propõe-se uma estratégia específica para a solução do

comportamento geral não-linear. Isto proporciona uma rápida convergência local e global, que faz ao modelo seja

apropriada para resolver estruturas à grande escala. O modelo dá respostas no comportamento não-linear de compostos, 

onde as formulações clássicas do micro-mecânica estão restringidas só ao campo linear. A metodologia é validada com 

várias análises numéricas e contrastada com dados experimentais e ensaios de referência (benchmark tests). 

Palavras chave: Materiais Compostos, Analise Numérica, Mecânica del Continuo, Modelos Constitutivos.



Ciência e Tecnologia dos Materiais, Vol. 20, n.º 1/2, 2008  3

Advanced Composite Material Simulation S. Oller et al.

Ciência e Tecnologia dos Materiais, Vol. 20, n.º 1/2, 2008 3

Advanced Composite Material Simulation S. Oller et al.

1. INTRODUCTION

The study of composite materials has been one of the major 

objectives of computational mechanics in the last decade.

The numerical simulation of composite materials has been

done, traditionally, using orthotropic materials with average

properties of their constituents. With this approximation, no 

model has been found able to work beyond the constituents

elastic limit state. Thus, these procedures limit the numerical 

computation to elastic cases. Different theories have been 

proposed to solve this problem, taking into account the 

internal configuration of the composite to predict its 

behavior. The two most commonly used are herein 

remarked.

Homogenization theory: This method deals with the 
global problem of composite material in a two-scale 

context. The macroscopic scale uses the composite

materials to obtain the global response of the structure; 

composites are treated as homogeneous materials in this

scale. The microscopic scale corresponds to an elemental 

characteristic volume in which the microscopic fields

inside the composite are obtained; this scale deals with

the component materials. Homogenization theory

assumes a periodical configuration of the composite 

material to relate these two scales [Sanchez-Palencia, 

1987; Oller et al., 2005].

Mixing theory: The first formulation of the mixing
theory corresponds to Trusdell and Toupín [Trusdell and

Toupín, 1960] and it is based in two main hypothesis: 1.

All composite constituents have the same strains. 2. Each 

constituent collaborates to the composite behavior 

according to its volumetric participation. The main

problem of the mixing theory is the iso-strain condition,

which forces a parallel distribution of the constituents in

the composite. Some improvements to the original 

formulation can be found in [Car et al., 2000]. 

This work uses an improvement of the mixing theory. The 

election of the mixing theory instead of a homogenization 

theory is based in the final aim of the code developed, 

compute real structures made of composite materials. A 

homogenization theory requires a micro-model for each 

point of the structure that becomes non-linear. The

resolution of a real structure with this procedure generates 

such a big amount of degrees of freedom that the calculation f

is beyond the computation capabilities of nowadays personal 

computers or small servers. On the other hand, the mixing 

theory does not increase the degrees of freedom of the 

problem, as it is only present in the constitutive section of 

the finite element code.

The simulations that will be shown are solved with PLCd 

[PLCd, 1991]. This is a finite element code, developed at 

CIMNE (International Center for Numerical Methods in 

Engineering) and UPC (Technical Univeristy of Catalonia). 

The code works with two and three dimensional solid 

geometries. It can deal with kinematics and material 

nonlinearities. It contains various constitutive laws to 

predict the material behavior: Von-Misses, Mohr-Coulomb,

improved Mohr-Coulomb, Drucker-Prager, etc. [Lubliner et 

al., 1989]. It uses different integration algorithms to simulate 

the material: Elastic, visco-elastic, damage, damage-

plasticity, etc. [Oller et al., 1990]. Dynamic analysis are 

developed using the Newmark method, [Barbat et al., 1997].

The different formulations included in PLCd to deal with

composite materials are exposed hereafter. 

2. FORMULATION USED TO SIMULATE THE 
COMPOSITE MATERIAL BEHAVIOR

2.1 MIXING THEORY

2.1.1 Classical mixing theory 
The classical rule of mixtures was originally developed by

Trusdell and Toupin [1960]. It considers that the interaction 

between the components in a material point of the composite

is done according to the following hypothesis: (i) each 

infinitesimal volume of the composite contains a finite 

number of material components; (ii) each component 

contribution to the global behavior of the composite is 

proportional to its volumetric participation; (iii) all 

components suffer the same strains (closing equation); (iv)

the volume of each component is significantly smaller than

the composite volume. 

The third hypothesis, in the case of small strains, can be 

written as:

1 2c n1 2
ij ij ij ijε ε ε ε

n1 2
ij ij ijij ijε εε ε (1)

Where,
c

ijε is the strain tensor for the composite and
k

ijε is 
the strain tensor for component k  of the composite.
According to second hypothesis, the stresses of the 

composite can be computed as the proportional addition of 

each component stresses, according to the volumetric 

participation, thus:

, ,

,

k k k k S k
ij ij ijkl ij

k n k n1, 1,

k k S c
ijkl ij

k n1,

k k kk k k

k Ckk
1

=

= ⋅ ⋅k C

εijkl ε
S kk Ck Ck kk ⋅k Cij

kk ijk
kkσ ij =

ε
(2)

where parameter 
kk  is the volumetric participation of 

component k  in the composite, defined as:

0

k kdVkk
dV

0

= (3)

A more detailed explanation of this theory, as well as the

extension to the large deformations case and its numerical 

implementation can be found in [Car, 2000] 

2.1.2 Serial/Parallel mixing theory 
1. The main problem of the classical mixing theory is the

iso-strain condition, which forces a parallel distribution 

of the constituents in the composite 

2. Fig. 1, iso-strain case). The serial/parallel rule of 
mixtures improves the classical mixing theory replacing

the iso-strain hypothesis for an iso-strain condition in 

the fiber direction and an iso-stress condition in the



S. Oller et al. Advanced Composite Material Simulation

4 Ciência e Tecnologia dos Materiais, Vol. 20, n.º 1/2, 2008

S. Oller et al. Advanced Composite Material Simulation

4 Ciência e Tecnologia dos Materiais, Vol. 20, n.º 1/2, 2008

transversal directions, allowing to simulate all

components distribution in the composite shown in  

Fig. 1. This theory has been developed by Rastellini and an 
extensive description of it can be found in [Rastellini, 2006]

and in the Deliverable 49 of the LESSLOSS project 

[CIMNE, 2006].  

Fig. 1. Different distribution of components in a composite
material

The main hypothesis in which is based the numerical model

of the Serial/Parallel mixing theory are: 

i) Composite is composed by two component materials: 

fiber and matrix 

ii) Component materials have the same strain in parallel

(fiber) direction

iii) Component materials have the same stress in serial 

direction 

iv) Composite material response is in direct relation with

the volume fractions of compounding materials

v) Homogeneous distribution of phases is considered in 

the composite 

vi) Perfect bounding between components is also

considered 

The equations that define the stress equilibrium and 

establish the strain compatibility between components arise

form the analysis of the model hypothesis. Thus,

Parallel behavior: c m f
P P P

c m m f f
P P P

m fm f

ε ε εm fmP PP
σ σ σm m f fP PP k

f
PP

εε
m mmk m P

(4)

Serial behavior: c m m f f
S S S

c m f
S S S

m fm fε εfS SS k
f

SS

σ σ σm fmS SS

m mmk m S
σσ

(5)

where, 
Pε  and Sε are the parallel and serial components of 

the stress tensor respectively, Pσ  and Sσ  are the parallel 
and serial components of the strain, the superscripts c , m
and f  represent the composite, matrix and fiber materials

and 
mk and f k  is the volumetric participation of fiber and 

matrix in the composite.  

In order to verify the compatibility equations, the Serial/ 

Parallel mixing theory proceeds in the following way. 

1. First thing to be done is to split the component strain

tensor into its serial and parallel parts. 

2. Afterwards, a first prediction of the matrix serial 

strains is computed. With this initial prediction and 

the strain relation of equation (5), the fiber serial 

strains can be also obtained.

3. Using each constituent constitutive law, the stresses 

for matrix and fiber can be calculated, as well as the 

actualization of each material internal variable.

4. The stress tensors computed in step 3 are split into

their serial and parallel parts and the iso-stress 

condition defined in equation (5) is checked. If it is 

verified, the matrix strain prediction was correct and

the composite stress can be obtained using equations

(4) and (5). If the iso-stress condition is not verified, 

the initial strain prediction must be corrected and the

process must continue in step 3. 

The flow diagram implemented in the numerical code

corresponding to the exposed procedure is shown in Figure

2

Fig. 2. Flow diagram of the Serial/Parallel mixing theory
(SP RoM)

The main problem of the Serial/Parallel mixing theory is

that the composite material can be composed, only, by two

material components. However, this inconvenient is solved

with the laminate procedure exposed in the following

section.  

2.2 LAMINATES COMPOSITES

Laminated composites are composed by different layers

with different fiber orientations. The orientation of the fiber 

can be defined by the engineer in order to obtain the better 

performance of the composite according to its application. 

Under this scope, the limitation of the Serial/Parallel mixing

theory to only two materials is not such, as the composites

Iso-strain Iso-stress M ixed caseIso-strain Iso-stress M ixed case



Ciência e Tecnologia dos Materiais, Vol. 20, n.º 1/2, 2008  5

Advanced Composite Material Simulation S. Oller et al.

Ciência e Tecnologia dos Materiais, Vol. 20, n.º 1/2, 2008 5

Advanced Composite Material Simulation S. Oller et al.

used are usually defined by multiple layers composed by

only two components: fiber and matrix. Thus, the SP RoM 

formulation can be applied to each layer of the composite

and, afterwards, compute the composite behavior composing 

the performance of each constituent layer. To obtain the

laminate behavior, the classical mixing theory is applied to 

each lamina.

Applying the classical mixing theory to the different layers

of the composite implies the assumption that all laminas of 

the laminate are under the same strain conditions. This

assumption can be considered correct, as the different 

laminas usually have fiber orientation distributions disposed

in such a way that provide the laminate with an in-plane 

homogeneous stiffness.  

At this point, it must be said that not all the layers have to 

behave according to the S/P RoM hypothesis. Sometimes,

between fiber oriented layers, a randomly oriented one is 

disposed. Having random oriented fibers, the layer behaves

as an isotropic material and the best theory to be applied to

predict its behavior is the Classical mixing theory. Thus, the

composite performance is obtained according to the 

following procedure:

1. For a given strain of the composite, the strain of each

composite layer is obtained applying the Classical 

mixing theory.
1 2c L L Ln1 2ε ε ε εL L LnL L1 2ε εε ε (6)

2. Each layer stress is obtained using the Serial/Parallel

mixing theory in case of fiber oriented layers or the 

Classical Mixing theory in case of randomly oriented

layers (or in other cases of iso-strain behavior such as 

single materials layers). 
Lk Lkε σLk ; using Classic mixing theory or 

SP RoM
(7)

3. The stresses of the composite are obtained composing

the stresses in each composite layer.

1

n
c Lj Lj

j

σLj Ljkσ
=

(8)

2.3 OTHER FORMULATIONS DEVELOPED TO 
SIMULATE CFRP REINFORCEMENTS 

Having defined the main formulation frame, in which the 

code works and deals with composite materials, there are 

other formulations in it that are used to obtain a better 

performance of the finite element code and that are required 

to obtain a better approximation of the mechanical behavior 

of composite material structures. In this chapter, all of them 

are briefly described.

2.3.1 Anisotropy using a mapping space theory 
This theory is based on the transport of all the constitutive

parameters and the stress and strain states of the structure,

from a real anisotropic space, to a fictitious isotropic space.

Once all variables are in the fictitious isotropic space, an

isotropic constitutive model can be used to obtain the new 

structure configuration. This theory allows considering 

materials with high anisotropy, such as composite materials, 

using all the techniques and procedures already developed

for isotropic materials.

All the anisotropy information is contained in two fourth 

order tensors. One of them,
ijklAii
σ , relates the stresses in the

fictitious isotropic space ( ijσ ) with the stresses in the real
anisotropic space ( ijσ ) and the other one, ijklAii

ε
, does the

same with the strains. The relation of both spaces for the 

strains and the stresses is exposed in equations (9).  

ij ijkl ij ij ijkl ij;;A
σ εAσ σ ε ε:ij ijkl ij ij ijkl: ; :;;A : ;;ijkli : ;;;= A : ;;

εA: ;; (9)

A representation of these transformations is displayed in

Fig. 3. A more detailed description of this methodology, 

the extension to large strains and its numerical 

implementation can be obtained in [Car et al., 2001 and 

Car, 2000]

Fig. 3. Space transformation. Real and fictitious stress and 
strain spaces in small strain (image obtained form [Car et 

al., 2001]) 

2.3.2 Fiber-matrix debounding 
The apparition of matrix cracks in a composite material is

usually followed by a relative movement between the fibers

and the matrix. This lost of adherence implies a stiffness

reduction in the composite material. This phenomenon is

introduced in the elastic limit of the material as a 

modification of its yield surface criterion. The new fiber 

elastic limit becomes: 

{ }( R N N{ii {fib fib mat{f ) min ( ) ; ( ) ;) min ( ) ; ({) min ( ) ; ( ) ;) min ( ) ; () ; ({fib fib matfib{min ( ) ; ( ) ;min ( ) ; ( )) ; ({ N ) /2 (min ( ) ; ( ) ;) ; ({ fib mat fibfib mat f( ) fibr2 ( ) /2 ( f2 ( ) /2 (10)
Where

fib
Rf )( is the new fiber strength, fib

Nf )(  is the

nominal fiber strength,
mat

Nf )( is the matrix nominal

strength and
matfib

Nf −)( is the fiber-matrix interface

nominal strength. Equation (10) shows that the debounding 

happens when one of the composite constituents reaches its 

nominal strength (considering the fiber-matrix interface as a 

constituent). The nominal resistance values are obtained 

from the material properties. The numerical implementation



S. Oller et al. Advanced Composite Material Simulation

6 Ciência e Tecnologia dos Materiais, Vol. 20, n.º 1/2, 2008

S. Oller et al. Advanced Composite Material Simulation

6 Ciência e Tecnologia dos Materiais, Vol. 20, n.º 1/2, 2008

of this phenomenon is described in the reference [Car, 2000 

and Oller, 2002]. 

2.3.3 Construction stages algorithm 
When performing numerical simulations of structures 

retrofitted with FRP, it is necessary to add the structural 

reinforcement once the original structure is already 

damaged. The “Construction Stages Algorithm”
implemented in PLCD permits running the numerical

simulation during the desired load cases, with only some

structural elements active on the structure. At a certain load

case, new elements can be added without stopping the 

calculation process. These new elements are free of strains

and stresses when they are activated.

The algorithm requires having all elements defined in the

structure. The elastic strains are divided in two components,

and active and a non-active, equation (11). If the element is

not present in the structure, all strains correspond to the non-

active part, equation (12), while, if the element is active, all

strains corresponding to the non-active situation will be 

removed, equation (13), from the total strain. Stresses are 

computed considering only the active elements, equation 

(14).
e
NA

e
A

e εεε += (11)

0; == eA
ee

NA εεε (12)

e
NA

ee
A εεε −= (13)

e
A

ee C εσ ⋅= (14)

This procedure is explained with more detail in [Martinez et
al., 2006; CIMNE, 2006].

2.3.4 Tangent constitutive stiffness tensor 
Depending on the constitutive equation used in a composite 

constituent material, the tangent constitutive tensor cannot 

be obtained analytically. One solution is to use, in these 

materials, the initial stiffness matrix, which will lead to the

equilibrium state but will require a large amount of 

structural iterations. Thus, in order to obtain a fast and

reliable algorithm, the expression of the tangent constitutive 

tensor is required. To obtain it, when no analytical

expression exists, a numerical derivation using a

perturbation method is performed. The definition of the

tangent constitutive tensor is: 
tσ ε:t && C (15)

where,

[ ] [ ]1 2 ; and[ ]n n] [ 1 2] [ 1 2[

t

σ σ σ σ[ ]1 22 ] ; [ 1 21[] 1 21[σ σ σ[ ] ;
1

t tc c
11

t
11 1n11 1nc11

=
t t
n nn1c c1n1
t tc c
1

& & & &[[& & & &[ ] 1 21[] 1 21[

C
(16)

The definition of the tangent constitutive tensor, equation

(15), shows that the variation of stresses due to an increment 

in the value of the j  element of ε& depends on the values of 
the j  column of tC . Thus, writing the j column of tC as,

Tt
j

t t t= j j nj1 2
t t t

j j nj1 2c c c1 2j jj j1 2c (17)

the stress variation is:
j t

j jσ ε
j t

j
&& (18)

Being
t
jc  the unknown

The perturbation method consists of applying a small

perturbation to the strain vector and, using the constitutive 

equation of the material, determines the variation that will

be obtained in the stress tensor due to this perturbation. At 

this point, the j  column of the tangent constitutive tensor 
can be computed as:

j
t
j

j

σ
ε

=c
&

&
(19)

The smaller the value applied to the perturbation, the better 

the approximation obtained for the tangent constitutive 

tensor. Having defined a perturbation value, jε& , the
perturbed stress is computed using the constitutive equation 

of the material applying the following input strain:

ˆ
T

ε ε ε ε ε σ→
1 j j n1 j j nε ε ε εε ε ε εε ε ε εε ε ε ε1 j j njε ε ε εε ε ε εε ε ε ε1 j j njε j jε j j (20)

And the stress variation due to the perturbation is obtained 

subtracting the original converged stress from the computed 

one:

ˆjσ σ σj σσ& (21)

This procedure must be repeated for all strain components in 

order to obtain the complete expression of the tangent 

constitutive tensor. Hence, the numerical cost of using a 

perturbation method is rather high. However, this procedure 

allows obtaining an accurate approximation to this tensor for 

any constitutive equation used, ensuring the convergence of 

the numerical process in few steps.

3. NUMERICAL EXAMPLES OF THE FORMULA-
TION PROPOSED 

3.1 BENDING REINFORCEMENT OF A RC BEAMS

In this section, a numerical simulation of a bending 

reinforced beam is presented and used to validate all the

formulations proposed and exposed in previous section. This

case shows the efficiency of the serial/parallel rule of 

mixtures to deal with this sort of structural problems, as it is 

able to reproduce the complex mechanical behavior found in

the beam with an acceptable computational cost. The

numerical results are validated with experimental values. 

The studied beam is defined in the paper by Spadea [Spadea 

et al. 1998]. Its geometry and the reinforcements applied to 
it are shown in Figure 4.

The red (thick) line displayed in the bottom of the beam

corresponds to the FRP reinforcement. This is made of 

carbon fibers embedded in a polymeric matrix. The content 

of fibers is 60% and the composite thickness is 1.2 mm. The

finite element model developed to simulate the beam 

reinforcement is shown in Fig. 5. This is a 3D finite element 

made with linear hexahedrons. 

The S/P rule of mixtures allows considering all the 

reinforcement details found in the beam using a coarse

mesh. In Fig. 5 it is also included the composite materials 

composition. As can be seen, a single finite element 



Ciência e Tecnologia dos Materiais, Vol. 20, n.º 1/2, 2008  7

Advanced Composite Material Simulation S. Oller et al.

Ciência e Tecnologia dos Materiais, Vol. 20, n.º 1/2, 2008 7

Advanced Composite Material Simulation S. Oller et al.

contains, in this particular case, up to three different 

component materials. The steel reinforcements are

considered as fibers, whose orientation is defined by the bar 

direction. The FRP reinforcement has been included adding 

new finite elements to reproduce with more accuracy its

position in the beam.

Fig. 4. Geometry and reinforcement of the beam studied

The results obtained with this simulation are compared with

the experimental results reported by Spadea [Spadea et al.,
1998]. Fig. 6 shows the capacity curve of the beam for the 

numerical and the experimental simulations. This is, vertical 

displacement of the beam, in the point where the force is

applied, against the load value. This figure shows the

agreement between numerical and experimental results,

which proves the ability of the method to perform this sort 

of simulations. Fig. 6 also includes the results obtained with 

a numerical simulation of the same beam without FRP. The 

comparison between the results obtained for the reinforced 

and for the non-reinforced beam shows the improvement 

obtained in the beam performance when it is reinforced with

FRP.

Fig. 5. Finite element model developed to realize the
numerical simulation

Fig. 6. Force-displacement graph comparing the experi-
mental and the numerical results

One of the main advantages of the proposed finite element 

formulation is that it allows obtaining the structural behavior 

of each composite component, providing all information 

required to know the failure cause of the structure. In

example, for the simulation developed, the failure modes 

reported by Spadea are: Tension steel yielding and concrete

crushing, in the non reinforced model; and sudden and total

loss of load capacity due to an explosive debonding of 

CFRP plate, in the reinforced model.

The failure mode in the non-reinforced beam model is the 

same as the one obtained in the experimental test. This can 

be seen in figure Fig. 7, which shows the damage to the 

concrete and the plastic damage to the steel reinforcement 

for the final calculation step and for the most severely

damaged beam section. These figures show that the steel has 

started to yield and that the compressed concrete has also 

reached its limit stress (onset of concrete crushing). Under 

these conditions the transversal section cannot develop more

stresses and the code cannot determine a valid solution for 

the current load step. This situation can be interpreted as 

beam failure 

Fig. 7. Damage parameter in concrete and steel in the non-
reinforced beam at failure

MAT-01:  CONCRETE (100%), MAT-02: CONCRETE (57%)
 LONGITUDINAL STEEL (42%)
 VERTICAL STEEL (1%)

MAT-03: CONCRETE (99%) MAT-04: CONCRETE (98%)
VERTICAL STEEL (1%)
VERTICAL STEEL (1%)
HORIZONTAL STEEL (1%)

MAT-05: CONCRETE (99%) MAT-06: POLYMERIC MATRIX (34%)
 HORIZONTAL STEEL (1%) LONG.CARBON FIBR. (66%)



S. Oller et al. Advanced Composite Material Simulation

8 Ciência e Tecnologia dos Materiais, Vol. 20, n.º 1/2, 2008

S. Oller et al. Advanced Composite Material Simulation

8 Ciência e Tecnologia dos Materiais, Vol. 20, n.º 1/2, 2008

3.2 CFRP RETROFITTING OF A BEAM

Two different numerical models have been developed to 

study the effect of retrofitting a structure, depending on the 

existing damage in the beam when the CFRP reinforcement 

is applied to it: 

• Sp3D-Rt2: The CFRP reinforcement is applied when
damage starts in concrete material. 

• Sp3D-Rt3: CFRP reinforcement is applied when steel 
starts yielding. 

Results obtained with these two models are compared with

those obtained when the beam is not reinforced (Sp3D-R0

model) and when the beam is reinforced from the beginning

of the loading process (Sp3D-R1 model). The capacity curve 

obtained for each model is shown in Fig. 8: 

These results show that the structural stiffness does not 

depends on when the reinforcement is applied to the

structure. The structure stiffness obtained when the CFRP

reinforcement is applied after the steel yielding (Sp3D-Rt3 

model) does not differ significantly form the structure 

stiffness obtained after steel yielding in the reinforced model 

(Sp3D-R1). However, retrofitting a structure implies that,

when the CFRP reinforcement starts collaborating, the 

deformation and damage of the structure is larger than if it 

had been reinforced from the beginning. Damage reduces

the load capacity of the beam while deformation can make

the serviceability state unacceptable (i.e. when a load of 25 

kN is applied to the structure, beam deformations are 45% 

larger in the retrofit model, Sp3D-Rt3, than in the reinforced 

one, Sp3D-R1). 

Fig. 8. Comparison between the CFRP reinforcement and
retrofitting by using capacity curves 

3.3 REINFORCEMENT OF A FRAMED STRUC-
TURE USING CFRP 

The main objective of the present simulation is to use the 

developed formulation to verify the capability of CFRP

reinforcements to increase the strength of concrete frames 

when seismic loads are applied to them. Concrete framed

structures are common in building and civil engineering; 

one of the most stressed zones of these structures, under 

seismic loads, are the connecting joints between beams and 

columns. In many occasions, these joints show a lack of 

strength that can be improved with CFRP. The developed 

models reinforce the frame joint with two different CFRP 

configurations, in order to study the ability of the 

reinforcements to increase the frame strength and to find out 

which configuration offers better results.

3.3.1 Model description 

The concrete frame to be studied is defined with the

geometry and the steel reinforcement commonly used in

buildings. Fig. 9 shows the geometry considered and Fig. 10

shows the steel reinforcement and the description of the 

CFRP reinforcement that will be applied to the frame joint.

The beam cross section, as well as its steel reinforcement, is

dimensioned in such a way to assure the structural failure in

the beam, near the joint, in order to increase the effects of 

CFRP in the frame joint. The structure is loaded with a

horizontal force P applied in the middle of the frame joint 

(Fig. 9). 

Fig. 9. Geometric definition of the framed structure
considered in the simulation 

Fig. 10. Reinforcements applied to the concrete frame



Ciência e Tecnologia dos Materiais, Vol. 20, n.º 1/2, 2008  9

Advanced Composite Material Simulation S. Oller et al.

Ciência e Tecnologia dos Materiais, Vol. 20, n.º 1/2, 2008 9

Advanced Composite Material Simulation S. Oller et al.

Two dimensional and three dimensional models have been 

developed for the concrete frame. 2D models have been

used to calibrate the mesh since it requires less

computational effort than 3D models. 2D models results are

compared with the 3D ones to validate the accuracy of each 

simulation. Three different structures are considered to 

study the effect of CFRP reinforcements on the frame joint: 

2D-noR and 3D-noR:  Two and three dimension concrete 
frame without CFRP

reinforcements

2D-R and 3D-R:  Two and three dimension concrete 
frame with the upper and lower 

CFRP reinforcements defined in

Fig. 10
2D-LR and 3D-LR:  Two and three dimension concrete 

frame with the upper, lower and 

lateral CFRP reinforcements 

All composite materials existing in the concrete frame are 

defined by combination of four different basic materials, 

which are defined in Erro! A origem da referência não foi 
encontrada.. CFRP reinforcement is 1.2mm thick and is
composed of 66% of carbon fibers and 34% of polymeric

matrix. In the case of the upper and lower reinforcements, 

the fibers are oriented following the structure longitudinal

axis. In lateral reinforcements, two layers of CFRP are

applied to the frame, in which the fibers are oriented at +0º 

and  +90º respect the horizontal.

Table 1. Mechanical characteristics of the constituent 
materials used to define the composite materials existing 
in the framed structure.

Yield
criterion

Yield Stress
[ MPa ] 

Fracture Energy
[kPa·m]

Material Young
Modulus
[ MPa ]

Poisson
Modulus

Compr. Tensile Compr. Tensile

Mohr-
Coulomb Concrete 2.5·10

4  0.20 30.0  3.0  50.0 0.5

Von-Mises Steel Reinf. 2.1·105  0.00 270.0 270.0 2000.0 2000.0

Mohr-
Coulomb

Polymeric
matrix 1.2·10

4 0.20 87.5 29.2 36.0 3.0

Von-Mises CarbonFibers 1.5·10
5  0.00 2300.0 2300.0 2000.0 2000.0

3.3.2 2D-Results 

The structural behavior of the frame joint for the different 

reinforcements applied to the structure is studied using the

capacity curves obtained for each model (Fig. 11). The

displacement considered corresponds to the horizontal

displacement suffered by the point where the load is applied. t

This displacement depends on the column, beam and joint 

stiffness. As the column and the beam are not modified in

the different models, if the joint stiffness is increased with

the different applied reinforcements, the force-displacement 

graph will reflect this increment. 

Fig. 11. Capacity curves obtained with the 2D models

Fig. 11 show that the upper and lower CFRP reinforcements 

(2DF-R model) do not improve significantly the frame

behavior. This improvement is only found when lateral

reinforcements are applied to the concrete frame. All three 

curves present a region where the load reduces, to start 

increasing again afterwards. These points correspond to the 

development of a plastic hinge in the structure. At this load 

step the structure adopts a new strength mechanism and can

increase its load capacity. Comparing the load applied to the 

structure until the development of the plastic hinge, the 

lateral reinforcements (2DF-LR model) increase in a 25%

the structural load capacity when compared with the non-

reinforced model (2DF-noR). This increment is only a 4% if 

the structure is reinforced only with upper and lower CFRP. 

A better comprehension of the effects produced by each

reinforcement can be obtained studying the points where the

plastic hinges are formed. Figure 12 shows the longitudinal

strains of each model at their last computed step. The cross 

sections where the plastic hinges are formed are the ones 

with larger strains. 

Figure 12 shows that applying only the upper and lower 

CFRP reinforcements the plastic hinge moves from the

beam to the inner part of the joint, where no reinforcements

are applied. Thus, the presence of CFRP does not modify 

substantially the beam behavior and, once the hinge has 

been formed, both structures behave similarly (as it can be

seen in Fig. 11). On the other hand, when the lateral

reinforcement is applied to the structure, it restrains damage

in the frame joint and moves the plastic hinge to the cross

section where no CFRP reinforcement is applied, what 

allows the structure to increase its load capacity and its 

stiffness.

3.3.3 3D-Results

The study by means of three dimensional models is also

performed, as in the case of 2D models, by means of the

capacity curves (Fig. 13). The main difference found when 

comparing these results with the 2D ones is that the 3D 

models are stiffer and can reach larger loads than the 2D

models. This is because the concrete confinement is better 

reproduced in this case, as steel stirrups are modeled taking 

into account their 3D distribution and not only in one of 



S. Oller et al. Advanced Composite Material Simulation

10 Ciência e Tecnologia dos Materiais, Vol. 20, n.º 1/2, 2008

S. Oller et al. Advanced Composite Material Simulation

10 Ciência e Tecnologia dos Materiais, Vol. 20, n.º 1/2, 2008

their directions. Hence, concrete can reach larger stresses, 

which increase the stiffness and strength of the structure. 

Fig. 12. Plastic hinges in the concrete frame. 2D models. a)
model without CFRP reinforcement, b) model with upper 

and lower CFRP, c) model with upper, lower and lateral

CFRP

Fig. 13 shows that plastic hinges in the non-reinforced

model (3DF-noR) and in the reinforced model (3DF-R) 

appear for the same load and displacement as in the 

reinforced beam model (2DF-LR), as a consequence of the 

increment of concrete strength. However, in the three

dimensional simulation, plastic hinges appear before in the 

reinforced model than in the non-reinforced one. The

explanation of this effect is shown in Fig. 14 (maximum

strains in the unreinforced beam model (3DF-noR) before

and after the formation of the plastic hinge) and in Fig. 15 

(the same results in the case of the 3DF-R model). 

Fig. 13. Capacity curves obtained with the 3D models

According to these figures, the cross section in which the

plastic hinge develops is nearly the same in both models.

But, as this cross section is closer to the initial damage in the 

reinforced model than in the non-reinforced one, it is easier 

to simulate the plastic hinge when the beam is reinforced.

Thus, even if the CFRP reinforcement increases the joint 

stiffness, in this case the frame plastic hinge appears for 

lower loads when this reinforcement is applied than when

the joint is not reinforced.  

More differences are found when comparing the three 

dimensional model with the two dimensional one, in the

case in which lateral CFRP reinforcements are applied to the

frame joint (3DF-LR model). The first difference is that the 

formation of a plastic hinge is not visible in the capacity 

curve. This is because no section is completely damaged

when the algorithm loses its convergence.

However, the main difference is found when looking at the 

most damaged section. The strains in the lateral sections of 

the frame joint (Fig. 16a) have a similar behavior to that of 

the 2D case: strains are larger in the cross section where the

CFRP reinforcement finishes than in the frame joint. But 

when the strains in a longitudinal section of the structure are

studied (Fig. 16b), they show that the plastic hinge is

developed in the frame joint, as happens in the 3DF-R 

model. Two dimensional models consider the CFRP 

reinforcement applied along the whole cross section while 

actually it is applied only to the lateral surfaces. Thus, the 

reinforcement can avoid structural cracks on the surface of 

the structure but cannot restrain them inside the joint.

These last figures show that the structure presents the same

structural failure independently of the CFRP reinforcement 

configuration applied to it. Thus, it can be concluded that 

the only effect of the lateral CFRP reinforcement over the 

a)

b)

c)



Ciência e Tecnologia dos Materiais, Vol. 20, n.º 1/2, 2008  11

Advanced Composite Material Simulation S. Oller et al.

Ciência e Tecnologia dos Materiais, Vol. 20, n.º 1/2, 2008 11

Advanced Composite Material Simulation S. Oller et al.

frame joint is to delay the apparition of cracks in it and the

following plastic hinge. However, this delay is enough to

allow a load 20% larger in the frame when the horizontal

displacement in it is of 3.0 cm, increment more than 

sufficient to consider this reinforcement typology the best 

option to improve concrete framed structures seismic

strength.

The results also show the necessity of using three 

dimensional elements depending on the simulation to be

performed. When the distribution of CFRP reinforcements is 

not uniform along the whole cross section, 2D simulations

can provide incorrect results. However, even if the 

effectiveness of lateral reinforcements is reduced in the 3D

model, the structural strength improvement is significant 

enough to consider this reinforcement configuration as the

best option to reinforce the column-beam joint of RC frame

structures

Fig. 14. Crack evolution in the 3DF-noR model (model
without CFRP reinforcement)

Fig. 15. Crack evolution in the 3DF-R model (model with
upper and lower CFRP) 

Fig. 16. Plastic hinge in the 3DF-LR model. Lateral view 

3.4 DELAMINATION AND INTERLAMINAR
CRACK PROPAGATION

The developed formulation can be used also to simulate

effects such as delamination and interlaminar crack 

propagation in laminated composites. The present 

simulation shows the capability of the code to deal with

these sorts of problems. This concept is also useful for 

retrofitting applications.

3.4.1 Experimental test description 

The End Notch Flexure test is based in the flexure of a beam

with an initial crack in one of its endings. The test has been 

applied to a composite made of carbon fibers with an epoxy 

polymeric matrix. Fibers are oriented in the longitudinal

direction of the beam and the initial crack is created

introducing an insert in the laminate during its fabrication. 

The dimensions of the beam, as well as the dimensions

considered for the numerical simulation, are shown in Fig.

17. The experimental test applies a vertical displacement to

the beam until the initial crack starts its propagation. The

imposed displacement is applied until the crack progression

stops and the beam recovers its linear behavior. At this 

point, the sample is unloaded. Main results obtained from 

this test are two: The force-displacement graph, which 

shows the structural performance of the composite beam,

and the final length of the initial crack. These two results are

the ones that will be compared with the numerical model 

developed.

Fig. 17. Dimensions of the beam used in the ENF test

The exact properties of the composite material used in the

experimental simulations were unknown when the 

experimental tests were performed [Corbella et al., 2004].
However, the composite is known to be made of carbon 

fibers and an epoxy polymeric matrix from Hexcel

composites. For the numerical simulation, the mechanical

values considered to define the composite are the ones 

described in Table 2ed form Hexcel Product data

description. The fiber (AS4) and matrix considered are the 

ones found in HexPly 8552 UD carbon prepegs.

Table 2. Sample geometry used for the ENF test. 



S. Oller et al. Advanced Composite Material Simulation

12 Ciência e Tecnologia dos Materiais, Vol. 20, n.º 1/2, 2008

S. Oller et al. Advanced Composite Material Simulation

12 Ciência e Tecnologia dos Materiais, Vol. 20, n.º 1/2, 2008

3.4.2 Numerical model description 

Two different numerical models have been used to simulate 

the “End Notch Flexure Test”. One test is in two

dimensional formulation plain stress and the second one

using a three dimensional formulation. The 2D model has

been defined with 627 linear quadrilateral elements whiler

the 3D model has 5016 linear brick elements. The mesh

defined for the three dimensional model is shown in Fig. 18.

Fig. 18. Three dimensional model developed. Mesh 
description

Two different materials have been defined in the numerical 

simulation. One of them is related to the composite material 

and another one corresponding to the insert material. The 

composite material is defined by the properties of the epoxy

matrix and the carbon fibers shown in Table 2material is

defined as an elastic material. Matrix material is

characterized by a damage law, like the one defined on 

reference [Martinez et al. 2007; Lubliner et al. 1989;

Rastellini et al. 2006; Oliver et al. 1990]. 

The damage model used requires knowing the relation 

between the compression strength and the tension strength 

of the material in order to obtain the correct damage 

evolution. As these parameters are unknown, what is done in 

the present document is to consider that both strengths the 

same and to define the fracture energy of the material as the

mode II fracture energy obtained from the experimental 

results. The value of this energy, for the 3M101 beam, is:
2

IIG kJ m1.02 /II .

The definition of the insert material properties has been 

done taking into account its structural performance. The 

main effect of this material in the beam is allowing the 

sliding of the section found above the insert along the 

section found below it. To do so, a material with a shear 

modulus nearly zero has been defined (it has not been 

defined as strictly zero to avoid numerical instabilities 

during the simulation).

3.4.3 Comparison between the numerical and the 
experimental results. 

The numerical and the experimental results are compared

with the force-displacement graph obtained for both cases. 

The displacement represented corresponds to the vertical

deflection of the point where the load is applied. This graph

is shown in Fig. 19, in which the results for the 2D and 3D

numerical simulations and the experimental test are

represented.

Fig. 19. Force-displacement. Graph obtained for the 
different models. 

Fig. 19 shows that the two dimensional simulation provides 

exactly same results as the three dimensional one, thus, for 

these kind of problems, 2D simulations are preferable, as the

computer cost is much lower. However, the most important 

result shown in Fig. 19 is the agreement between the

numerical and the experimental results. The beam initial 

elastic stiffness obtained in the numerical simulation is 

nearly the same that is obtained from the experimental test. 

And this agreement between results is even better when

comparing the beam maximum load capacity or failure 

point. The only result that differs a bit in the numerical

simulation is the final beam stiffness, when the crack has 

reached its maximum length. In this case, the numerical 

beam is a 6 % stiffer than the experimental one (the stiffness

obtained in each case is, respectively, 1146 N/mm and 1076 

N/mm).

The other result to be compared is the final crack length. 

The experimental values obtained for this final crack length

is of 50.34mm. In the numerical simulation, the crack points

correspond to those in which the damage parameter, in

matrix material, is equal to one. These points have a matrix 

stiffness equal to zero. This implies that the composite serial 

stiffness is also zero, due to the iso-stress condition imposed

by the Serial/Parallel mixing theory. Those points with 

matrix completely damaged cannot develop any shear 

strength. Hence, the final crack length can by obtained by

finding the point, closer to the beam mid-span, with a value 

of the damage parameter, in matrix material, equal to one. 

Fig. 20 shows the damage parameter in matrix in the load

step in which the beam reaches its maximum deflection. In

this figure can be seen that the crack length obtained with 

the numerical simulation also nearly reaches the mid-span 

section

Fig. 20. Damage in matrix material when the maximum
deflection has been reached



Ciência e Tecnologia dos Materiais, Vol. 20, n.º 1/2, 2008  13

Advanced Composite Material Simulation S. Oller et al.

Ciência e Tecnologia dos Materiais, Vol. 20, n.º 1/2, 2008 13

Advanced Composite Material Simulation S. Oller et al.

The exact value of the damage parameter is shown, for the

points represented in Fig. 21a, in Fig. 21b. In this figure can

be seen that point 13 (corresponding to mid-span) reaches a 

damage value of 0.6, while the value of point 12 is 

approximately 0.98. Considering this last value close 

enough to one and thus, the section completely broken, the 

numerical crack length obtained is of 48mm. The point 

found at 49mm of the support has a damage value in matrix

material of 0.89, which is also close enough to one to 

consider that the numerical results are exactly the same as 

the experimental ones 

Fig. 21. Evolution of the damage parameter in the beam

4. CONCLUSIONS 

In this work have been exposed the different numerical 

procedures developed to solve in a reliable and efficient way

the problem of reinforcement and/or retrofitting of 

reinforced concrete (RC) structures using fiber reinforced

polymers (FRP) and composite structural behavior with

delamination and interlaminar crack propagation. Due to the

complexity of the problem to be solved, efforts have been

directed not only to the numerical procedures that allow

performing the structural simulation but also to the 

efficiency of the code and the way the user interacts with it.

Of all the formulations developed to solve the delamination

problem and FRP reinforcement of RC structures, is of 

special relevance the general formulation of the mixing

theory to deal with laminated composites. This is the 

division of the composite in its different components until

reaching the constitutent material, which will be the one that 

will provide the structural behavior of the composite. This

formulation can be understood as a manager of constitutive 

equations and is the one that allows dealing with the

reinforcement problem, taking into account all its

particularities, without increasing the problem numerical

size beyond the computational limits. The good performance 

of this theory has been tested with the different simulations 

presented in section 0 of the present document.

Besides the mixing theory formulation, other numerical 

procedures have been developed to deal with the particular 

case of FRP reinforcements. The most relevant of them are 

the anisotropy using a mapped space theory and the fiber 

matrix debounding. Special attention must be paid in the 

construction stages algorithm, which allows performing 

simulations of retrofitted structures (section 3.2 these

simulations have shown that, even the FRP performance do

not vary significantly if it is applied as a reinforcement or as 

a retrofit, the structural deformations and the stresses are

larger if the FRP is applied when the structure is already 

damaged. Finally, it has to be said that the compression 

strength formulation has not been tested yet in a FRP 

reinforcement simulation, however, first results obtained 

permit be optimistic about its performance and validity.  

Also, the paper shows that the Serial/Parallel mixing theory 

is able to simulate a composite laminate behavior ant its 

delamination process by using the appropriate constitutive 

equations to predict the material behavior of the composite

components. No other help or formulation is needed. This 

affirmation has been proved with the simulation of the End

Notch Flexure (ENF) test. The results obtained with the

numerical simulation are practically identical to the results

obtained from the experimental tests.

The structural behavior of the materials, obtained from the

numerical simulation, shows that the delamination 

phenomenon occurs as a result of the lost of stiffness in

matrix material due to the damage produced by the shear 

stresses in it. This lost of stiffness in matrix material implies

that no other component material can develop serial stresses,

due to the iso-stress condition of the Serial/Parallel mixing 

theory in the serial direction. This is translated in a lost of 

stiffness of the composite in all serial directions. In the case 

considered, the serial directions are all directions non 

coincident with fiber orientation. Thus, the composite is 

unable to avoid the shear deformations produced by the 

external loads.

The conclusion that all all formulations exposed are valid

and useful to solve composite laminated structures of FRP.

However, the objective of these simulations was not only to 

verify the formulations implemented in the finite element 

code, but also to study in which way the simulations of 

structural reinforcements of CFRP must be developed to

obtain accurate results. The simulation that has provided

more information in this aspect has been the framed 

structure one.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This work has been supported by CEE-FP6 (LESSLOSS

project, ref. FP6-50544(GOCE)) and by the Spanish 

Government through the Ministerio de Ciencia y Tecnología

(RECOMP project, ref. BIA2005-06952 and the Ministerio

de Fomento (project “Retrofitting and reinforcement of 

reinforced concrete structures with composite materials.

Numerical and experimental developments applied to joint 

of bars and composites anchorage proposal”).  The 

fellowship of X. Martinez has been provided by CIMNE 

(International Centre for Numerical Methods in 

Engineering). All this support is gratefully acknowledged 



S. Oller et al. Advanced Composite Material Simulation

14 Ciência e Tecnologia dos Materiais, Vol. 20, n.º 1/2, 2008

S. Oller et al. Advanced Composite Material Simulation

14 Ciência e Tecnologia dos Materiais, Vol. 20, n.º 1/2, 2008

REFERENCES

 [1] Barbat, A.H., Oller, S., Oñate, E., Hanganu, A. [1997]

“Viscous damage model for Timoshenko beam 

structures” International Journal of Solids and 
Structures, Vol.34, No 30, pp. 3953-3976 

[2] Car, E., Oller, S., Oñate, E. [2001] “A Large Strain

Plasticity for Anisotropic Materials – Composite 

Material Application,” International Journal of 
Plasticity, Vol. 17, No. 11, pp. 1437-1463. 

 [3] Car, E., Oller, S., Oñate, E. [2000] “An anisotropic 

elasto-plastic constitutive model for large strain

analysis of fiber reinforced composite materials”

Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and 
Engineering, Vol.185, No 2-4, pp. 245-277 

 [4] CIMNE [2006] LessLoss Deriverable 49: Integration 
of knowledge on FRP retrofitted structures, LessLoss 
project (GOCE-CT-2003-505488), Sub-Project 7 

 [5] Corbella B, Vicens J, Costa J [2004]. Informe de los

resultados de los ensayos de propagación de grieta en

modo II del "round robin test" del proyecto 

GRINCOMP (mat2003-09768-c03). Technical 

Report 2004-CYT-01-IT01, CIMEP.

 [6] Lubliner J., Oliver, J., Oller S., Oñate, E. [1989] “A 

plastic damage model for concrete” International
Journal of Solids and Structures, Vol. 25, No 3, pp.
299-326

 [7] Martinez, X., Oller, S., Barbat, A., Rastellini, F.

[2007] “New procedure to calculate compression 

strength of FRP using the Serial/Parallel mixing 

theory”, Accepted at 8th FRPRCS-8, Patras, Greece 

 [8] Martinez, X., Oller, S., Barbat, A. [2006] “Numerical 

tool to study structural reinforcement of steel 

reinforced concrete (RC) structures under seismic 

loads using fiber reinforced polymers (FRP)”, 

ECEES-1 Proceedings, Geneva, Switzerland 

 [9] Martinez X., Oller S., Barbero E. (2007). Study of 

delamination in composites by using the

serial/parallel mixing theory and a damage

formulation. Composites 2007, U. Porto. 12th to 14th

Septemer/2007.

 [10] Oliver J., Cervera M., Oller S., Lubliner J. (1990). A

Simple Damage Model For Concrete, Including Long

Term Effects. Second International Conference on 

Computer Aided Analysis And Design of Concrete 

Structures. Vol. 2 pp. 945-958. Zell Am See, Austria.

Viena. 1990. 

[11] Oller, S., Miquel, J., Zalamea, F. [2005] “Composite 

material behavior using a homogenization double

scale method” Journal of Engineering Mechanics,
Vol.131, No 1, pp. 65-79 

[12] Oller, S. [2002], Análisis y cálculo de estructuras de 
materiales compuestos, CIMNE, Barcelona, Spain 

[13] Oller, S., Oñate, E., Oliver, J., Lubliner, J. [1990] 

“Finite element non--linear analysis of concrete

structures using a plastic-damage model”

Engineering Fracture Mechanics, Vol. 35, No 1-3, 
pp. 219-231

[14] PLCd Manual [1991-now] PLCd. Non-linear 
thermomechanic finite element code oriented to PhD
student education. Code developed at CIMNE 

[15] Rastellini, F. [2006] Numerical modelling of the 
constitutive non-linearity of composite laminates,
PhD thesis, Departament de Resistència de Materials 

i Estructures a l’Enginyeria (RMEE) – UPC, 

Directors: S. Oller y E. Oñate. 

[16] Rastellini F., Salomon O., Oller S., Oñate E. (2006). 

Non-Linear mechanical damage modelling for long 

fiber-reinforced laminates. The e-Journal and

Exhibition of Non-destructive Testing. Electronic

Publication. www.ndt.net (CDCM 2006). 

[17] Sánchez-Palencia, E.S. [1987], Homogenization
techniques for composite media, Springer-Verlag,
Berlin, Germany. Chapter: “Boundary layers and 

edge effects in composites”, pp. 121-192 

[18] Spadea, G., Benicardino F., Swamy, R. [1998] 

“Structural behavior of composite RC beams with

externally bonded CFRP” Journal of Composites for 
Construction, Vol.2, No 3, pp. 132-137 

[19] Trusdell C., Toupín, R. [1960] The classical field 
theories, Handbuch der physic iii/I, Edition,
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Germany

[20] Zienkiewicz, O. C., Taylor, L.R., [1991] The finite 
element method, McGraw-Hill, London, England




