




























































Archives of Computational Methods in Engineering - Preprint

Challenges, tools and applications of tracking algorithms in
the numerical modelling of cracks in concrete and masonry
structures

Savvas Saloustros · Miguel Cervera · Luca Pelà

This is a pre-print of an article published in Archives of Computational Methods in Engineering. The final authenticated
version is available online at: https://doi.org/10.1007/s11831-018-9274-3

Abstract The importance of crack propagation in the
structural behaviour of concrete and masonry struc-
tures has led to the development of a wide range of
finite element methods for crack simulation. A common
standpoint in many of them is the use of tracking al-
gorithms, which identify and designate the location of
cracks within the analysed structure. In this way, the
crack modelling techniques, smeared or discrete, are ap-
plied only to a restricted part of the discretized domain.

This paper presents a review of finite element ap-
proaches to cracking focusing on the development and
use of tracking algorithms. These are presented in four
categories according to the information necessary for
the definition and storage of the crack-path. In addi-
tion to that, the most utilised criteria for the selection
of the crack propagation direction are summarized.

The various algorithmic issues involved in the devel-
opment of a tracking algorithm are discussed through
the presentation of a local tracking algorithm based on

Savvas Saloustros · Miguel Cervera · Luca Pelà

Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering
Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya, UPC-BarcelonaTech
Campus Nord UPC, Jordi Girona 1-3, 08034 Barcelona,
Spain.

CIMNE - Centre Internacional de Mètodes Numèrics a
l’Enginyeria
Campus Nord UPC, Gran Capità, S/N, 08034 Barcelona,
Spain.

E-mail: savvas.saloustros@upc.edu
E-mail: miguel.cervera@upc.edu
E-mail: luca.pela@upc.edu

the smeared crack approach. Challenges such as the
modelling of arbitrary and multiple cracks propagat-
ing towards more than one direction, as well as multi-
directional and intersecting cracking, are detailed. The
presented numerical model is applied to the analysis of
small- and large-scale masonry and concrete structures
under monotonic and cyclic loading.

Keywords Computational failure mechanics · Strain
localization · Tracking algorithms · Quasi-brittle
materials · Monotonic and cyclic loading

1 Introduction

Strain localization refers to the development of narrow
bands within a loaded structure where material degra-
dation and deformation concentrates, while the areas
outside these bands tend to unload elastically. In struc-
tures made of quasi-brittle materials, the evolution of
these strain localization bands, called hereafter cracks,
can have a detrimental effect on the global structural
behaviour. Especially when reinforcement is lacking, as
in the case of unreinforced masonry structures, the de-
velopment of the collapse mechanism depends on the
relative location and propagation of dominant cracks
within the structure.

Due to the high importance of cracking phenomena
in the structural capacity and response, the engineer-
ing community has shown an earnest interest during the
last century in their understanding and realistic predic-
tion, to such an extent that two new engineering fields
have emerged: Fracture Mechanics and Computational
Failure Mechanics. In the first the mathematical and
physical bases associated with the initiation and prop-
agation of cracking are set, while in the latter these

https://doi.org/10.1007/s11831-018-9274-3


2 Savvas Saloustros et al.

principles are applied and further developed within a
numerical framework.

This paper focuses on the advances in the compu-
tational modelling of cracking during the last decades
and in particular on the use of tracking algorithms in
strain localization analysis. These numerical procedures
are used to define the zones within the structure where
cracking is expected to occur. In this way, the numeri-
cal approach used for the simulation of cracking is only
applied to these designated zones rather than in the
whole structure.

The paper is structured in the following way. The
next section presents a brief historical overview of finite
element approaches used for the simulation of cracking.
Section 3 focuses on the development and use of track-
ing algorithms, the encountered challenges and the var-
ious solutions proposed in the literature. Then, the rest
of the paper discusses the algorithmic issues and the
application of tracking algorithms through the presen-
tation of a local tracking technique developed by the
authors for the analysis of both concrete and masonry
structures. Section 4 outlines the simulation of mono-
tonic loading cases, and two applications are presented
in Section 5. The modelling of cyclic loading is ad-
dressed in Section 6 and Section 7 includes a relative
case-study. Section 8 presents a large-scale application
of the local tracking algorithm to an existing unrein-
forced masonry structure. The paper closes with the
conclusions and some considerations for future research.

2 Finite element approaches to cracking

2.1 Classical crack representations

The advance of digital computers and the development
of the Finite Element Method (FEM) between the 1950s
and 1960s offered to engineers a powerful tool for ap-
plying and testing the fracture mechanics theories de-
veloped in the first half of the 20th century (for a his-
torical synopsis see Felippa [1]). Since then, a plethora
of numerical methods have been developed focusing on
the simulation of propagating cracks in solids. This sec-
tion presents an outline of the most important of these
methods adopting a categorization on the basis of the
crack representation at discrete level into: the Discrete
or Discontinuous Crack Approach and the Smeared or
Continuous Crack Approach.

In the Discrete Crack Approach (DCA), a crack
is simulated as an actual displacement discontinuity
(called hereafter a strong discontinuity) within a sin-
gle element or along the boundary of adjacent ele-
ments (see Fig. 1a). Upon crack initiation, the displace-
ment field across a crack presents a discrete jump w

and the associated, fictitious, strain field becomes un-
bounded, shown in Fig. 1c. This is achieved through
the proper enrichment of the displacement field with
discontinuous functions. Alternatively, in the Smeared
Crack Approach (SCA), cracks are represented in a con-
tinuous setting, and their effect (in the displacement
and strains) is smeared over a certain region of the
discretized domain, called the localization-band, with
width h including one or more elements, as illustrated
in Fig. 1b. The first case (Fig. 1d) corresponds to the
local smeared crack approach, in which the displace-
ment jump presents two weak discontinuities between
the element within the localization-band and the ad-
jacent ones, while the associated strains show a defi-
nite jump. The second case (Fig. 1e) refers to the regu-
larised smeared crack approach, where the use of more
elements for representing the effect of the crack results
in a smoother variation of the displacement and strain
fields over the selected localization band h. A discrete
crack is interpreted as the limit case of a smeared one
having a localization-band with vanishing width, and
conversely, a smeared crack is the regularization of a
discrete crack over a certain width h.

Despite their substantial differences, discrete and
smeared crack approaches define the relationship be-
tween stress and deformation embarking from the same
starting point; the cohesive-zone model. The cohesive-
zone model, introduced by Barenblatt [2] for brittle
fracture and Dugdale [3] for ductile one, defines the
relationship between traction forces and displacements
at the surface of the crack. In 1976, Hillerborg et al.
[4] adopted the cohesive-zone concept in their fictitious
crack model for representing discontinuous cracking in
quasi-brittle materials with the finite element method.
In this fictitious crack model, the loss of cohesion in the
forming crack was directly related to the experimentally
measured fracture energy of the material. The same
concept was formulated later in 1983 in the context
of the smeared crack approach by Bažant and Oh [5].
Today, the bibliography riddles with constitutive mod-
els based on these predecessors, which have been devel-
oped within the framework of plasticity (e.g. [6, 7, 8, 9]),
damage (e.g. [10, 11, 12, 13, 14]), a combination of plas-
ticity and damage (e.g. [15, 16, 17, 18, 19]) and smeared
cracking (e.g. [20, 21]).

2.2 The problem of directional mesh-bias dependency

Discrete and smeared crack approaches have seen many
variations since their first applications during the 1960s,
the former by Ngo and Skordelis [22] and Nilson [23]
and the latter by Rashid [24]. The main motivation be-
hind these developments has been the wide range of



Tracking algorithms for the numerical modelling of cracks in concrete and masonry structures 3

h

S

n

u

n

u

n

ε

n

ε

∞

ww

w/h

W 1 W 2S

h

n

u

n

ε

W 1 W 2

h

(a)

(b)

(c) (d) (e)

W 1

W 2

Fig. 1. (a) Discrete crack approach: the crack (shown with the red dashed curve S) is simulated either in the interior or
across the boundaries of the finite elements. (b) Smeared crack approach: the effect of the crack is simulated within a zone of
width h (bounded by the red dashed curves W1,W2) including one or more finite elements. Displacements and strains within
the localization band of a (c) discrete crack approach, (d) local smeared crack approach and (e) regularised smeared crack
approach.

engineering applications concerned with fracture sim-
ulation, varying from large-scale structures with arbi-
trary and multiple cracking to small-scale ones with
few dominating cracks. The first cases need numeri-
cal tools that offer a balance between computational
efficiency and correct crack localization. In the latter

cases, the increasing importance of the accurate crack
representation necessitates the elaboration of numerical
approaches that can capture rigorously the crack prop-
agation and the associated opening/closing kinematics.

Another equally important driving force for the de-
velopment of various numerical methods has been the



4 Savvas Saloustros et al.

Fig. 2. Illustration of directional mesh-bias dependency in a
mode I crack opening. Top: two meshes with different orien-
tation of the finite elements’ sides. Bottom: deformation and
strain localization band (in grey) induced by a traction force
applied at the top right end. The dependency of the localiza-
tion band to the structure of the mesh is known as directional
mesh-bias dependency.

unexpected numerical difficulties encountered in the
simulation of cracks. Probably, the most significant of
them is the observation that in a finite element anal-
ysis cracks have the tendency to propagate following
the orientation of the finite elements’ sides (see Fig. 2).
This phenomenon became known as directional mesh-
bias dependency/sensitivity and its underlying causes
have been historically a matter of controversy. In par-
ticular, the origin of this pathology has been sought in
the three ingredients of a computational failure model:
(i) the underlying continuum theory, (ii) the constitu-
tive model setting the linear and non-linear response
of the material, and (iii) the spatial discretization pro-
cedure turning the continuum problem into a discrete
one.

Early interpretations of the problem considered
directional mesh-bias dependency as the result of
mathematical features associated with the continuum
model (e.g. [25, 26, 27]). Strain softening involves
negative slope on the local stress-strain (or traction-
displacement) relationship, usually represented by the
use of a negative material tangent modulus. Due to the
latter, the incremental equations of the Boundary Value
Problem (BVP) lose ellipticity in quasi-static problems
or hyperbolicity in dynamic ones. The alteration of the

elliptic/hyperbolic character of the BVP results in the
loss of uniqueness of the solution. As we will present
later, efforts to recover the well-posedness of the BVP
have been possible through modifications on the con-
tinuum or the constitutive model.

Along a different line, mesh-bias dependency has
been considered to be the consequence of the approxi-
mation error involved in the discrete representation of
the continuum differential equations [29, 30, 31]. The
finite element method aims to approximate the solu-
tion of a continuum problem through its discretiza-
tion into finite parts, i.e. the finite elements. The dis-
cretization procedure induces approximation errors in
the pre- and post-peak range of the localization process.
In the linear range, the discretization error originates
from the differentiation process for obtaining the strains
(and the stresses) from the known displacements. In
the post-peak range, the discretization error is induced
by the limited capacity of standard finite elements to
reproduce separation modes in an adequate manner
[32, 33]. Evidently, efforts to overcome these problems
have pointed to the enhancement of the finite element
method accuracy in the pre- and post-localization reg-
iments.

Finally, a third apprehension of the problem con-
siders the constitutive model as the possible flaw to the
mesh-bias dependency of the numerical solution [34]. In
this sense, the mesh-bias independency of the numerical
solution can be alleviated through the proper definition
of the constitutive model and the failure condition.

In the following we present an overview, without
claiming completeness, of discrete and smeared crack
approaches aiming to the mesh independent simulation
of cracking within the context of the Finite Element
Method (FEM). Other methodologies outside the FEM
field, such as meshfree approaches, boundary element
methods or discrete element methods will not be cov-
ered here. For a general review the reader is also referred
to Rabczuk et al. [35].

2.3 Discrete crack approaches

The Discrete Crack Approach (DCA) represents closely
the condition induced by an open crack, provoking dis-
placement discontinuities within the fractured solid.
The concept is based on the long tradition of Fracture
Mechanics that, naturally, have defined the criteria for
crack initiation and propagation in discrete crack ap-
proaches.

The DCA was preferred in the first endeavours
for crack simulation with the finite element method
[22, 36]. In these applications, cracks were modelled by



Tracking algorithms for the numerical modelling of cracks in concrete and masonry structures 5

(a) (b) (c)

(d) (e) (f)

Fig. 3. Discrete (DCA) and Smeared (SCA) crack approaches for the representation of a curved crack. (a) DCA: Inter-element
crack approaches with nodal separation or introduction of cohesive interface elements at the sides of the finite elements,
(b) DCA: Remeshing, (c) DCA: Nodal enrichment in partition of unity methods, (d) DCA-SCA: elements with embedded
discontinuities. (e) SCA: local weak discontinuities, (f) Remeshing and local SCA. (Image adapted from Cervera and Chiumenti
[28]).

means of separating elements, upon satisfying a failure
condition. The crack geometry was represented by the
element edges and an additional set of nodes was intro-
duced so that the interpolation across the element edges
could be discontinuous. A subsequent alternative was
the use of discrete interface elements along the crack
boundaries [37, 4]. These strategies became known as
inter-element crack approaches or discrete-interface ap-
proaches.

Inter-element crack approaches have an obvious lim-
itation; cracks can develop only across the element
boundaries and therefore the crack geometry depends
on the mesh topology (Fig. 3a). To overcome this prob-
lem, two solutions have been proposed. The first one
is to use a mesh with predefined element orientations
aligned with crack-paths that are a priori known, esti-
mated (through preliminary analyses) [38, 39, 40] (Fig.
4) or coincide with weak zones of the simulated mate-
rial, as the mortar-unit interface in masonry structures
[41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46] (Fig. 5). The second choice is
the use of a crack propagation criterion and the con-
tinuous adaptation of the mesh topology, so that the
crack direction coincides with the finite elements’ sides
(Fig. 3b). The crack could be then simulated either by
introducing a discrete interface or an additional set of
nodes [47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53] (see Fig. 6). These ap-
proaches are based on graphic-aided design algorithms
and became known as remeshing techniques. Remeshing

Fig. 4. Simulation of crack propagation in a four-point shear
test on a single-edge notched concrete beam, with predefined
crack-path using discrete interfaces in Rots [38].

Fig. 5. Modelling of masonry with discrete interfaces in Ma-
corini and Izzuddin [45].

is still an important part of several strain localization
techniques (e.g. [54, 55, 56]).

The increased computational cost due to the addi-
tion of nodes and the increase of the bandwidth of the



6 Savvas Saloustros et al.

Fig. 6. Remeshing in the simulation of a propagating crack
within a lug in Saouma and Zatz [47].

Fig. 7. Simulation of crack propagation in a four-point shear
test on a single-edge notched concrete beam with the Discrete
Strong Discontinuity Approach in Dias-da-Costa et al. [67].

stiffness matrix, as well as the intrinsic errors due to
the projections of the variable fields from the old to the
new mesh, make remeshing methods cumbersome for
the simulation of evolving cracks. The answer to this
was to simulate the effect of a crack within an element
so that remeshing and nodal addition are not necessary.
This concept led to the development of the Embedded
Finite Element Method (E-FEM) in which crack discon-
tinuities are embedded within a finite element. An early
effort towards this direction can be traced in the work
of Johnson and Scott [57]. Some years later, Dvorkin et
al. [58] set the basis for the introduction of a strong dis-
continuity within a finite element. The approach raised
much interest in the following years and different ver-
sions of elements with embedded strong discontinuities
were developed (e.g. [59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65, 66])
(Fig. 3d). The Discrete Strong Discontinuity Approach
is based on the same concepts of E-FEM but, as im-
plied by its name, represents the cracks as actual dis-
continuities by introducing global nodes in the elements
crossed by the crack-path [67] (Fig. 7). Early reviews of
the different variations of embedded strong discontinu-
ity methods are given by Jirásek [68] and Oliver et al.
[69].

In the end of the 20th century, Belytschko and Black
[70] and Möes et al. [71] proposed the eXtended Finite
Element Method (X-FEM) as an alternative to the ex-
isting approaches for crack simulation. In X-FEM, the
displacement discontinuities are captured through the

Fig. 8. Nodal enrichment of elements crossed by a crack and
surrounding the crack-tip in the eXtended Finite Element
Method (X-FEM). (Image from Dumstorff and Meschke [90]).

kinematic enrichment of the nodes at elements crossed
by a crack, based on the partition of unity concept
[72, 73] (Fig. 3c). Additional enrichments are applied
to the nodes surrounding the crack-tip within a certain
area (see Fig. 8), which are used for the computation
of the near-tip stress intensity factors and, thus, of the
stress field. The method became very popular, since it
avoids the use of remeshing algorithms, and saw many
variations in the following years such as the Hansbo
method (or Phantom node method) [74, 75, 76] and the
Generalised Finite Element Method [77, 78, 79, 80, 81].
Reviews of the different versions of the X-FEM can be
found in [82, 83, 84, 85, 86], while comparisons between
E-FEM and X-FEM in [87, 88, 89].

A common characteristic for many of the aforemen-
tioned strong discontinuity approaches is the use of de-
vices that define the crack propagation direction and
ensure crack-path continuity, the so-called tracking al-
gorithms. Through them, the potential location of the
crack, and thus the elements or nodes that require the
kinematic enrichment can be identified. It should be
noted here that the use of tracking algorithms is, in
principle, not essential in E-FEM [65, 91, 92]. However,
potential misalignment of the embedded discontinuities
across neighbouring elements provokes spurious stress
locking [93] and mesh-dependent results [94, 95]. For
this reason, tracking algorithms are commonly adopted
by E-FEM approaches.

To overcome the necessity of crack-path continuity
through tracking algorithms, Remmers et al. [96, 97] de-
veloped the cohesive segments method. Here, the crack
is represented in a piecewise linear way, as shown in
Fig. 9, with a collection of overlapping cohesive seg-
ments that extend through three consecutive finite el-
ements. Displacement discontinuities are captured ex-
ploiting the partition of unity method by nodal enrich-
ment and their magnitude is governed by cohesive rela-
tionships. The cracking node method by Song and Be-
lytschko [98] is a similar approach in which crack seg-



Tracking algorithms for the numerical modelling of cracks in concrete and masonry structures 7

Fig. 9. Representation of a crack increment in the cohesive
segments method by Remmers et al. [96]. A crack is intro-
duced at the integration point when the failure criterion is
satisfied and extends through three elements. Nodes in black
are enhanced according to the partition of unity method to
represent the displacement jump (Image from Remmers et al.
[97]).

Fig. 10. Representation of a crack in the cracking node
method by Song and Belytschko [98]. Nodes in black are en-
hanced according to the partition of unity method to repre-
sent the displacement jump. The dashed line represents the
crack-path approximation. (Image from Song and Belytschko
[98]).

ments are introduced to nodes and cross two adjacent
elements (see Fig. 10).

During the last years, efforts to unify the design and
the structural analysis resulted in the development of
the isogeometric analysis. Fracture propagation using
isogeometric analysis is still at its infancy, with the first
approaches exploring the potential of the method using
the partition of unity concept for modelling the cracks
using the discrete crack approach [99, 100].

The above enriching approaches, either at elemen-
tal or nodal level, aim to capture strong discontinuities
upon crack initiation by improving the kinematics of
the finite elements. In this sense, they can be inter-
preted as a way to limit the discretization error in the
non-linear range. In addition to that, directional mesh-

bias independency is improved in many of these ap-
proaches through the use of tracking algorithms, which
define explicitly the location of a propagating crack
within the structure.

2.4 Smeared crack approaches

The Smeared Crack Approach (SCA) is the numerical
counterpart of continuum solid mechanics. Contrary to
discrete crack approaches, the effect of a crack is rep-
resented as smeared over a part of the finite element
mesh, where the stress is reducing for an increasing
strain according to a defined constitutive law (see Fig.
3e). This smeared representation of the material degra-
dation matches well the diffused damage in reinforced
concrete structures, and unsurprisingly the first appli-
cation by Rashid [24] dealt with simulation of cracking
in prestressed concrete vessels.

In the years following Rashid’s work, smeared crack
approaches almost monopolized the simulation of crack-
ing in quasi-brittle materials. The reason for this are
two important practical advantages of the methodol-
ogy compared to discrete crack approaches. Firstly, the
fact that a crack is smeared within one or more el-
ements poses no restriction on the orientation of the
crack planes with respect to the directionality of the el-
ements’ sides. Secondly, their implementation in a con-
ventional finite element code merely requires a subrou-
tine with a constitutive model.

The popularity of the method dropped when it was
realised that the dissipated energy was directly asso-
ciated with the size of the used finite elements (e.g.
[101, 102]). In the following years particular efforts
were made to address the problem [103], leading to the
crack-band approach by Bažant and Oh [5]. According
to this, the traction-displacement relationship of the
cohesive-zone model is adjusted to a stress-strain re-
lationship considering equivalence of the dissipated en-
ergy. The regularization of the stress-strain relationship
is possible considering the band over which the crack is
smeared, h in Figs. 1b, 1d. In local smeared crack ap-
proaches this band is associated to the width of a single
finite element (Fig. 3e). Constitutive models based on
the local SCA are today part of almost every commer-
cial finite element code, and are still the most favoured
approach used by practitioners for crack propagation
analysis in large- and small-scale structures.

As soon as the problem of the mesh-size dependency
was successfully overcome, the trust over local smeared
crack approaches was once more lessened due to the
directional mesh-bias dependency. Considering the fact
that well-aligned meshes, referring to meshes with the



8 Savvas Saloustros et al.

Fig. 11. Crack propagation analysis in a double-edge notched concrete specimen under four-point bending using meshes with
increasing refinement from left to right. Analysis with an isotropic local damage model and a tracking algorithm (top) and
without a tracking algorithm (bottom). (Image from Cervera and Chiumenti [28]).

element sides aligned to the crack propagation, pro-
duced good results, the first endeavoured remedy was
once again the use of remeshing algorithms [104, 105]
(Fig. 3f).

Along a different line, specific finite element formu-
lations have been developed, within the context of local
SCA, aiming to overcome the directional mesh-bias de-
pendency through the limitation of the discretization
error. To this aim, Ortiz et al. [106] and Belytschko et
al. [107] proposed the enrichment of the strain field for
the simulation of kinematic modes induced by a crack.
This methodology was further elaborated by Simo et
al. [108, 109] and resulted in the class of Enhanced As-
sumed Strain (EAS) finite elements (Fig. 3d). A more
recent application of such an elemental enrichment in
a smeared cracking context is the mesh-corrected or-
thotropic damage model [110, 111], being the smeared
counterpart of the previously presented E-FEM.

The beneficial use of tracking algorithms in discrete
crack approaches did not go unnoticed, and during the
last decade tracking algorithms have also been used as
an auxiliary device in local smeared crack approaches
aiming to improve the directional mesh-bias indepen-
dency. This strategy was introduced in a smeared crack-
ing context by Cervera and Chiumenti [30, 28] aiming to
define the location of cracks and restrict their evolution
within a single row of finite elements (Fig. 11). Differ-
ent formulations of tracking algorithms within smeared
crack approaches have been presented in the last years
in references [32, 112, 113, 114, 115, 116].

Mixed FE methods, introduced in the mid 1960s
[118], offer another possibility for reducing the dis-
cretization error. The approach considers additional
variables (such as the pressure, the stresses or the
strains) to the nodal displacements as the primary un-
knowns of the boundary value problem under question.
After their long use in computational fluid dynamics,
due to their good performance in incompressible situ-
ations, mixed formulations were introduced during the
last decade of the 20th century in strain localization
problems by Zienkiewicz et al. [105] and Pastor et al.
[119, 120]. In the last years, several mixed methods
have been developed and applied to strain localiza-
tion problems, including mixed pressure-displacement
[121, 122, 29, 123, 124], stress-displacement [125, 31]
and strain-displacement [125, 126, 127, 117, 128] finite
elements (Fig. 12).

2.5 Regularized smeared crack approaches

In the 1990s, academic efforts focused on the develop-
ment of new formulations that aimed to recover the
well-posedness of the boundary value problem. The
fruit of these efforts have been the so-called regu-
larised smeared crack approaches, including micropo-
lar, non-local, gradient-enhanced and phase-field mod-
els. In micro-polar or Cosserat models the underly-
ing continuum description is enriched by adding rota-
tional degrees-of-freedom to the conventional transla-
tional degrees-of-freedom [129, 26]. In non-local models



Tracking algorithms for the numerical modelling of cracks in concrete and masonry structures 9

Fig. 12. Comparison between numerically obtained crack pattern using a mixed strain/displacement formulation by Benedetti
et al. [117] and the experimental result of a pull-out test on a concrete specimen. (Image from Benedetti et al. [117]).

the local stress does not depend on the local strain but
on an averaged strain computed over a defined area
[130, 131]. A similar approach is followed in gradient-
enhanced models, in which non-locality is considered by
introducing higher order deformation gradients in the
constitutive relationship [132, 133, 134]. For a compar-
ison between non-local and gradient-enhanced models
see Peerlings et al. [135] and between non-local mod-
els and X-FEM see Bobiński and Tejchman [136]. In
the last years, Griffith’s variational approach to frac-
ture has been revived through the phase-field models
[137, 138, 139, 140] (Fig. 13) (for a review see Ambati
et al. [141]). Despite their different origin, de Borst and
Verhoosel [142, 143] have presented recently the close
mathematical relationship between gradient-enhanced
and phase-field models. A common standpoint of the
above models is the use of an internal characteristic
length of physical nature, which acts as a localization
limiter, as well as the use of highly refined meshes
within this length to capture the material degradation
[33].

Finally, strain-rate dependent viscous-regularised
models [25, 144] have been considered as an alterna-
tive solution that recovers the well-posedness of the
boundary value problem through the addition of vis-
cous effects in the constitutive relationship. Obviously,
the regularization effect vanishes with reducing viscos-
ity.

2.6 Hybrid crack approaches

Apart from representing a crack exclusively with either
a discrete or a smeared crack approach, there is also
the possibility to combine both as shown in Fig. 14. In
these hybrid strategies initial micro-cracking is simu-
lated with the use of a smeared crack approach. At a
second stage, in which material degradation has reached
a defined threshold, the crack formation is simulated
through the introduction of a strong discontinuity.

In the majority of these hybrid crack approaches,
smeared cracking is simulated with a different kind of

a regularised SCA model such as non-local [93, 145],
viscous-regularised [146], or gradient-enhanced [147].
The use of a strong discontinuity at a later stage of
damage evolution allows for the localized representation
of cracking, which otherwise is smeared over a defined,
and usually highly refined, region of the mesh due to the
non-local definition (Fig. 14). An alternative approach
to the use of regularised models for the smeared crack
representation was adopted by Belytschko et al. [148],
in which a transition between a local damage model
and an X-FEM with cohesive enrichment is applied for
the simulation of dynamic cracks. Aiming to a better
estimation of the stress field prior to the introduction of
a strong discontinuity, Oliver et al. [149] and Lloberas-
Valls et al. [150] have recently proposed the use of mixed
strain-displacement and enhanced assumed strains for-
mulations, respectively.

3 Tracking algorithms

Tracking algorithms are an important part of many fi-
nite element approaches for the simulation of cracking.
Their role is to identify the direction of the crack prop-
agation, and designate the consolidated and extended
crack-path within the discretized domain during the nu-
merical simulation. According to the selected crack rep-
resentation, a smeared or discrete crack approach is ap-
plied to the elements within the crack-path to simulate
the effect of the crack in the material, while the rest
of the elements outside the crack are usually prevented
from failing.

Tracking algorithms can benefit the numerical so-
lution at least in three ways [32]. Firstly, they aid the
identification of the expected solution by minimizing
the number of the potential ones. This is done through
the use of a crack propagation criterion that defines the
crack direction. Secondly, they result in a more realistic
crack representation, especially in the case of mixed-
mode problems with curved cracks. Finally, they mini-
mize or limit the energy dissipation outside of the crack



10 Savvas Saloustros et al.

Fig. 13. (a) Single edge notched pure shear test setup, (b) used mesh, and (c) phase-field simulation by de Borst and Verhoosel
[142]. (Collection of images from de Borst and Verhoosel [142]).

Fig. 14. Representation of a crack in a wedge splitting test
combing a non-local damage model with X-FEM by Comi
et al. [145]. D represents the value of the non-local damage
variable. (Image from Comi et al. [145]).

band. The significance of the latter is to be emphasized
since the stress-strain law in local smeared crack ap-
proaches is commonly regularised considering that each
crack propagates within a single row of finite elements.

The long tradition of tracking algorithms in Discrete
Crack Approaches (DCA) is justified for two more rea-
sons. Firstly, they avoid numerical instabilities, since
the kinematic enrichment is applied only to a narrow
band within the mesh where the crack is expected to
develop. Indiscriminate enrichment may not provide
stable results. Secondly, they guarantee the crack-path
continuity, improving in this way the robustness of the
method. As discussed, crack-path continuity of the in-
troduced strong discontinuities in discrete crack ap-
proaches is important to ensure compatibility between
the deformation modes of adjacent elements, which if
not guaranteed may result in spurious stress locking
and mesh-dependent results [93, 95, 94].

The successful application of tracking algorithms
in discrete crack approaches pointed to their potential

benefits in a smeared cracking context, an approach
which was introduced in [28, 30]. In the Smeared Crack
Approach (SCA), tracking algorithms identify the ele-
ments crossed by the crack-path allowing them to dam-
age according to the selected constitutive law, while
preventing the ones outside of it from failing.

The following of this section outlines commonly
used tracking algorithms in the available literature.
First, a categorization of tracking algorithms is per-
formed in terms of the information necessary for the
definition and storage of the crack-path. According to
this, four categories are defined and presented includ-
ing: (i) local, (ii) global, (ii) partial domain tracking
algorithms and (iv) tracking algorithms based on an un-
derlying damage-related field. Following that, the crack
propagation criteria, which can be used for most of the
tracking algorithms independently of their category, are
summarized.

3.1 Local algorithms

Local tracking algorithms identify the location of a
crack within the mesh in an element-by-element man-
ner. The crack propagation direction is computed lo-
cally, using information available at element level or
within a restricted area surrounding it. Using this di-
rection, the new crack segment within an element can
be defined, as well as the locus of the crack edges in
neighbouring elements. The same strategy is followed
for each crack that may exist in the analysed struc-
ture, starting from the first element of the crack (called
hereafter as crack-root) or the last element at the crack-
front (called as crack-tip in two-dimensions or crack-
face in three-dimensions).

The above general procedure, which is followed by
a local tracking algorithm for constructing the crack-
path, is illustrated in Fig. 15. The necessary ingredients



Tracking algorithms for the numerical modelling of cracks in concrete and masonry structures 11

A

n

B

crack-path

crack-tip

Fig. 15. Crack propagation in a part of the mesh using local
tracking algorithms.

are the crack propagation direction n and the crack-
entry coordinates. Starting from the crack-entry point
(Point A in Fig. 15), the exit point of the crack at the
crack-tip element is easily identified as the intersection
between the extension of the vector n and one of the
element’s sides (Point B in Fig. 15). The shared side
with one of the neighbouring elements and the inter-
section point define the next crack-tip element and the
position of its crack-entry point, respectively.

Owing to their quite simple strategy, local track-
ing algorithms have been used in various discrete and
smeared crack approaches. Their implementation is
likewise straightforward, needing a strategy for the cal-
culation of the crack propagation direction, as in all
tracking algorithms, and a side-connectivity array indi-
cating the elements sharing a side with a given one. On
the one hand, the latter can be easily constructed at the
beginning of the analysis and stored for the rest of it
(provided that no remeshing is used). The propagation
direction, on the other hand, is continuously updated
at the crack-tip element of each crack.

Despite the intrinsic simplicity of the above proce-
dure, the literature riddles with diverse formulations
of local tracking algorithms. The reason for this lies
on their strong dependence on the finite element tech-
nology used. As it will be shown in the following, the
crack propagation path within an element may vary
depending to the interpolation strategy used, while the
procedure followed for identifying the crack-entry/exit
points depends on the shape of the used finite elements
(triangles, quadrilaterals, tetrahedra, hexahedra etc.).

Local tracking algorithms were the first used for the
simulation of propagating cracks in finite element ap-
plications. Their role was to define the direction and
length of a new crack segment, which was then sim-
ulated through remeshing and nodal separation tech-
niques [151, 47] or later with the introduction of cohe-
sive interface elements [48].

Fig. 16. C1 continuous crack-path in the local tracking al-
gorithm proposed by Slobbe et al. [112]. Si denotes the crack
propagation direction entry from the preceding element i.
(Image from Slobbe et al. [112]).

A common characteristic of local tracking algo-
rithms is the construction of a continuous crack-path
(see Fig. 15). This intrinsic crack-path continuity of
the method is a key feature for the limitation of stress
locking in approaches with embedded strong disconti-
nuities. In that sense, local tracking algorithms blend
very well with E-FEM and numerous implementations
exist in the literature [152, 153, 154, 67, 155, 156]. The
first applications of X-FEM employed, likewise, local
tracking algorithms for recognizing the crack-path and
enriching accordingly the nodes of the elements crossed
by it [70, 71]. It is noted that in X-FEM the crack-tip
can be located at any point within the element, con-
trary to E-FEM in which the actual location is usually
not defined within the element.

Complementary to their long tradition in discrete
crack approaches, the use of local tracking algorithms
in a smeared cracking context was proposed relatively
recently in [157, 158, 159, 32]. In those applications, ma-
terial degradation was simulated in the elements within
the crack-path through the use of local continuum dam-
age mechanics models, while the rest maintained a lin-
ear elastic stress-strain behaviour. Pelá et al. [160, 161]
extended this tracking algorithm for the simulation of
cracking in orthotropic materials such as masonry and
wood.

In most local tracking algorithms, the crack prop-
agation direction is updated at each new element and
kept fixed during its propagation through it. This choice
naturally gives a C0 continuous crack-path constructed
by piecewise linear segments. Slobbe et al. [112, 162]
have recently proposed a local tracking algorithm in a
SCA context, which can provide C1 crack continuity
among elements (see Fig. 16). This is achieved by con-
structing the crack propagation field within a crack-tip



12 Savvas Saloustros et al.

Fig. 17. Local tracking algorithm for the definition of a new
crack surface in Areias and Belytschko [163]. n denotes the
defined crack propagation direction according to the propaga-
tion criterion and nm the modified one computed respecting
pre-existing crack faces in adjacent elements. (Image from
Areias and Belytschko [163]).

element considering the propagation directions at its in-
tegration points and the crack-entry direction from the
previous element. The method needs the assignment
of crack propagation directions at the corner nodes
through a weighted linear least squares approximation
using the known propagation directions at the crack-
entry point and the integration points. Then the crack-
path field can be interpolated at any location within
the element using its shape functions.

In the case of planar cracks the extension of local
tracking algorithms to three dimensions is straightfor-
ward (see [164]). Difficulties, however, may arise for rep-
resenting the crack surface in non-planar cracks and an
adequate strategy is necessary to ensure crack-path con-
tinuity. To this aim, several approaches have been pro-
posed. In Areias and Belytschko [163], the new crack
surface in the crack-tip element is defined consider-
ing a modified crack propagation direction. This de-
pends on the local crack direction computed at element
level and the pre-existing crack faces (i.e. the intersect-
ing facets of neighbouring cracks with the current el-
ement) in neighbouring elements (see Fig. 17). Jäger
et al. [165] report that it may be impossible using the
above approach to construct a new crack plane in the
case that the crack faces of adjacent elements do not

Fig. 18. Local tracking algorithm for the definition of a new
crack surface (shown by the dashed triangles) in Gasser and
Holzapfel [163]. N denotes the defined crack propagation di-
rection according to the propagation criterion, N? the modi-
fied one and P a point used for the definition of the new crack
surface. (a) Existing non-smooth crack surface and crack-
front, (b) prediction of the new crack surface using N and
P , (c) correction of the new crack surface using N? and P ,
(d) patch of elements used for the definition of N?. (Image
from Gasser and Holzapfel [167]).

lie within one plane at the crack-tip element. Gasser
and Holzapfel proposed two alternatives to overcome
the above problem by relaxing the requirement of a
crack-path continuity among the different crack faces.
In their first proposal [166], a new crack surface can
be uniquely defined by its normal vector and a single
point located at the crack. The first is computed con-
sidering the underlying stress field, while the definition
of the latter depends on the adjacent crack-edges. The
authors, however, observed that in some cases this ap-
proach may result in very irregular crack surfaces which
may lead to (unphysical) crack bifurcations [167]. As a
solution to this shortcoming, they proposed the addi-
tion of a corrector phase that follows the first prediction
of the crack surface with the above procedure [167]. The
corrector phase adjusts the predicted crack plane to fit
the neighbouring cracks surfaces such that patch-wise
linear or quadratic crack representations are possible
(see Fig. 18). Jäger et al. [165] present a comparison
between the tracking algorithm proposed by Areias and
Belytschko [163] and the one by Gasser and Holzapfel
[167].

3.2 Global algorithms

Contrary to local methods, global tracking algorithms
compute simultaneously all the potential crack-paths
at each step of the analysis. This is achieved through
the solution of a linear boundary value problem defined
in the whole analysed domain. The approach was pro-



Tracking algorithms for the numerical modelling of cracks in concrete and masonry structures 13

Fig. 19. The heat conduction problem used for the compu-
tation of the thermal isolines representing potential crack-
paths in the global tracking algorithm proposed by Oliver et
al. [168, 169]. (Image from Oliver and Huespe [169]).

posed by Oliver and co-workers [168, 169] and since
then has been applied in various contexts for the prop-
agation of two-dimensional (2D) and three-dimensional
(3D) cracks.

The basic idea of the global tracking algorithm is to
construct a scalar function θ whose isolines represent
the crack propagation directions within the analysed
structure. The procedure is presented in the following
keeping the notation used in [168, 169] to facilitate the
comparison with Fig. 19.

The scalar function θ, used for the definition of the
potential crack-paths, is computed through the solution
of an anisotropic heat conduction-like boundary value
problem which can be defined as

∇ · q = 0 in Ω (1a)

q = −K · ∇ θ = −T
∂θ

∂T
−
[
S
∂θ

∂S

]
in Ω (1b)

q · v = −(v ·T)
∂θ

∂T
−
[
(v · S)

∂θ

∂S

]
= 0 on ∂Ω. (1c)

In the above equations q is the heat flux, v is the
outnormal to the boundary ∂Ω, S and T are arbitrary
unit vectors having the direction of the failure plane. K
is an anisotropic conductivity-like tensor defined as

K = T⊗T + [S⊗ S] + ε I. (2)

where I represents the unit tensor and ε is a small
perturbation parameter introduced to avoid the sin-
gularity of K. The effect of this perturbation param-
eter was studied in [170]. In the above equations, the
terms within the brackets are necessary for the use of
the tracking algorithm in 3D problems and have to be
considered null in 2D ones.

Adopting a finite element discretization, the above
boundary value problem is solved through a system of
linear algebraic equations

[K] {θ} = {0} (3)

with [K] being the stiffness matrix of the heat
conduction-like finite element problem and {θ} the vec-
tor of temperature-like nodal unknowns [168]. The solu-
tion of the problem needs the definition of the T and S
vectors. If a vector N represents the crack propagation
direction, computed according to the selected propaga-
tion criterion, the T and S are selected as orthogonal
to N. Finally, in order to provide a non-uniform field
for θ, two arbitrary values for θ need to be prescribed,
at least, in two nodes.

As soon as the failure condition is reached at an el-
ement i, its corresponding value θi = θ0 is computed.
The crack-path can then be identified by constructing
the isoline corresponding to this value θi, starting from
the centroid of the crack root element. Fracture is sim-
ulated by applying the chosen crack representation ap-
proach at the elements crossed by the θi isoline. In the
original approach by Oliver et al. [168, 169] this was
done by introducing strong discontinuities. Later, Hue-
spe et al. [171, 172] followed the same approach for
the simulation of ductile failure, whereas Dumstorff and
Meschke [90] used this global tracking algorithm in the
context of X-FEM. Cervera and Chiumenti [28, 30] im-
plemented the same algorithm in a smeared cracking
context, and cracks were simulated through the use of
an isotropic continuum damage model in the elements
crossed by the crack-path.

Recently, Riccardi et al. [173] have further elabo-
rated the global tracking algorithm by proposing an
alternative mathematical formulation for the construc-
tion of the θ scalar field. The motivation behind their
work is the eradication of the user-defined perturba-
tion parameter used for the definition of K in Eq. (2).
This approach has shown to increase the stability of the
global tracking algorithm, albeit the precision seems to
reduce for coarse meshes [173] compared to the original
one. In the same work, the authors propose the update
of the crack-root at each numerical step and to con-
struct the isoline of an existing crack considering the
θ value of the crack-tip. This strategy seems to alle-
viate problems associated with the loss of crack-path
continuity.

Global tracking algorithms are in general more de-
manding from the computational point of view [165]
and more code invasive compared to local ones [32, 149].
This is because the tangent field to the crack T (and S
in 3D) is computed for the whole domain, even at loca-
tions away from cracks and the global problem needs to
be solved for each step. An additional limitation rises
from their inability to handle merging, intersecting or
branching cracks. Contrarily, one important advantage,
evidenced from Eqs. (3), is the straightforward exten-
sion to 3D problems as shown in Oliver et al. [168],



14 Savvas Saloustros et al.

Chaves [174] and Jäger et al. [175]. In addition to that,
there is no strong dependence on the finite element tech-
nology, as with local tracking algorithms.

3.3 Partial-domain algorithms

Partial-domain tracking algorithms are a compromise
between local and global ones. In these approaches, the
crack is tracked through the solution of a boundary
value problem at each numerical step within a sub-
domain rather than in the whole structure.

The most famous partial-domain tracking algorithm
is the level set method. Originally, it was proposed by
Osher and Sethian [176] for the representation of the
motion of interfaces as the zero of a function, called the
level set function. Much later, Belytschko et al. [177]
and Stolarska et al. [178] introduced the use of level set
methods for crack representation within the context of
X-FEM.

A level set function is any continuous function divid-
ing a domain into two parts and taking negative values
in one, and positive in the other. The zero level set
of this function defines the location of the interface of
interest. Contrary to the original approach [176, 179],
which focused on the motion of closed interfaces, cracks
are open ones. Consequently, their representation neces-
sitates one level set for representing the signed distance
to the crack surface, and an additional one for each
crack-tip representing the signed distance from it (see
Fig. 20).

The necessary components for the tracking of cracks
with the level set method are: (i) the level set func-
tions for each crack, (ii) an update algorithm for these
level set functions, (iii) the crack propagation direc-
tion, which normally is based on local criteria and the
computation of the stress intensity factors and (iv)
the crack propagation velocity or crack increment size
which is used for the extension of the crack during one
step and can be defined according to mechanical laws
(e.g. [177, 180, 181, 182]) or explicitly by the user (e.g.
[183, 184]).

At the beginning of the numerical analysis, a crack
is introduced and a function ψ is constructed using the
signed distance function from the crack

ψ(x, t = 0) = ±min ||x− xγ0 || (4)

while the additional functions for each crack-tip ϕ1,2
are defined as

ϕi(x, t = 0) = (x− xi) · t̂i. (5)

In the above equations, x represents the location of a
point within the structure, xγ0 is the location of a point

belonging to the initially defined crack γ0, xi is the lo-
cation of the ith crack-tip and t̂i is a unit vector tangent
to the crack at its tip i. The sign of the minimum dis-
tance in Eq. (4) depends on which side of the crack a
point x is located. As can be seen in Fig. 20 with these
definitions the crack locus can be defined as

γt = {x : ψ(x, t) = 0 ∩ ϕ(x, t) ≤ 0)} (6)

where

ϕ(x, t) = max
i

(ϕi). (7)

In the level set method, the crack is represented in
an implicit way. The location of the crack is identified
through interpolation of the level set values, which are
stored at the nodes, using the same shape functions of
the displacements. Hence, the crack representation de-
pends on the interpolation strategy of the chosen finite
elements. Aiming to reduce the high computational cost
and storage requirements, a partial domain around the
crack is usually considered for the computation, update
and storage of the level sets at the nodes of elements
within it [178].

Having defined the initial level set functions for each
crack, its location and propagation is monitored with
the update of its level sets during the numerical anal-
ysis. To this end, several proposals exist to update the
level set functions, which can be defined through geo-
metrical evolutions and non-differential equations [178,
181, 183, 185], fast marching algorithms [186, 187, 188],

Fig. 20. Level set functions for the representation of a crack
in Stolarska et al. [178]. ψ is the signed distance function from
the crack and ϕ1,2 are the signed distances from the normal
to each crack-tip. (Image from Stolarska et al. [178]).



Tracking algorithms for the numerical modelling of cracks in concrete and masonry structures 15

partial differential equations [180] or mixed approaches
based on both geometrical and differential equation ap-
proaches [189, 182]. Fries and Baydoun [184] proposed
an alternative approach for the crack extension. In their
work, cracks are represented by level set functions but
the crack extension is made with the use of a local
tracking procedure starting from the crack-tip. When
the crack-extension is identified, then the level sets are
updated to include the new crack-path. Similar ap-
proaches have been recently presented by Holl et al.
[190] and Sadeghirad et al. [191].

The proper update of the level set functions is very
important for the accuracy of the numerical solution in
X-FEM. This is due to the multiple roles that level sets
have within X-FEM methods, the most important of
which is the proper identification of the crack propa-
gation and, thus, the nodal enrichment of the elements
that are crossed by the crack, as well as those surround-
ing the crack-tip. Additionally, level sets are important
for the calculation of auxiliary variables, such as the
near-tip displacement and stress field and the stress-
intensity factors, which in turn define the propagation
direction. Duflot [189] gives an excellent review of dif-
ferent level set update methods and their role within
X-FEM. The generality of some of the update schemes
as well of the definitions for the level set functions allows
their almost straightforward extension to 3D problems
(e.g. [192, 193, 185, 194, 195]).

In finite element crack modelling, level set methods
have been used almost exclusively in X-FEM applica-
tions. This is due to the fact that the propagation de-
pends heavily on the crack-tip stresses, which can be ac-
curately computed with the use of the enrichment func-
tions. Contrariwise, in E-FEM the stresses can be far
from accurate in the crack-tip because a crack propa-
gates from one element to the other [66]. For this reason,
level set methods cannot be applied in E-FEM without
important elaboration at the crack-tip stress field [66],
with recent developments in this direction presented in
[196].

Another partial-domain tracking algorithm can be
considered the one presented by Feist and Hofstetter
[94, 197]. This approach is based on the global tracking
algorithm presented in the previous Section 3.2, with
the main difference that the scalar field θ is constructed
only within a partial domain of the whole structure.
This domain is occupied by elements already or poten-
tially crossed by the crack. The approach is, similarly
to the global tracking algorithm, easily extended to 3D
cases [198], see also [199]. A comparison of the partial-
domain and the global tracking algorithms is available
in [94].

3.4 Algorithms based on an underlying
damage-related field

In the last years a new class of tracking algorithms has
emerged, in which the crack-path is identified consid-
ering an underlying scalar field representing material
degradation in a smeared manner. These tracking al-
gorithms are used in hybrid discontinuity approaches,
presented in Section 2.6, and their aim is to monitor the
evolution of the material degradation modelled with a
smeared crack approach, and define the location where
a strong discontinuity will be inserted to simulate the
localized jump of the displacements. The use of track-
ing algorithms within these approaches aims to enhance
the localization process and the correct representation
of the crack kinematics rather than the enhancement
of the mesh-objectivity, which was essentially the pur-
pose of the algorithms presented in the previous sec-
tions. The latter is achieved, as discussed in Section
2.6, through the use of alternative smeared crack ap-
proaches such as regularised models, mixed formula-
tions or finite elements with embedded weak disconti-
nuities.

One of the first tracking algorithms in this category
can be found in the work of Comi et al. [145], where
a non-local damage model is used as the underlying
field for the tracking of the crack. In this approach, the
tracking algorithm monitors the non-local damage at
the elements ahead of the crack-tip. As soon as this ex-
ceeds a defined threshold, a cohesive crack is inserted
to the element directly connected to the crack-tip. The
initial direction of the crack is set as equal to the direc-
tion of the already formed damage band of the non-local
damage field.

The recently proposed crack-path-field tracking al-
gorithm by Dias et al. [201, 202] and Oliver et al. [149]
determines the position of a discrete crack considering
a diffuse strain localization field αh (see Fig. 21), which
is obtained by non-linear local constitutive models with
strain softening. The crack-path-field is defined as the
location where the selected scalar field αh takes its max-
imum value. The procedure for defining the crack-path
is composed of four steps including the computation
of: (i) the smooth continuous approximation of vari-
able αh denoted as ψh, (ii) its directional derivative
∂ψh/∂x, (iii) a smooth continuous approximation of
this directional derivative µh and (iv) its zero level set
Γ . The above fields are illustrated in Fig. 21 for an
one-dimensional case. The crack-path-field algorithm
is used in the last part of a kinematic enhancement
series employed for the mesh-objective localization of
fracture. The first kinematic enhancement is applied to
elements in which material bifurcation is about to occur



16 Savvas Saloustros et al.

Fig. 21. One dimensional illustration of the strain localization field αh and its directional derivative ψh (left) and the crack-
path-field Γ as the zero level of µh, which is the continuous approximation of ψh (right). (Image from Dias et al. [200]).

Fig. 22. Damage gradient vectors and an orthoradial vector
eθ at the crack-tip of a potential crack in the marching ridges
algorithm of Feld-Payet et al. [55]. (Image from Feld-Payet et
al. [55]).

[150] or has already occurred [149, 200]. This enhance-
ment provides a better approximation of field αh in
potential locations of strain localization. Then, at an a-
priori defined stage of the localisation process, a strong
discontinuity is inserted at the aforementioned elements
that are already enhanced in a weak manner and are
crossed by the zero level set of the crack-path-field Γ .
The algorithm has been used in two-dimensional simu-
lations of quasi-static [149, 203, 200] and dynamic crack
propagation [150].

Feld-Payet et al. [55] recently proposed a tracking
algorithm to similar the crack-path-field. The so-called
marching ridges tracking algorithm is based on the
identification of the crack-path as the zero level set of
a scalar product involving the gradient of a regularised
degradation-related field and an orthoradial vector eθ
defined on a polar grid centred on the crack-tip or crack
origin (see Fig. 22). The algorithm has been used for
both 2D and 3D problems.

Fig. 23. Geometrical tracking algorithm proposed by
Tamayo-Mas and Rodríquez-Ferran [204] for the calculation
of the crack-path as the simplified medial axis (θ-SMA) of bi-
tangent interior circles to a regularised damage field. (Image
from Tamayo-Mas and Rodríquez-Ferran [204]).

In the continuous-discontinuous approach of
Tamayo-Mas and Rodríguez-Ferran [205, 206] the
transition between regularised and discrete damage
is through the use of a geometrical tracking algo-
rithm. The crack-path is constructed as the simplified
medial axis (denoted as θ-SMA in Fig. 23) of an
area where regularised damage overpasses a defined
damage threshold. The θ-SMA is the loci of centres
of bi-tangent interior circles to the aforementioned
damaged area (see Fig. 23). In 3D, a damaged volume
is considered instead of an area and the crack is
defined in a similar way by its medial surface. The
algorithm has been used as a transition between a
gradient-enhanced damage model and traction-free
cracks in [204] or cohesive cracks in [206].



Tracking algorithms for the numerical modelling of cracks in concrete and masonry structures 17

3.5 Crack propagation direction in tracking algorithms

The crack propagation criterion is a vital part of a
tracking algorithm. This criterion is usually based on
the theory of Fracture Mechanics, empirical or physical
considerations. In the following, a summary of the most
used propagation criteria within tracking algorithms is
given. Comparative studies between different propaga-
tion criteria used in tracking algorithms have been pre-
sented by Bouchard et al. [207], Dumstorff and Meschke
[90] and Unger et al. [208].

3.5.1 Linear Elastic Fracture Mechanics criteria

Linear Elastic Fracture Mechanics (LEFM) provides
three criteria with significant use in tracking algo-
rithms: (i) the maximum circumferential (or maximum
hoop/tangential) stress, (ii) the minimum strain energy
density, and (iii) the maximum energy release criteria.

The maximum circumferential stress criterion, pro-
posed by Erdogan and Sih [209], states that a crack
propagates from its tip at a polar angle θc in which the
circumferential stress σθθ reaches its maximum. As the
circumferential stress in the crack propagation direction
is a principal stress, the angle θc can be determined an-
alytically by equating the shear circumferential stress
σrθ to zero

σrθ =
1

2π r
cos(θ/2)(

1

2
KI sin θ +

1

2
KII(3 cos θ − 1)

)
= 0 (8)

where θ and r are the local polar coordinates at the
crack-tip and KI , KII are the stress intensity factors
under mode I and mode II loading, respectively. The
solution of the above equation gives

θc = 2 arctan

[
1

4

(
KI/KII ±

√
(KI/KII)2 + 8

)]
. (9)

The crack propagation angle θc is the one correspond-
ing to the maximum σθθ between the two possible ones
given by Eq. (9). The extension of the maximum cir-
cumferential stress criterion to 3D has been presented
by Shöllmann et al. [210].

Instead of considering stresses, the coeval minimum
strain energy density criterion [211, 212, 213] looks at
the strain energy density distribution around the crack-
tip for the definition of the crack propagation direction.
Here, crack propagation takes place when the strain-
energy density factor S reaches a critical value Sc (as-
sumed to be a material property) at a neighbourhood

of the crack-tip and in a direction defined by the angle
θc corresponding to the local minimum of S

∂S

∂θ

∣∣∣
θ=θc

= 0 (10a)

∂2S

∂θ2

∣∣∣
θ=θc

≥ 0. (10b)

The strain energy density is defined as [211, 212, 213]

S = α11K
2
I + 2α12KI KII + α22K

2
II + α33K

2
III (11)

where

α11 =
1

16G
[(κ− cos θ)(1 + cos θ)] (12)

α12 =
1

16G
sin θ [2 cos θ − (κ− 1)] (13)

α22 =
1

16G

[(κ+ 1)(1− cos θ) + (1 + cos θ)(3 cos θ − 1)] (14)

α33 =
1

4G
(15)

with ν being the Poisson ratio andG the shear modulus.
Finally, κ is defined as

κ =

{
3− 4 ν for plane strain
(3− ν)/(1 + ν) for plane stress.

(16)

As can be seen from Eqs. (9) and (11), the use of the
maximum stress and the minimum strain energy den-
sity criteria necessitates the computation of the stress
intensity factors. In the first applications of these lo-
cal propagation criteria [151, 214, 47], the stress in-
tensity factors were computed with the use of spe-
cial singular finite elements around the crack-tip (e.g.
[215, 216, 217]). An alternative to these elements was
the use of isoparametric quadratic elements with sim-
ple modifications on the position of the internal nodes
[218, 219], such that the singular stress fields near a
crack-tip could be reproduced [220]. Considering recent
applications, the maximum circumferential stress crite-
rion is very popular within the X-FEM. In this con-
text, the stress intensity factors are calculated using
domain forms of the interaction integrals over a se-
lected area circumscribed by a radius rd, which is nor-
mally defined as a factor of the finite element charac-
teristic length (see Fig. 24). Applications of the max-
imum circumferential stress criterion in the context
of the partition of unity methods can be found in
[70, 71, 221, 222, 223, 185, 224] among others.

The maximum release energy criterion stems from
the original Griffith’s energy release theory concept
[225, 226] and was later reconsidered in [209, 227, 228].
Contrary to the above criteria, which depend on a local



18 Savvas Saloustros et al.

Fig. 24. Selected elements surrounding the crack-tip for the
calculation of the interaction integral in the computation of
the crack propagation direction within X-FEM. (Image from
Moës et al. [71]).

near-tip variable (i.e. the stress or strain energy den-
sity), the maximum release energy criterion depends
on a global energy state. In particular, a crack prop-
agates from the crack-tip along a direction defined by
the polar angle θc, which maximizes the global released
energy of the structure Ge. This can be stated by the
following conditions

∂Ge
∂θ

∣∣∣
θ=θc

= 0 (17a)

∂2Ge
∂θ2

∣∣∣
θ=θc

≤ 0. (17b)

Propagation is initiated when the released energy Ge
reaches a critical value Gc, which is a material property.

Early applications of the maximum energy release
criterion in the context of the finite element method
can be found in [151, 229]. Much later, Meschke and
Dumstorff [230, 90] used the maximum energy release
criterion in the context of X-FEM. In their formulation,
the crack propagation direction as well as its extension
length are introduced as global unknowns to the prob-
lem, which is then solved enforcing a minimization of
the total energy of the body. Similar criteria have been
used afterwards by Unger et al. [208] and Zhang et al.
[66]. In the latter approaches, an iterative procedure
is used and the global energy of the structure is com-
puted for different angles and crack extensions. The an-
gle minimizing the global energy is finally selected for
the new increment. This iterative procedure increases
importantly the computational cost of these methods
[208].

In their first applications in the context of FEM the
above LEFM criteria were commonly implemented in
the same code and used for comparative studies using
remeshing and nodal separation methods (see for in-
stance [151, 48]). The same procedure was followed later

by Bouchard et al. [207]. A common outcome of these
studies was the similar performance of the maximum
circumferential stress and the maximum release energy
criteria, while the use of the minimum strain energy
density criterion yielded less accurate results regarding
the expected crack propagation [151, 207].

3.5.2 Maximum Principal Stress criterion

When resisting forces are assumed to apply at the crack
surfaces, either through a cohesive-traction separation
law or from a stress-strain continuum model, the singu-
larity at the crack-tip considered in linear elastic frac-
ture mechanics disappears [222]. In such cases, the use
of the presented propagation criteria of LEFM need
some further modifications. One very common modifi-
cation concerns the maximum circumferential stress cri-
terion, which turns into the maximum principal stress
criterion.

The maximum principal stress criterion states that
a crack will propagate in a direction orthogonal to
the maximum principal stresses. Due to its straight-
forward implementation, as well as the good accuracy
for straight and slightly curved cracks, this criterion has
been one of the most used for crack propagation in both
discrete [51, 39, 231, 232, 233, 234] and smeared crack
approaches [158, 32, 161, 112, 115, 113].

A common practice used for the improvement of
the reliability of the stresses in the vicinity of the
crack is to use an average stress tensor, which is com-
puted using smoothing/averaging techniques around
the crack-tip (e.g. [235, 231, 236, 198, 97, 67]) or non-
local stress/strain tensors [93] (see Fig. 25).

Fig. 25. Computation of the crack propagation considering
an averaged value of stresses of the crack-tip and neighbour-
ing elements through Gaussian weight function in Dumstorff
and Meschke [90].



Tracking algorithms for the numerical modelling of cracks in concrete and masonry structures 19

3.5.3 Discontinuous material bifurcation analysis

Discontinuous material bifurcation analysis is fre-
quently used for the computation of the propagation
direction. The method dates back to the work of Hill
[237] who associated the strong ellipticity character
of the acoustic (or localization) tensor Q to the ex-
istence of discontinuous acceleration waves. In subse-
quent works the loss of the elliptic (or hyperbolic in dy-
namics) character of the governing equations was linked
likewise to the strain localization in an elastic-plastic
[238, 239, 240] or a softening solid [60, 241, 242].

The criterion for loss of the material stability and
therefore onset of strain localization can be defined as

det [Q(n)] ≤ 0 (18)

where the acoustic/localization tensor Q is a function
of the constitutive tangent matrix C and the normal
vector to the material discontinuity n

Q = n ·C · n. (19)

The above equations define that the material loses its
stability (or, in other words, the material bifurcates)
when the determinant of the acoustic tensors ceases to
be positive in a direction defined by a vector n. In-
versely, the crack propagation direction can be com-
puted by finding the normal vector n which gives the
minimum determinant of Q and checking whether the
inequality of Eq. (18) is satisfied.

For simple cases, analytical derivations are possi-
ble for the discontinuous material bifurcation analysis
[237, 243, 244, 245, 169], while more general cases ne-
cessitate the numerical solution of the problem with
proper algorithms [106, 246, 247]. Recent contributions
on analytical strain localization analyses have been pre-
sented by Wu and Cervera [248, 19] for constitutive
models based on associative plasticity and damage for-
mulations.

The solution of the local analytical problem nor-
mally gives two possible directions for material bifur-
cation [249, 247, 35, 250]. In these cases, the selection
of the propagation direction necessitates the use of an
additional criterion. Rabczuk and Belytschko chose the
propagation plane as the one with the normal closest to
the direction of the principal tensile stress [251] or the
direction corresponding to the maximum displacement
gradient in the localization direction [252]. Similar cri-
teria considering the gradient of the instantaneous (or
the rate of the) displacement field have been consid-
ered by Oliver et al. [33] and Weed et al. [253]. In [114]
an energetic approach is used to selecting among the
two potential crack planes given by the Mohr Coulomb
theory of fracture. According to this, the selected crack

plane is the one that maximizes the energy release. This
direction is selected as the one along which the accu-
mulated strain energy density before crack propagation
is higher.

3.5.4 Crack branching

Crack branching refers to the splitting of a crack at its
crack-tip into two or more cracks (branches) during its
propagation within a solid. The phenomenon commonly
occurs under dynamic loading, although crack branch-
ing has been observed also under quasi-static loading.

The simulation of crack branching with tracking al-
gorithms is not a trivial task, as it necessitates two ad-
ditional criteria that specify the moment of the crack-
branching and the direction of the new branches. To-
day, a robust predictive theory that can give answers to
the above conditions is missing. As a consequence, the
criteria used in tracking algorithms for the definition
of crack branching are heuristic or empirical based on
experimental evidence.

Belytschko et al. [148] allow a crack to branch when
the propagation directions at elements ahead of the
crack-tip, obtained with a discontinuous material bi-
furcation analysis, are no longer constant but present
a significant variation among them. The same criterion
was used by Song et al. [75], with the difference that in
this case the crack propagation directions are computed
with a maximum principal stress criterion. A similar
criterion was used later by Song and Belytschko [98]
in the context of the cracking nodes method, allowing
new cracks to initiate next to existing ones when their
propagation direction makes an angle with the existing
crack direction greater than a defined threshold.

In Linder and Armero [154] (see also [254]) the crack
branching is associated with the Rayleigh wave speed.
In particular, a crack is allowed to branch as soon as
the propagation velocity at the crack tip reaches a crit-
ical value, expressed as a fraction of the Rayleigh wave
speed. The approach is implemented in quadrilateral
elements and as soon as the branching criterion is sat-
isfied the two elements that fall out of the crack propa-
gation direction at the crack-tip are selected as the new
crack-tips (see Fig. 26). From them, the crack propa-
gates following the direction of the maximum principal
stress.

Fig. 26 demonstrates another implication that needs
to be considered in the modelling of crack branching
with strong discontinuity methods. This is the special
construction of the branching elements, which is nec-
essary to ensure compatibility of the kinematics of dis-
continuities in the neighbouring elements at the crack
branches. Implementations of these elements in the con-



20 Savvas Saloustros et al.

Fig. 26. Branching of a crack in Linder and Armero [154] and different strategies for the branching element: element deletion
(left), element with a single discontinuity (middle) and element with embedded branching (right). (Image from Linder and
Armero [154]).

text of the partition of unity methods can be found in
[255, 256], and for embedded strong discontinuities in
[154, 150].

4 Local tracking algorithm - Monotonic loading

This section focuses on the different aspects involved
in the development of tracking algorithms for the sim-
ulation of propagating cracks under monotonic load-
ing. To this aim, a local tracking algorithm [32, 114,
115, 257, 116] is outlined, focusing on the methodology
used for the crack initiation and propagation, as well
as crack-path continuity, in a smeared damage frame-
work. The presented tracking algorithm is implemented
within the finite element program COMET [258] devel-
oped at the International Centre for Numerical Meth-
ods in Engineering (CIMNE), in Barcelona, and is used
for all the numerical analysis of Sections 5,7,8. Pre- and
post-processing is carried-out with GiD [259] also devel-
oped in CIMNE.

As discussed in Section 3, the purpose of a tracking
algorithm is to limit the strain localization to crack-
paths composed of a series of consecutive finite ele-
ments. This is performed through the execution of a
sequence of tasks at each solution step including the
identification of new cracks and the definition of their
propagation, in addition to the propagation of existing
ones that have consolidated in previous steps.

As soon as the crack paths are defined, a labelling
system is used to categorize the elements falling within
or outside of them. In this work, the elements within
a crack respond according to the constitutive law pre-
sented in [260] and summarized in Appendix A. The
rest of the elements maintain a linear elastic stress-
strain relationship.

The presented tracking algorithm is devised for tri-
angular constant strain finite elements. Despite their
known limitations, these elements ensure a straightfor-
ward implementation in any finite element code and al-

low for the easier meshing of irregular geometries. The
extension of this approach to other element typologies
is possible as in [112, 113].

4.1 Crack nucleation - Fixed-directional tracking

4.1.1 Crack-roots

The first task of a tracking algorithm is to define where
and when new cracks appear, which is done through
the use of a crack nucleation criterion. This criterion
commonly coincides with the satisfaction of a failure
condition under tensile or shear stress states. An excep-
tion to this strategy are tracking algorithms based on
an underlying damage-related field, as those presented
in Section 3.4.

In the following, the nucleation of a new crack at
a new numerical step n + 1 is associated with the sat-
isfaction of the tensile failure criterion of a continuum
damage model (see Appendix A). This criterion has the
form

Φ+n+1 = τ
+
n+1 − r

+
n+1 = 0 (20)

where τ+ is a norm termed as the equivalent stress and
r+ is the stress threshold. The simulation of arbitrary
cracking from any location of the analysed structure,
without their a-priori definition by the analyst, implies
that the crack nucleation criterion should be checked all
over the simulated domain. Therefore, this condition is
checked for all the existing undamaged elements of the
mesh, and the ones fulfilling it are temporarily labelled
as potential crack-root elements.

The control of the damage dispersion over a small
part of the discretized domain, and thus the simula-
tion of separate and individual cracks, is possible with
the use of an exclusion radius criterion. This criterion,
introduced in [157, 158], states that a new crack can
originate at an element which is located in an area in



Tracking algorithms for the numerical modelling of cracks in concrete and masonry structures 21

Damaged element
crack origin

r excl

Crack-root elementr excl

boundary crack roots

internal crack root

crack-tip

crack

Fig. 27. Illustration of some basic elements of the presented
local tracking algorithm. Crack-roots are the origin elements
of the cracks, crack-tips are the last elements at the propa-
gating front and crack-origins refer to the location within an
element where a crack begins.

which no other cracks exist. This area is circumscribed
by the exclusion radius rexcl, which is defined by the
user (see Fig. 27). The definition of an exclusion radius
averts the initiation of secondary spurious cracking sur-
rounding existing cracks, a pathology that may spoil
the correct damage localization in later steps of the
simulation [168, 98]. Similar criteria have been used by
Oliver et al. [168] and Song & Belytschko [98], where
the equivalent exclusion area (named as shielding zone
in [168]) is defined as a multiple of the finite element
size. Note that the exclusion radius here controls only
the nucleation of new cracks at a certain distance to
existing ones and does not preclude the propagation of
cracks close to others as in [168]. A similar use of the
exclusion radius to the one presented in this work is
possible in the tracking algorithm proposed by Slobbe
et al. [112], whereas in Alfaiate et al. [153] the exclusion
radius prevents the initiation of new cracks only around
the crack-tip.

Apart from its aforementioned numerical purpose,
the exclusion radius has a second functionality when
a composite material, such as masonry, is simulated.
More specifically, rexcl can be defined according to the
average distance between the weak zones of the com-
posite, heterogeneous material. For many masonry ty-
pologies, the weak zones are the interfaces between the
mortar and the units due to the contact of two different
materials, or the mortar joints themselves, and conse-
quently the distance between cracks is determined by
the size of the brick or stone units [261, 262]. In such
cases, the staggering of the masonry can be considered
using an exclusion radius equivalent to the unit’s size.

With the above definitions, a potential crack-root
element without any existing crack within the area cir-
cumscribed by the exclusion radius is defined as a crack-
root element. Crack-root elements with one or more
sides on the boundary of the mesh are referred to as
boundary crack-root elements, while those with no sides
on the boundary of the mesh are internal crack-root el-
ements. If more than one finite elements are defined
as potential crack-roots at the same increment, and the
distance between them is less than the exclusion radius,
the one with the highest value of the tensile equiva-
lent stress τ+ (see Eq. (A.6) in Appendix A) is selected
as a crack-root. A similar approach for selecting the
crack-root among many elements satisfying the crack
initiation criterion in the same analysis step has been
recently used by Wu et al. [156]. Figure 27 presents an
example of boundary and internal crack-roots.

4.2 Crack-origin coordinates

Following the identification of the new crack-roots, the
coordinates of the crack-origin points are defined and
stored. For cracks initiating at corner or at internal ele-
ments, the centroid of the triangular element is selected
as the crack-origin. In case of cracks initiating at an el-
ement with one side over the boundary, the midpoint
of this side is selected as the crack-origin. Figure 27
presents examples for crack-origins at corner, bound-
ary and internal elements.

4.3 Crack propagation

The propagation of new and existing cracks at each step
of the numerical analysis starts from the crack-root and
crack-tip elements, respectively. A crack-tip is the last
damaged element at the propagating front of a crack
that has already formed in a previous step of the anal-
ysis (see Fig. 27). The possibility of simulating crack
propagation along one or two directions depending on
the position of the crack-root element is considered.
Cracks originating from elements at the boundary (i.e.
boundary crack-roots) can propagate along one direc-
tion, while those originating from an internal element
(i.e. internal crack-roots) can propagate along two op-
posite directions. The procedure for each case is pre-
sented in the following.

4.3.1 Propagation along one direction

The crack propagation from boundary crack-root and
crack-tip elements is illustrated in Fig. 28. For each



22 Savvas Saloustros et al.

Potential Element

i

k

ve

Crack Entry Point
Element j

i

j

k

ve
Crack Entry Point
Element j

Crack root/tip Potential Element
Crack Entry Point
Element k

ve:  Crack propagation Maximum principal stress

j

(b)(a)

Fig. 28. Procedure for crack propagation from a crack-tip or from a boundary crack-root (picture adapted from [159]).

boundary crack-root element, a vector is defined, start-
ing from the crack-origin location, with a direction or-
thogonal to the one given by the maximum principal ef-
fective stress. This direction is calculated using a stress
tensor constructed from the average values of the ef-
fective stresses at the nodes of each element. The use
of smoothed values of stresses is a common practice in
local tracking algorithms aiming to increase the relia-
bility of the stress directions at the crack-tip (see for
instance [231, 236, 232, 97, 67]). The intersection of
this vector with the neighbouring element defines the
exit point and the next potential element of the crack
(Fig. 28a). Similarly, starting from this point the follow-
ing potential elements of the crack are recognised (Fig.
28b). The same procedure is followed for identifying the
propagation path of consolidated cracks from the crack-
tip elements. In this case the crack-origin point is the
exit point of the crack at the previous cracked element.

4.3.2 Propagation along two directions

Contrary to cracking starting from the boundary, other
cracks, such as shear ones, initiate from the interior and
propagate along two opposite directions. The numerical
procedure for modelling internal crack propagation is
presented in Fig. 29 and is detailed in the following.

Starting from the crack-origin of the internal crack-
root element, two vectors (ve,1) and (ve,2) are defined,
having a direction orthogonal to that of the maximum
principal effective stress but opposing orientations (Fig.
29a). Following this, the crack path is recognized in
two stages. First, the elements pertaining to the path
defined by the orientation of vector (ve,1) are identi-
fied starting from the crack-origin point and following
the same process as described above for the boundary
crack-root and crack-tip elements (Fig. 29b). Upon con-
cluding the labelling towards that side of the crack, the
elements lying at the opposite face can be recognised

starting again from the crack-origin point of the inter-
nal crack-root, but using the orientation of vector (ve,2)
(Fig. 29c).

4.4 End of the labelling procedure

The labelling procedure for a crack stops at a numeri-
cal step when at least one of the following criteria are
satisfied:

(i) Boundary criterion: a crack reaches the mesh
boundary and at least one of the elements in the
wake of the crack with a distance from the crack-
tip smaller than the exclusion radius does not have
sides or nodes on the boundary of the mesh.

(ii) Stress-threshold criterion: the stress-state of a po-
tential element is lower than a pre-defined thresh-
old. This threshold can be conveniently defined in
terms of the tensile equivalent stress and previ-
ous works [157, 159, 32, 160] have demonstrated
that labelling can be completed when the inequality
τ+ < 0.75f+ holds, where f+ is the tensile strength.
This is a common strategy in tracking algorithms
that limits the computational cost, since it allows
the termination of the labelling procedure during a
numerical step before the crack meets the boundary.

A common local mechanism of unreinforced ma-
sonry structures is the rocking of piers due to the for-
mation of flexural cracks at their supports. A similar
case is illustrated in Fig. 30a, where cracks originate
from the corners and propagate towards the interior of
a masonry wall analysed under horizontal loading at its
top. A close-up of the principal stress directions at the
region of the crack-tip during the loading, shown in Fig.
31, reveals that these are not parallel to the boundary.
This is due to the adopted boundary conditions at the
top and bottom of the wall. Under these conditions,



Tracking algorithms for the numerical modelling of cracks in concrete and masonry structures 23

rexcl

ve

 ve,1

 ve,2

ve

Crack  root element
Potential crack element

Maximum  principal stress
ve: Crack propagation
Crack origin

(a) (b) (c)

rexcl : Exclusion radius

Fig. 29. Simulation of internal cracking with the tracking algorithm: (a) internal crack-root element with the two opposite
vectors (ve,1 and ve,2) of the crack propagation, (b) labelling of the potential crack elements towards the first side of the crack,
(c) labelling of the potential crack elements towards the second side of the crack.

it is possible that the crack originating from the cor-
ner of the wall (element A in Fig. 31) exits the mesh
at its lower boundary (element B in Fig. 31). The pre-
sented definition of boundary criterion, addresses this
unrealistic end of the crack propagation. In this way, if
a crack reaches the boundary but condition (i) is not
fulfilled, the crack direction is corrected and defined as
parallel to the boundary of the mesh where the crack
exits. The labelling process in this case ends when this
crack reaches again another boundary of the mesh, as
for instance the vertical end of the wall for the case of
Fig. 30. As will be shown through the structural ap-
plications included in this paper, the above definition
succeeds in identifying correctly complete or incomplete
cracks that propagate across the boundary of the anal-
ysed structure. Instead, the improper definition of the
boundary criterion would lead to the result of Fig. 30b,
where the two cracks stop as soon as the crack fronts
reach the boundary of the mesh, resulting in an im-
proper identification of the collapse mechanism and the
load capacity.

4.5 Element labelling and crack-path continuity

4.5.1 Element labelling

As soon as the propagation of all the cracks has been
defined, each element of the mesh is labelled with a
flag representing its element-state for the current step
of the analysis. The following three element-states are
defined:

(a) (b)

Fig. 30. Flexural crack propagation on top and bottom of a
shear wall for a top displacement of δ = 2mm: (a) with and
(b) without proper definition of the boundary criterion.

Fig. 31. Flexural crack at the bottom of a shear wall exiting
the mesh.

– Intact element, outside a crack : element outside of a
crack-path. Its stress-strain relationship will remain
linear elastic for the current analysis step.



24 Savvas Saloustros et al.

A A

B

(b)

(c)

(a)

A

C
B

(d)

A

C
B

Crack Element
Potential crack element
Intact element, outside a crack

A: Crack-tip at step n

C: Crack-tip at step n+1
B: Potential Crack-tip at step n+1

Fig. 32. Assigned flags to the elements of the mesh for a
propagating crack: (a) consolidated crack prior to crack prop-
agation at the end of step n, (b) potential crack path at step
n+ 1, (c) consolidated crack after convergence of step n+ 1,
(d) labelling element-state at the end of step n+ 1.

– Potential crack element : undamaged element falling
within a crack-path. If it satisfies the damage cri-
terion, its stress-strain relationship will be defined
according to the selected continuum damage model
(Appendix A).

– Crack element : element that is a part of a consoli-
dated crack and has experienced damage at a pre-
vious analysis step. Its stress-strain relationship is
characterized by the selected constitutive model.

The above categorization of elements can be visu-
alised in Fig. 32, which illustrates the propagation of
a crack and the labelling procedure during a step of
the numerical analysis. Figure 32a presents the consol-
idated part of the crack, which has propagated up to
element A in the previous analysis step n. In the new
step n + 1, the tracking algorithm identifies that the
crack can potentially propagate up to element B (see
Fig. 32b), which is the last one satisfying the stress
threshold criterion presented in Section 4.4. A flag is
assigned to all the elements between A and B categoriz-
ing them as potential crack elements. This flag activates
the selected non-linear constitutive law for these poten-
tial crack elements, while the rest will maintain a linear
elastic stress-strain relationship. Fig. 32c shows the up-

dated labelling of the elements in the crack at the end
of the iterations of step n+ 1, when convergence is at-
tained. All the elements up to element C have damaged,
while the rest potential elements did not satisfy the fail-
ure criterion and therefore remained linear elastic. Be-
fore proceeding to the new analysis step, the tracking
algorithm is called to update the element-state for a last
time. The element-state of all potential elements that
remained intact is initialized to Intact element, outside
a crack as shown in Fig. 32d. This ensures that during
the next analysis step, the crack will propagate start-
ing from element C, with a crack propagation direction
according to the new converged stress state.

4.5.2 Crack path continuity

Let us now consider the same case of the single prop-
agating crack, but assuming that two elements D and
E, prior to element C, have not damaged after conver-
gence of the analysis at step n+1 even if they had been
identified as potential crack elements at the beginning
of the step (see Fig. 33a). If no further consideration is
made, the element-state of elements D and E would be
set to intact element, outside a crack at the end of the
step, and the crack loses its continuity breaking in more
than one parts. This is avoided with the implementa-
tion of a crack path continuity procedure. According to
this, the damage state of all the elements of the crack
is inspected after convergence starting from the poten-
tial crack-tip elements and going backwards towards the
crack-tip at the beginning of the step. For the current
example, this means starting from element B and go-
ing backwards up to element A. As soon as, a damaged
element is found, in this case element C, the rest of the
status of all the preceding elements is changed to Crack
element (Fig. 33b). The procedure continues up to the
crack-tip element at the beginning of the current step,
which is element A in Fig. 33.

The above procedure implies that the algorithm
stores for each crack the crack-tip of the consolidated
crack (e.g. element A in Fig. 33) and the potential
crack-tip at the end of the labelling procedure (e.g. ele-
ment B in Fig. 33). Additionally, each element is asso-
ciated with the crack(s) it belongs to. In this way, the
crack-path of each crack can be recovered at any mo-
ment, starting from the (potential) crack-tip and going
backwards considering elements belonging to the same
crack.

4.6 Maximum curvature criterion

The definition of the crack nucleation and propagation,
considering the stress/strain values at a restricted area



Tracking algorithms for the numerical modelling of cracks in concrete and masonry structures 25

Crack Element
Potential crack element
Intact element, outside a crack

(a)

A

C
B

(b)
A: Crack-tip at step n

C: Crack-tip at step n+1

A

C
B

D
E

D
E

B: Potential Crack-tip at step n+1

D, E : Undamaged elements labelled as Crack elements to ensure
crack path continuity

Fig. 33. Assigned flags to the elements of the mesh for a
propagating crack (a) before and (b) after the application of
the crack path continuity procedure.

around each element, justifies the “local” nature of the
presented tracking algorithm. This choice is very con-
venient for handling cases with multiple cracks and in
terms of computational efficiency compared to global
tracking algorithms [32]. Nevertheless, local tracking al-
gorithms can encounter some difficulties under bending
stress states, when the local calculation of the princi-
pal stress directions at the crack-tip may be relatively
poor due to high stress-gradients, resulting in spurious
changes in the crack direction.

To avoid such non-realistic result, Clemente et al.
[157, 158, 32] proposed the enhancement of the track-
ing algorithm with a procedure for the apropos correc-
tion of the crack propagation. This procedure, termed
as maximum curvature criterion, is activated at each
element at the propagating front of the crack (i.e. the
crack-tip elements) before the selection of the next po-
tential element. The idea is to compare the crack prop-
agation direction defined at the crack-tip element (ve),
with the vector sum of the crack directions (vc) of both
the potential and the damaged elements within a neigh-
bourhood of radius rneigh (see Fig. 34). If the relative
angle among them is greater than a threshold angle
αmax, the vector vc is used for the definition of the crack
direction instead of the vector ve. This is formalised as

|vc ·ve|

{
≥ cos(αmax) crack propagates using ve
< cos(αmax) crack propagates using vc

(21)

The parameters involved in the use of the maximum
curvature criterion are the rneigh radius and the αmax
angle. As presented in [159, 32], the proper choice of
the radius rneigh, and thus the selection of the number
of elements considered in the definition of the vectorial

vc α
αmax ve

*

*

*

*

*r neigh

Damaged elements

Potential crack elements

Maximum  principal stress
Crack propagation direction

FE  centroid
*

Crack origin point

Maximum allowed crack deviation
Vector sum of crack propagation directions

*

*

*

*

*

α Angle between ve  and vc
αmax Maximum allowed angle between ve and vc

Fig. 34. Illustration of the maximum curvature criterion
used for the correction of the crack propagation direction dur-
ing the propagation of an internal crack.

sum vc, is important in cases with curved cracks. Con-
trariwise, the effect of rneigh is limited for cracks which
are straight or exhibit small curvature.

The use of similar criteria for preventing sudden
turns in propagating cracks is common in tracking al-
gorithms. For instance, Jäger et al. [165] use the same
criterion in a 3D local tracking algorithm and allow a
deviation angle of a new crack segment between π/6
and π/4. In Zhang et al. [66] the new crack direction
in the crack-tip is defined using the consolidated crack
direction at the previous element and the mean value of
the crack directions of the following two new crack ele-
ments. This smoothing strategy alleviates sudden turns
in the crack direction (see [263, 66]).

An alternative to the explicit control of the crack
diverging angle has been presented by Slobbe et al.
[112, 162] also in the context of local tracking algo-
rithms. The main concept is to postpone the crack path
fixation up to the moment that a certain level of dam-
age is reached at an element crossed by a potential
crack (denoted as the damage path). The idea resem-
bles closely the strategy used by Jirásek and Zimmer-
man [93] and Sancho et al. [65, 91] for the adaptation
of embedded strong discontinuities until a certain crack
width is reached, which is usually defined according to
the material parameters. Similar assumptions are com-
mon also in continuous-discontinuous models, in which



26 Savvas Saloustros et al.

a strong discontinuity is inserted, at a later stage of
damage localization, to represent the displacement dis-
continuity of the crack (e.g. [206, 55]). Despite the po-
tentiality of this method demonstrated in the context
of an embedded crack model [65, 91, 264, 234], Slobbe
et al. [112, 162] show that delayed crack path fixation
may provide ambiguous results concerning the appear-
ance of spurious crack tortuosity, while the criteria for
the proper definition of the parameter controlling the
moment of crack path fixation (damage/crack-width
limit) are still under research. In Slobbe et al. [112, 162],
the preclusion of the crack overturning is also achieved
by adopting a C1 continuous crack representation, in
which the crack-entry direction is considered in the def-
inition of the new propagation direction at a new ele-
ment of the crack.

5 Applications of the tracking algorithm under
monotonic loading

This section includes two applications of the presented
tracking algorithm to the simulation of cracking in con-
crete and masonry structures under monotonic loading.
The first case considers the tensile splitting test on con-
crete cylinders. This is used as a benchmark test for the
simulation of a dominant internal crack, starting from
the interior of the discretized domain and propagating
towards two directions. The second application consid-
ers a real-scale masonry frame under in-plane horizon-
tal loading. This case assesses the capacity of the pre-
sented tracking algorithm to model multiple internal
and boundary cracking.

5.1 Internal cracking - Tensile splitting test

The tensile splitting strength of geomaterials, such as
concrete and rocks, is experimentally obtained with a
standardized test method carried-out on cylinder speci-
mens [265, 266]. The test consists in applying diametric
compressive loading along the two sides of the tested
specimen, as shown in Fig. 35. This loading results
in the failure of the cylinder due to cracking, which
starts from the interior and propagates vertically to-
wards the locations of the applied load. The tensile
splitting strength fsp of the tested material is obtained
through the following expression [265, 266]

fsp =
2F

πDL
(22)

where F is the maximum measured load, L is the length
of the cylinder and D its diameter (see Fig. 35).

Load application 
supports

L

D

F/L 

Fig. 35. Geometry and load configuration for the tensile
splitting test.

The numerical simulation considers an experimental
test carried-out by Malárics et al. [267, 268] on a cylin-
drical concrete specimen with diameter D = 150mm
and length L = 300mm. The compressive load was
applied through two steel plates of 10mm width and
length equal to the specimen’s length.

Figure 36 presents the crack propagation for one
of the tested high strength gravel concrete specimens,
measured with the use of a series of conducting silver
plates denoted with LS1-7. For a detailed description
of the experimental set-up and results the reader is re-
ferred to Malárics et al. [268, 267].

The numerical model was prepared based on the
material properties reported in [267] for the tested
specimen HK-1 made of high strength gravel concrete.
These are E = 36.4GPa, v = 0.20, f+ = 5.6MPa,
f− = 78.5MPa, G+f = 151.7 J/m

2, ρ = 2400 kg/m2.
The failure criterion is the one proposed by Lubliner
et al. [15] and is obtained by setting κ1 = 1.0 in Eq.
(A.10). The value of the compressive fracture energy
was not given in [267] and has been defined equal to
G−f = 250G

+
f = 37925 J/m

2 according to [269, 270].
It is noted that the sensitivity of the strength capacity
of the specimen to the compressive fracture energy is
minimal. The numerical parameters used in the track-
ing algorithm are rexcl = 50mm, αmax = π/4 and
rneigh = 50mm.

The experiment has been simulated by applying
a vertical displacement at the top of the specimen
through a steel plate of 10mm width. The horizontal
displacement at both top and bottom supports is re-
strained. At each step of the analysis, the corresponding
non-linear equations are solved with the use of a secant
(Picard’s) method along with a line-search procedure.



Tracking algorithms for the numerical modelling of cracks in concrete and masonry structures 27

Fig. 36. Cracking sequence in the splitting tensile test of a high strength gravel concrete specimen tested by Malárics [268].
(Image from Malárics [268]).

Fig. 37. First row: labelling of the tracking algorithm with elements in black representing crack origins or crack-tips. Second
row: tensile damage contour. Vertical displacement at the top equal to: (a) −0.115mm, (b) −0.120mm, (c) −0.130mm.

Fig. 38. (a) Finite element meshes and maximum principal strains (b) with and (c) without the tracking algorithm. First
row: Mesh A. Second row: Mesh B.

Convergence of an increment is attained when the ratio
between the iterative residual forces and the norm of
the total external forces is lower than 10−3 (0.1%).

Fig. 37 shows the results of the analysis using an
unstructured mesh of 2856 constant strain triangles
(1525 nodes) under plane strain conditions. The first



28 Savvas Saloustros et al.

Fig. 39. (a) Geometry (values in mm) and load configuration of the experiment on a real scale unreinforced masonry frame.
Cracking at the end of the experiment of (b) the whole frame and (c) the spandrel. (Picture adapted from Augenti et al. [271]).

row presents the labelling of the tracking system, while
the second one the tensile damage contour. For a verti-
cal displacement of 0.115mm an internal crack, start-
ing at around the 2/3 of the specimens height, prop-
agated very fast towards the two load supports (Fig.
37a). Damage initially concentrated at the two tips of
the crack, and for increasing displacement extended to
its central part (Fig. 37b). The final capacity of the
specimen was determined by the propagation of this
crack up to the boundaries of the specimen. As soon
as that happened, some additional cracking appeared
around the locations of the load application and the
external boundaries. The numerically predicted split-
ting strength of the specimen, measured with Eq. (22),
was 5.18 MPa. This value is almost identical to the
mean of the experimentally predicted from the various
tested specimens of the same concrete typology, which
was measured equal to 5.20 MPa with a coefficient of
variation of 0.10.

The directional mesh-bias dependency of the nu-
merical solution is investigated in Fig. 38, where the
results obtained with two different meshes with and
without the tracking algorithm are presented in terms
of maximum principal strains. Mesh A is the unstruc-
tured mesh used for the results shown in Fig. 37. Mesh
B is composed of 2530 constant strain triangles (1356
nodes), and its central part is discretized with a struc-
tured pattern that is slanted by 13◦ with respect to the
vertical axis. The obtained results illustrate the way
that tracking algorithms can improve the directional
mesh-bias dependency of the classical smeared crack
approach. As can be seen in the middle row of Fig. 37,
the use of the tracking algorithm results in a vertical
crack for both meshes, and no sensitivity on the used
mesh is observed. On the contrary, when the tracking
algorithm is not used a different strain localization is
obtained, which depends strongly on the directionality
of the mesh.

5.2 Multiple internal and boundary cracking -
Masonry frame

An important challenge of tracking algorithms is the
simulation of multiple arbitrary cracking. This is a
common pathology of unreinforced masonry structures,
with flexural cracks starting at the boundaries of open-
ings, and shear internal cracks affecting wall and span-
drel elements. The capacity of tracking algorithms to
simulate such failure patterns was investigated by the
authors in [115, 272] and is outlined in the following.

This structural application considers a real-scale
masonry frame with a door opening, with its geome-
try presented in Fig. 39a. The structure was tested by
Augenti et al. [271] under in-plane horizontal mono-
tonic loading applied at the top left corner. A vertical
load of 200 kN was maintained constant during the ex-
periment at the top of the piers, simulating the gravita-
tional effect of additional floors. Figures 39b-c illustrate
the obtained damage pattern at the end of the exper-
iment. The spandrel above the timber lintel was the
most damaged element, with flexural vertical cracks at
its two ends, and a shear crack crossing it diagonally
through its whole length. Regarding the piers, two hor-
izontal flexural cracks formed at their lower ends (Fig.
39b).

The structure was analysed under plane stress con-
ditions using an unstructured mesh composed of 20728
constant-strain triangles (10678 nodes). Three different
materials, presented in Table 1 were used for simulat-
ing the masonry, the timber lintel above the door and
the interface between these two. Non-linear behaviour
was assumed for the masonry and for the interface be-
tween masonry and the lintel, while elastic properties
have been attributed to the timber lintel. The selection
of the properties and their influence on the numerical
result are discussed in [272, 260]. The numerical param-
eters for the tracking algorithm are rexcl = 300 mm



Tracking algorithms for the numerical modelling of cracks in concrete and masonry structures 29

(equal to the length of the bricks), αmax = π/4 and
rneigh = 200 mm.

The experimental test was simulated by applying a
horizontal displacement d at the left top part of the
structure for a constant vertical force of V = 200 kN at
the top of the piers (see Fig. 39a). Similar to the split-
ting tensile test, a secant (Picard’s) method has been
used for solving the non-linear equilibrium equations
at each numerical step of the analysis along with a line
search procedure. Convergence of a numerical step is
attained when the ratio between the iterative residual
forces and the norm of the total external forces is lower
than 10−2 (1%).

Figure 40 shows the evolution of the tensile damage
at five stages of the analysis. The first damage affect-
ing the structure are two vertical cracks at the corners
of the spandrel (Fig. 40a). With increasing horizontal
displacement two horizontal cracks form at the base
of the piers (Fig. 40b), facilitating a rocking behaviour.
Following this, internal cracking starts to appear within
the spandrel (Fig. 40c-d). For a horizontal displacement

Fig. 40. Tensile damage contour for an horizontal displace-
ment of: (a) d = 1.5 mm, (b) d = 3.3 mm, (c) d = 12.3 mm,
(d) d = 17.3 mm, (e) d = 20.7 mm. (f) Maximum principal
strains contour for d = 20.7 mm.

around 21 mm, this crack rapidly extends through the
whole length of the spandrel, inducing secondary flexu-
ral cracks at the top and bottom of the spandrel (Fig.
40e). The formation of this diagonal crack results in
the sudden drop of the structural capacity, similarly to
the experimental result, as can be appreciated in the
numerical and experimental graphs presented in Fig.
41.

A comparison between the experimentally obtained
damage (Figs. 39b-c) and the open cracks at the end of
the analysis, presented in Fig. 40f with the contour of
the maximum principal strains, shows that the numer-
ical model could resemble very closely the experimen-
tally obtained damage pattern. Moreover, the simula-
tion of the changes in the structural capacity due to the
evolution of different cracks within the structure, shown
in the graph of Fig. 41, demonstrates the ability of the
numerical model to account for the sudden changes in
the stress distribution within the structure following the
appearance of each crack. This is an important aspect
for assessing the stability and displacement capacity of
existing masonry structures.

 0

 20

 40

 60

 80

 100

 120

 140

 160

 180

 200

 0  5  10  15  20  25

 H
o
ri

z
o
n
ta

l 
F

o
rc

e
 F

 [
k
N

]

Horizontal displacement d [mm]

Experimental
Numerical - Tracking

Fig. 41. Load-displacement graph of the experimental test
and the numerical analysis of the masonry frame.

Cracking in masonry structures commonly appears
in the weakest zones, which are the brick-mortar inter-
face or the mortar joints in case of low strength his-
torical mortars. The studied experiment presents an
analogous behaviour. The flexural cracks start at the
joints, before splitting the bricks met along their ver-
tical propagation, while similarly the diagonal crack
in the spandrel propagates mostly through the ma-
sonry joints. The higher fragility of the brick-mortar
interface makes the size of the bricks as the determi-
nant parameter for defining the distance between the
cracks. This role is played by the exclusion radius in



30 Savvas Saloustros et al.

Table 1. Material parameters adopted in the simulation of the masonry frame wall.

Material f+ f− G+f G
−
f E ρ v

[MPa] [MPa] [J/m2] [J/m2] [GPa] [kg/m3] [−]
Masonry 0.13 3.9 15 35000 1.54 1200 0.2
Interface 0.01 3.9 5 35000 0.02 1200 0.2
Timber - - - - 15 500 0.2

Fig. 42. Contour of tensile damage (left) and maximum prin-
cipal strains (right): (a) rexcl = 100 mm, (b) rexcl = 200
mm, (c) rexcl = 300 mm, (d) rexcl = 500 mm (horizontal
displacement d = 0.21 m).

the presented numerical model. This can be visualised
in Fig. 42 presenting the tensile damage distribution ob-
tained for four different values of the exclusion radius
rexcl = 100mm; 200mm; 300mm; 500mm. A value of
the exclusion radius equal to 100mm does not take into
account the internal micro-structure of masonry defined
by the size of the brick (i.e. 150 × 300 × 100mm3),
resulting in a denser cracking at the two corners of
the spandrel, which did not occur in the experiment.
This flexural cracking affects the structural response, as
can be appreciated in the respective load vs displace-
ment graph of Fig. 43, where for rexcl = 100 mm the

 0

 20

 40

 60

 80

 100

 120

 140

 160

 180

 200

 0  5  10  15  20  25

 H
o
ri

z
o
n
ta

l 
F

o
rc

e
 F

 [
k
N

]

Horizontal displacement d [mm]

r
excl

 = 100 mm

r
excl

 = 200 mm

r
excl

 = 300 mm

r
excl

 = 500 mm

Fig. 43. Load-displacement graphs obtained from the simu-
lation of the masonry frame with different values of rexcl.

typical graph for a rocking failure mode is obtained,
without the drop in the capacity associated with the
shear damage in the spandrel. Contrariwise, for values
of the exclusion radius of 200mm and above, the nu-
merical model reproduces the experimentally obtained
structural response in terms of cracking (Fig. 42b-d),
strength and ductility (Fig. 43).

6 Local tracking algorithm - Cyclic loading

Despite their substantial differences in crack representa-
tion, crack propagation and nucleation criteria, a com-
mon standpoint of many algorithms in the literature
(e.g. [153, 168, 32, 112, 113, 156]) is the assumption that
the propagation of a crack stops when it meets another
one. The various successful applications of these track-
ing algorithms show that this choice can be valid, or a
least not detrimental, for structural applications under
monotonic loading. Contrariwise, the experience of past
earthquakes demonstrates that cyclic loading of con-
crete and masonry structures may cause complex crack-
ing and situations including crack opening and closing
as well as crack intersection. This section deals with the
application of tracking algorithms to cases with cyclic
loads, and outlines the algorithmic issues that have to
be addressed for modelling the aforementioned cracking
phenomena.



Tracking algorithms for the numerical modelling of cracks in concrete and masonry structures 31

j

i

Damaged Element
Potential Crack element
Common Crack element
Existing Crack
Propagating Crack

(a) (b)

k

j

i

k

Maximum  principal stress
Crack propagation direction

Fig. 44. Illustration of a case (a) prior and (b) after the intersection of two cracks as modelled by the local tracking algorithm.

6.1 Crack intersection

The modelling of cracking using the smeared crack ap-
proach allows the straightforward extension of the crack
propagation strategy presented in Section 6.1 for sim-
ulatings crack intersection. The procedure is presented
in Fig. 44, where a propagating crack (in red) starting
from the crack-tip element “i ” meets an existing crack
(in blue) towards its propagation. As shown in Fig. 44a,
the crack propagation direction at the current crack-
tip element “j ”, which is a part of the existing crack,
is defined in the same way as for intact elements. Note
that the crack propagation direction is computed con-
sidering the values of the effective stresses, which makes
possible its definition even if the common element is
completely damaged. In the same manner, the crack
continues its propagation through the existing crack as
shown in Fig. 44b, with the elements “j ” and “k ” being
common crack elements now.

As it can be seen from the above procedure, the
modelling of crack intersection can be easily pursued
in the context of a smeared crack approach. On the
contrary, in discrete crack approaches the simulation of
crack intersection requires changes at nodal or elemen-
tal level (see [255, 154]) to enable the modelling of the
different kinematics induced by the intersecting cracks.
Another challenge in discrete crack approaches concerns
the proper calculation of the stress intensity factors
and, consequently, the computation of the propagation
direction, which may necessitate the mesh refinement
in the crack-tip zone [86]. Nevertheless, it should be
noted that in smeared crack approaches the correct
crack propagation relies on the accurate strain local-
ization, which depends strongly on the kinematics of
the chosen finite elements. In the presented tracking
algorithm, local errors in the crack propagation direc-
tion can be potentially corrected through the maximum
curvature criterion (see Section 4.6).

As soon as cracks can intersect, an element may be-
long to more than one crack, implying that it will have
as many crack-entry points as the number of the cracks

crossing it. It is recalled that the storage of the crack-
entry point is necessary for three functions. The first
one is when the element is the crack-tip of a crack and
thus the crack-entry coordinates are necessary to iden-
tify the starting point for the crack propagation. The
second one is to check crack path continuity (Section
4.5.2), while the third function concerns the use of the
maximum curvature criterion (Section 4.6). In the max-
imum curvature criterion, the crack-entry points at el-
ements on the wake of the crack-tip are recovered in
order to opportunely correct the propagation of the
crack. To this aim, a proper matrix is implemented
to save the potential crack-entry coordinates for each
side of the element. In the case that more than one
cracks enter from the same side, two options are possi-
ble: (i) to add elements in the matrix corresponding to
each new crack-entry coordinates, (ii) to use an average
crack-entry point for that side. The first choice favours
accuracy, but increases the numerical cost since there
is the need for dynamically allocating memory, as well
as the use of additional arrays to associate the crack-
entry point with the number of each crack. Due to the
above, the second choice has been selected in this work
in favour of computer memory usage and robustness,
which are necessary for the analysis of structures with
a large number of cracks.

6.2 Crack nucleation - Multi-directional tracking

The criteria for crack initiation, presented in Section
4.1, define that new cracks can start at a certain dis-
tance from existing ones, which is determined by the
exclusion radius rexcl. As shown in Section 5, this pro-
cedure is robust for structural cases with monotonic
loading, where the crack directions do not show sudden
changes during the loading history (see also other appli-
cations in [32, 160, 273, 274, 114, 275]). However, cyclic
loading (e.g. due to earthquakes) may induce multi-
directional cracking with cracks initiating at the same
region of existing cracks but with a different propagat-



32 Savvas Saloustros et al.

Fig. 45. Example of cracking under the shear loading of a
wall: (a) opening of a crack during the loading towards the
left, (b) closing of the crack when returning to the initial
configuration and (c) opening of a second crack, diagonal to
the first during the reverse loading.

ing direction. This phenomenon is illustrated in Fig.
45, showing a masonry wall under the effect of cyclic
shear loading at its top (restraining the rotation). The
top displacement towards the left produces a diagonal
shear crack, starting from the middle of the wall and
propagating towards its two opposite corners (Fig. 45a).
Unloading finds the wall at its initial configuration with
the crack closed, illustrated in Fig. 45b. Loading to-
wards the right results in the opening of a new crack
at the centre of the wall that propagates diagonally
producing the common X-crack pattern of unreinforced
masonry walls (Fig. 45c).

The simulation of such cases needs a different ap-
proach for crack initiation compared to the one pre-
sented in Section 4.1. For instance, in the specific case
of the shear wall of Fig. 45, the crack initiation criterion
should allow the initiation of the second crack at the fi-
nite element that satisfies the failure criterion after the
reversal of the loading cycle, without considering if this
lies within the exclusion radius area of the first crack.

For the simulation of cases involving the nucleation
of cracks due to different stress-states at a region of
existing cracks, the authors have proposed the catego-
rization of cracks into active and inactive [116]. To this
aim, two versors are used:

– Crack direction (v̂cr): is a versor denoting the av-
erage direction of a consolidated crack. The crack
direction of a crack is calculated using the co-
ordinates of its two ends. These are the coordi-
nates of the crack origin and the crack-tip for
single-direction propagating cracks (with a bound-
ary crack-root), and the coordinates of the two
crack-tips for double-direction propagating cracks
(with an internal crack-root).

– Crack closure direction (v̂cl): is a versor denoting
the average direction orthogonal to the maximum
principal effective stress (or strains) of all the ele-
ments within the crack. It is equivalent to an av-
erage crack propagation direction obtained consid-

ering the effective stress state of all the elements
within a crack.

The crack direction and crack closure direction ver-
sors are updated at the end of each analysis step for all
the consolidated cracks. A crack i is defined as active if
the angle between its crack direction versor v̂icr and its
crack closure direction versor v̂icl is lower than a prede-
fined limit angle αlim. The crack status can be formally
expressed through the use of the following function

Hi[|v̂icr · v̂
i
cl| − cos(αlim)] =

{
0 : Inactive crack
1 : Active crack

(23)

where (·) is the dot product, the subscript i = 1, Ncr is
used to denote the versor values for each crack of the
total existing cracks Ncr and H[•] is the Heaviside step
function

H[x] =

{
0 for x < 0
1 for x ≥ 0

(24)

Following the above, an element is a crack-root when
all of the following criteria are satisfied:

(i) The failure condition, as defined by the constitutive
model (Eq. 20), is satisfied.

(ii) There is no active crack within an area defined by
the exclusion radius rexcl.

(iii) There is no crack within an area defined by the ex-
clusion radius rexcl with a crack direction making
an angle with the crack propagation direction of the
crack-root lower than the limit angle αlim.

The first two conditions imply that new cracks
can initiate at locations where the current stress-state
has resulted in the closing of the pre-existing cracks.
The third one prevents the presence of spurious crack-
ing with similar direction to consolidated neighbouring
cracks.

To illustrate this, Fig. 46 presents how the algorithm
models the two shear cracks at the middle of the wall for
the example of Fig. 45. Fig. 46a shows the stress-state
within the crack at the moment of the opening of the
crack during the movement towards the left. The two
versors of the crack (v̂cr and v̂cl, shown in one of the two
crack-tips of the crack) coincide, as the crack direction
has been defined according to the crack-propagation di-
rection of each element within it. The crack is active and
can continue its propagation. Figure 46b presents the
stress state for a step during the reversal of the cycle.
The wall now is deforming towards the right and the
existing crack is closed. This can be seen looking at the
directions of the principal stresses which have rotated
compared to when the crack was open. The crack clo-
sure (v̂cr) and crack direction versors (v̂cl) form an angle



Tracking algorithms for the numerical modelling of cracks in concrete and masonry structures 33

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

Active Crack  root element

Elements within an active crack

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

ω > αlim
v

cl

v

cr

v

cr

v

cl

Elements within an inactive crack

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

ω > αlim

Direction of maximum
 principal stress

Crack direction
Crack closure direction

Crack origin point

FE  centroid
*

Inactive crack path

Active crack path

(b) (c)(a)

v

cr

v

cl

Fig. 46. Crack propagation in the middle of a shear wall: (a) propagation of a shear crack for the loading towards the left,
(b) deactivation of the crack due to the change in the stress state, (c) initiation and propagation of a second crack next to the
inactive one.

which is greater than the limit angle αlim. The existing
crack is therefore identified as inactive, and new cracks
are allowed to open. This happens at a later instance,
shown in Fig. 46c, when a crack initiates very close to
the existing crack and propagates thereafter.

The use of a limit angle as a way to identify the
closure of existing cracks and the possibility of new
ones to open, was introduced at constitutive level in the
smeared crack models by de Borst & Nauta [20]. Sim-
ilarly, Song & Belytschko employed a threshold angle
for allowing the initiation of crack branching in propa-
gating cracks [98] under dynamic fracture.

7 Structural application under cyclic loading

This section presents an application (detailed in [116,
260]) of the presented tracking algorithm to a case with
intersecting cracking under cyclic loading. This an un-
reinforced masonry wall that was tested under quasi-
static in-plane cyclic shear loading by Anthoine et al.
[276, 277].

The experimental set-up is presented in Fig. 47.
The wall was built in an English bond pattern with
unit dimensions of 55 × 120 × 250 mm3 and 10 mm
mortar joint thickness, resulting in a specimen with
width of d = 1.00m, height h = 1.35m and thickness
w = 0.25m. The effect of an earthquake action on the
wall was investigated through the application of a hor-
izontal displacement at the top in a cyclic fashion with
increasing magnitude. During the whole experiment a
constant vertical load of 150 kN was applied at the top

of the wall, while proper boundary conditions were used
to avoid its top and bottom rotation.

The wall is discretized using 5470 constant strain
triangles (2836 nodes) and analysed under plane stress
conditions. The material parameters are presented in
Table 2 and have been selected according to the avail-
able experimental data on stack bond prisms reported
in [278, 279]. The not available data have been defined
according to the discussion presented in [116, 260] for
calibrating the shear response of the model. Regard-
ing the tracking parameters, the exclusion radius has
been set equal to rexcl = 200mm, which is a value be-
tween the length and the width of the bricks, while the
parameters for the maximum curvature criterion are
αmax = 25

◦, rneigh = 600 mm. The limit angle used
for the activation-deactivation of the cracks under the
cyclic loading is αlim = 40◦.

Figure 48 presents the numerical results in terms of
tensile and compressive damage, as well as the maxi-
mum principal strains at the end of the analysis. The
contour of the tensile damage in Fig. 48a reveals that
important cracking has affected the structure during
the loading history, with horizontal cracks at the bot-
tom and top ends and the left and right sides of the
wall, and diagonal shear cracks in the middle. Never-
theless, the compressive damage and maximum prin-
cipal strains contours (Figs. 48b,c) reveal that the
main degradation of the wall is due to a X-crack pat-
tern, which typically characterizes unreinforced ma-
sonry walls under seismic loading. This dominating
shear failure is depicted in the force-displacement graph



34 Savvas Saloustros et al.

Fig. 47. Experimental set-up of the tested masonry wall. (Image from Anthoine [277]).

Table 2. Material parameters adopted in the simulation of the masonry shear wall.

f+ f− G
+
f G

−
f E ρ v β κ1

[MPa] [MPa] [J/m2] [J/m2] [MPa] [kg/m3] [−] [−] [−]

0.15 6.2 80.0 14000 1490 1750 0.2 0.95 0.15

Fig. 48. Contours of: (a) tensile damage d+, (b) compressive damage d−, and (c) the maximum principal strains at the end
of the analysis.

of Fig. 49. The structural response is characterized by
a softening behaviour with appreciable energy dissipa-
tion after reaching the maximum capacity for a dis-
placement of 3 mm.

The performance of the proposed approach for the
crack-activation and deactivation can be appreciated in
Figs. 50, 51, which present the crack state and the dam-
age pattern at different instances of the loading history.
During the first cycle, shown in Fig. 50, the loading to-
wards the right produces three cracks, one at the top
right and lower left corners and an internal crack start-
ing from the middle of the wall. These cracks progres-
sively close during the load reversal, and are recognized
as inactive by the tracking algorithm. Their deactiva-
tion allows new ones to appear at the boundaries and
centre of the wall. Fig. 51 shows the crack state and the
cracking of the wall for the cycle with ±3.0mm max-
imum top displacement. Despite the important crack-
ing, the tracking algorithm can capture correctly the

-110

-90

-70

-50

-30

-10

 10

 30

 50

 70

 90

 110

-10 -5  0  5  10

H
o

ri
z
o

n
ta

l 
fo

rc
e
 (

k
N

)

Horizontal displacement (mm)

Experimental Envelope
Numerical Result

Fig. 49. Force against horizontal displacement graphs for the
masonry shear wall obtained through the numerical analysis.

changes in the stress state within the wall and recog-



Tracking algorithms for the numerical modelling of cracks in concrete and masonry structures 35

Fig. 50. (a) Tensile damage contour d+ and (b) crack state
during the first loading cycle for the maximum displacement
towards the right (left column) and the maximum displace-
ment towards the left (right column) (deformed mesh ×100).

nize correctly the active and inactive cracks according
to the loading direction and their open or close con-
figuration respectively. During this cycle, the diagonal
shear cracking at the middle of the wall reaches the
top and bottom ends, and results in the drop in the
structural capacity as shown in Fig. 49.

8 Large-Scale structural application

Large-scale problems with extensive cracking are a big
challenge for tracking algorithms. Such cases necessitate
numerical models that are capable of handling multiple
and arbitrary crack initiation and propagation, allow-
ing for crack intersection and showing the necessary ro-
bustness and efficiency. This section outlines a relative
application of the tracking algorithm to a large-scale
structure presented in [257].

The structural application deals with the pushover
analysis of an interior structural wall of an unreinforced
masonry building situated in Via Martoglio, Catania
Italy [280]. This is a well-known case study in the
literature, analysed with diverse numerical tools ori-
ented to the simulation of masonry structures (e.g.
[280, 281, 282]).

Figure 52 illustrates the geometry of the analysed
structure and the distinguishing structural elements.

Fig. 51. (a) Tensile damage contour d+ and (b) crack state
for a maximum displacement of +3.00mm (left column) and
−3.00mm (right column) (deformed mesh ×50).

370 105 174 105 273 105 203 256 134 100 330 100 160 95 440

2950

6
4

2
2

5
1

3
9

2
4

2
2

5
1

2
1

2
4

2
2

5
1

2
1

2
4

2
2

5
1

2
1

2
4

2
2

5
1

2
3

1
9

3
4

Walls Floors

2
4

Concrete Lintel

Fig. 52. Geometry (in cm) and material distribution of the
analysed wall.

Table 3. Materials assigned to the different structural ele-
ments of Model-A and Model-B.

Material Model A Model B

A Walls & Floors Walls

B Lintel Floors & Lintel

The floors are constructed with clay brick vaults sup-
ported on concrete girders, while the roof is a timber
structure. Since no information is available regarding



36 Savvas Saloustros et al.

Fig. 53. Tensile damage (first row) and maximum principal
strains (second row) at the end of the analysis for (a) Model
A and (b) Model B.

the floor’s rigidity, two models are considered with dif-
ferent material properties for the floors (see Table 3).
The first one (denoted hereafter as Model A) adopts
the existence of a flexible diaphragm and is prepared
using the same material parameters for both masonry
walls and floors (Material A in Table 4). The second
model (denoted hereafter as Model B) intents to sim-
ulate the effect of a stiff diaphragm and the floors are
modelled as linear elastic having the double stiffness of
masonry’s one (Material B in Table 4). In both mod-
els the concrete lintel above the central opening at the
ground floor has been simulated also as linear elastic.
A value of 0.45 is assigned to κ1 parameter resulting
in a shear strength of 0.15 MPa, which is the value
used in [280, 281]. As the previous case study (Section
5), the exclusion radius is defined equal to the bricks
length rexcl = 250mm, while the rest of the track-
ing parameters are αmax = π/4 and rneigh = 500mm.
Multi-directional crack initiation is not considered for
this case, due to the monotonic nature of the applied
loading.

The structure is discretized using an unstructured
mesh with 51052 constant strain triangles (26538
nodes) and plane stress conditions are adopted. The
effect of an earthquake is simulated by means of a
non-linear equivalent static analysis (pushover analy-
sis), which is carried-out in two stages. In the first one,
the self-weight of the walls and floors is applied, as well
as the live load as defined in [280]. In the second stage,
horizontal forces are applied at the level of each floor.
This loading pattern is proportional to the height and
the vertical loading of each floor as suggested in [283].

Figure 53 shows the results obtained with the two
models in terms of tensile damage (first row) and max-
imum principal strains (second row). The different as-
sumptions regarding the floor parameters result in dis-
tinct structural responses by the two models. In Model
A, the spandrels above the openings are the most
severely damaged elements, exhibiting important ver-
tical cracking. The absence of the consolidating action
from a stiff diaphragm allows the free rotation of the
piers as soon as the cracks in the spandrels are com-
pletely open. As a result, the last three vertical piers
of the right side rotate as cantilevers around their base
with almost no interaction among them. Failure of the
structure is eventually determined by the collapse of
the right side, as shown in the second row of Fig. 53a.
Contrary to Model A, the modelling of a stiff linear
elastic floor in Model B mobilises the shear response
of both spandrels and walls. This is demonstrated by
the diagonal cracking experienced by these elements in
Fig. 53b (first row). Collapse in this case is due to the
shear failure of the piers at the base of the structure
(see second row of Fig 53b).

The above results illustrate the capacity of tracking
algorithms to handle cases with an extensive number of
cracks. The numerical stability can be appreciated in
Fig. 54, which presents the obtained base shear against
horizontal displacement graphs for Model A and B. In
both cases, the complete loading history with an im-
portant part of the post-peak response could be repro-
duced. Moreover, the numerical model is capable of re-
producing the change in structural response according
to the adopted assumption on the floors rigidity of the
two models.

 0

 200

 400

 600

 800

 1000

 1200

 0  5  10  15  20  25  30  35  40

B
a
se

 S
h
e
a
r 

[k
N

]

Horizontal Displacement [mm]

Model A

Model B

Fig. 54. Base shear versus horizontal displacement at the
top right corner of the structure for the flexible diaphragm
case (Model A) and for the stiff diaphragm case (Model B).



Tracking algorithms for the numerical modelling of cracks in concrete and masonry structures 37

Table 4. Material parameters adopted in the numerical simulations of the large-scale structural wall.

Material f+ f− G+f G
−
f E ρ v

[MPa] [MPa] [J/m2] [J/m2] [GPa] [kg/m3] [−]
A 0.10 3.0 100 50000 2.5 1700 0.2
B [-] [-] [-] [-] 5.0 1700 0.2

The effect of directional mesh-bias dependency is
also investigated in this large-scale application. To this
aim Model A is analysed with two different mesh ty-
pologies, presented in Fig. 55. The results without and
with the tracking algorithm are shown in Fig. 56 and
Fig. 57, respectively. It can be appreciated in Fig.
56 that the solutions without the tracking algorithm
are severely biased by the mesh-directionality. For the
structured mesh vertical cracking affects the spandrel,
while for the unstructured one the cracks in the span-
drels are mainly diagonal. The tracking algorithm alle-
viates significantly the mesh-bias dependency as can be
appreciated in Fig. 57. For both cases, the same vertical
flexural cracking is predicted in the spandrels, which is
the expected damage due to the absence of a stiff di-
aphragm. This effect is also shown in the graphs of Fig.
58. The mesh-bias dependency in the analyses without
the tracking algorithm gives an important difference in
the capacity and post-peak response. On the contrary,
the analyses performed using the tracking algorithm are
consistent among them.

Fig. 55. Close-up of the two meshes used for the analysis of
Model A: (a) structured, (b) unstructured.

9 Conclusions

Finite element modelling of cracking in quasi-brittle
materials counts almost six decades of applications.
During this period, a wide range of numerical strate-
gies have been proposed with different levels of accuracy

Fig. 56. Simulation of Model A using the classical smeared
crack approach without the tracking algorithm. Tensile dam-
age (first row) and maximum principal strains (second row).
(a) Unstructured mesh for a horizontal displacement of 15.4
mm (Point A in Fig. 58). (b) Structured mesh for a horizontal
displacement of 15.5 mm (Point B in Fig. 58).

Fig. 57. Simulation of Model A using the proposed tracking
algorithm. Tensile damage (first row) and maximum principal
strains (second row). (a) Unstructured mesh for a horizontal
displacement of 20.9 mm (Point C in Fig. 58). (b) Structured
mesh for a horizontal displacement of 21.2 mm (Point D in
Fig. 58).

in crack representation and associated computational



38 Savvas Saloustros et al.

 0

 100

 200

 300

 400

 500

 600

 700

 0  5  10  15  20  25  30  35  40

B
a
se

 S
h

e
a
r 

[k
N

]

Horizontal Displacement [mm]

C

D

A

B

Tracking Unstructured Mesh
Tracking Structured Mesh
No-Tracking Unstructured Mesh
No-Tracking Structured Mesh

Fig. 58. Base shear versus horizontal displacement at the
top right corner of the structure using two different meshes
(structured and unstructured), with and without the pro-
posed tracking algorithm.

cost. Despite the obtained experience, the realistic sim-
ulation of cracking is still a challenging issue.

Today there exist both numerical and physical chal-
lenges that need to be addressed for the finite element
simulation of propagating cracks. On the one hand,
probably the most important numerical challenge is the
overcoming of the directional mesh-bias sensitivity of
finite element solutions. This pathology has been the
driving force behind the development of different strain
localization techniques during the last three decades.
In addition to this, an important issue is the limita-
tion of the computational cost such that the developed
numerical strategy can be used by both researchers
and practitioners for the analysis of large-scale struc-
tures with multiple cracks. On the other hand, physical
challenges include, among others, the understanding of
phenomena associated with multiple crack nucleation,
crack-opening and closing, crack intersection, definition
of crack propagation direction and crack branching.

The available numerical approaches for the simu-
lation of propagating cracks can be categorized with
respect to the choice of the crack representation. This
is possible using a strong discontinuity (discrete crack
approach), weak ones (smeared crack approach), or a
combination of both (hybrid crack approaches). De-
spite their differences, many of these approaches have
as a common standpoint the use of tracking algorithms.
These are numerical procedures used to define the zones
within the structure that cracking is expected to occur.
In this way, the discrete or smeared crack modelling
of cracking is applied in a limited zone within the in-
vestigated structure. One of the most important bene-
fits of using tracking algorithms is the improvement of
the directional mesh-bias independency, experienced by

both discrete and smeared crack approaches, due to the
explicit definition of the crack location according to a
selected a-priori crack propagation strategy.

Tracking algorithms have seen many advances in the
last two decades. Considering the information necessary
for defining and storing the crack path, tracking algo-
rithms can be categorized as local, global and partial-
domain ones, while a special category are the ones based
on an underlying damage-related field.

An important part of every tracking algorithm is
the criterion used for selecting the crack propagation
direction. This can be based on linear elastic fracture
mechanics criteria, material bifurcation analysis or em-
pirical criteria. The topic is certainly not exhausted and
a wide variety of crack propagation criteria are used to-
day.

Contrary to monotonic loading, cyclic response is a
relatively unexplored territory for tracking algorithms.
Cases with cyclic loads necessitate to account for crack-
opening and closing, as well as crack intersection phe-
nomena. These phenomena are easier to simulate with
tracking algorithms based on a smeared crack approach
than with a discrete crack framework.

Some of the identified challenges for modelling
cracking with tracking algorithms have been addressed
in this paper through the presentation of a local track-
ing algorithm. Strategies for modelling arbitrary inter-
nal and boundary cracking, crack-path continuity, crack
intersection, crack opening and closing, as well as multi-
directional cracking have been detailed. The validity of
these strategies has been demonstrated through the pre-
sentation of four case studies with monotonic and cyclic
loading.

Acknowledgements This research has received the finan-
cial support from the MINECO (Ministerio de Economia y
Competitividad of the Spanish Government) and the ERDF
(European Regional Development Fund) through the MUL-
TIMAS project (Multiscale techniques for the experimental
and numerical analysis of the reliability of masonry struc-
tures, ref. num. BIA2015-63882-P) and the EACY project
(Enhanced accuracy computational and experimental frame-
work for strain localization and failure mechanisms, ref.
MAT2013-48624-C2-1-P).

Compliance with ethical standards

Conflict of interest The authors declare that they have no
conflict of interest.



Tracking algorithms for the numerical modelling of cracks in concrete and masonry structures 39

Appendix A Continuum damage mechanics
model

A.1 Constitutive equation

The constitutive model used in this work is a contin-
uum damage model that distinguishes between tensile
(d+) and compressive damage (d−). The constitutive
equation is

σ = (1− d+) σ̄+ + (1− d−) σ̄−. (A.1)

The effective stresses (σ̄) are computed adopting a
strain equivalent hypothesis [284, 285] as

σ̄ = C0 : ε
e (A.2)

εe = ε− εi (A.3)

where C0 is the 4th order isotropic elastic constitutive
tensor, while ε, εe and εi are second order tensors repre-
senting the total, the elastic and the irreversible strains,
respectively. The split of the effective stress tensor into
a positive (σ̄+) and a negative part (σ̄−) is performed
according to Faria et al. [286, 13] as

σ̄+ =

3∑
j=1

〈σ̄j〉 pj ⊗ pj (A.4)

σ̄− = σ̄ − σ̄+. (A.5)

In the above equations, σ̄j is the principal effective
stress corresponding to the eigenvector pj of the effec-
tive stress tensor and the symbols 〈·〉 are the Macaulay
brackets (〈x〉 = x, if x ≥ 0 ,〈x〉 = 0, if x < 0).

A.2 Damage criteria

Loading, unloading and reloading conditions are distin-
guished with the use of two scalar positive quantities,
one for tension τ+ and a second for compression τ−,
termed as equivalent stresses. Their values are defined
according to the following functions proposed by Pe-
tracca et al. [287, 288]

τ+ = H0 [σ̄max]

[
1

1− a

(
aĪ1 +

√
3J̄2 + b〈σ̄max〉

) f+
f−

]
(A.6)

τ− = H0 [−σ̄min]
[

1

1− a

(
aĪ1 +

√
3J̄2 + κ1b〈σ̄max〉

)]
(A.7)

a =

(
f−b /f

−
)
− 1

2
(
f−b /f

−
)
− 1

(A.8)

b = (1− a) f−/f+ − (1 + a) . (A.9)

In the above, f+ and f− stand for the tensile and com-
pressive uniaxial strengths, respectively, and f−b for the
biaxial compressive strength. Ī1 is the first invariant of
the effective stress tensor and J̄2 the second invariant
of the deviatoric effective stress tensor. The κ1 variable
in Eq. (A.7) was introduced in [287, 288] as a way to
control the shape of the compressive damage surface
in the shear quadrants, and through this the dilatant
behaviour of the material under shear stress states. Its
value varies between 0 (i.e. the Drucker-Prager crite-
rion) and 1 (i.e. the criterion proposed by Lubliner et
al. [15]). Finally, σ̄max and σ̄min designate the maxi-
mum and minimum principal effective stresses respec-
tively, whereas H0 is the specific Heaviside function
(H0[x] = 1 forx > 0 andH0[x] = 0 forx ≤ 0). The evo-
lution of tensile and compressive damage is controlled
with two damage criteria (Φ±), which are defined as

Φ±(r±, τ±) = τ± − r± ≤ 0. (A.10)

The stress thresholds (r±) are internal stress-like vari-
ables representing the current damage threshold. Their
initial values are equal to the uniaxial tensile and com-
pressive strength at the moment of damage initiation
r±0 = f

±. After damage is triggered, both thresholds
become equal to the maximum attained values by the
equivalent stresses and can be explicitly computed for
a generic time instant t as

r±t = max

[
r±0 , max

i∈ (0,t)

(
τ±i
)]
. (A.11)

A.3 Irreversible strains

The irreversible strains are considered as an internal
variable with the following evolution law proposed in
[116]

∆εin+1 = β
r( ˜̄σn+1)− rn

rn+1
εen+1. (A.12)

where ˜̄σn+1 are the trial effective stresses and r( ˜̄σn+1)
the equivalent stress threshold computed as

˜̄σn+1 = (σ̄|∆εi=0)n+1 = σ̄n +C0 : ∆εn+1 (A.13)
r( ˜̄σn+1) = max

[
rn, τ( ˜̄σn+1)

]
. (A.14)

The parameter β = [0, 1] is used to determine the mag-
nitude of the incremental irreversible strains. For β = 0
no increment of irreversible strains is considered, while
for β = 1 the total strain increment is irreversible. Nu-
merically, the effect of the irreversible strains is consid-



40 Savvas Saloustros et al.

ered through the update of the effective stresses accord-
ing to the following expressions (see [116, 260])

σ̄n+1 = λ ˜̄σn+1 (A.15)

λ = 1− β
(

1−
rn

r( ˜̄σn+1)

)
. (A.16)

A.4 Damage variables

The damage variables are defined according to the ex-
ponential softening law proposed in [289]

d+ = 1−
r+0
r+

exp

{
2H+d

(
r+0 − r

+

r+0

)}
r+ ≥ r+0 .

(A.17)

Tension and compression evolution laws consider the
positive G+f and negative G

−
f fracture energies, respec-

tively, as well as the characteristic finite element width
ldis through the corresponding discrete softening pa-
rameterH±d ensuring mesh-size independent energy dis-
sipation according to the crack-band theory [5]. For the
case of tension this is

H+d =
ldis

l+mat − ldis
(A.18)

For the case of compressive damage, the expression pro-
posed in [116, 260] is used to compute the discrete soft-
ening parameter H−d

H−d =
1

1− β

(
ldis

l−mat − ldis

)
(A.19)

The above definition is consistent with the crack band-
width approach yielding objective results for different
values of β by considering the contributions to the dissi-
pated energy of the evolution of the irreversible strains
and the compressive damage. In the above, the material
characteristic length l±mat for tension and compression
is

l±mat =
2EG±f

(f±)
2
. (A.20)

The current work considers the use of constant strain
triangles for which the characteristic finite element
length has been considered as ldis =

√
2Afe, with Afe

representing the area of the finite element. This is a
standard procedure that can be refined to consider the
crack direction and the finite element size according to
references [290, 110, 291].

References

1. Felippa, C. A. A historical outline of matrix structural
analysis: A play in three acts. Computers and Struc-
tures, 79(14):1313–1324, 2001.

2. Barenblatt, G. I. The Mathematical Theory of Equilib-
rium of Crack in Brittle Fracture. Adv. Appl. Mech., 7:
55–129, 1962.

3. Dugdale, D. S. Yielding of steel sheets containing slits.
Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids, 8(2):
100–104, 1960.

4. Hillerborg, A. and Modéer, M. and Petersson, P. E.
Analysis of crack formation and crack growth in con-
crete by means of fracture mechanics and finite ele-
ments. Cement and Concrete Research, 6(6):773–781,
1976.

5. Bažant, Z. P. and Oh, B. Crack band theory for fracture
of concrete. Materials and Structures, 16:155–177, 1983.

6. Chen, W. F. Plasticity in reinforced concrete. McGraw-
Hill, 1982. ISBN 1932159746. 474 pp.

7. Simo, J.C. and Hughes, T.J.R. Computational Inelas-
ticity, volume 7. Springer, 1998. ISBN 4420767936. 392
pp.

8. Feenstra, P. H. and de Borst, R. A composite plasticity
model for concrete. International Journal of Solids and
Structures, 33(5):707–730, 1996.

9. Oñate, E. and Oller, S. and Oliver, J. and Lubliner, J. A
constitutive model for cracking of concrete based on the
incremental theory of plasticity, 1988. ISSN 0264-4401.

10. Mazars, J. and Pijaudier-Cabot, G. Continuum damage
theory - application to concrete. Journal of Engineering
Mechanics, 115(2):345–365, 1989.

11. Oliver, J. and Cervera, M. and Oller, S. H. and Lubliner,
J. Isotropic damage models and smeared crack analysis
of concrete. In Proc. SCI-C Computer Aided Analysis
and Design of Concrete Structures, number February,
pages 945–957, 1990.

12. Cervera, M. and Oliver, J. and Faria, R. Seismic evalu-
ation of concrete dams via continuum damage models.
Earthquake Engineering & Structural Dynamics, 24(9):
1225–1245, 1995.

13. Faria, R. and Oliver, J. and Cervera, M. A strain-
based plastic viscous-damage model for massive con-
crete structures. International Journal of Solids and
Structures, 35(14):1533–1558, 1998.

14. Mazars, J. and Hamon, F. and Grange, S. A new
3D damage model for concrete under monotonic, cyclic
and dynamic loadings. Materials and Structures, pages
3779–3793, 2014.

15. Lubliner, J. and Oliver, J. and Oller, S. and Oñate, E. A
plastic-damage model for concrete. International Jour-
nal of Solids and Structures, 25(3):299–326, 1989.

16. Lee, J. and Fenves, G. L. Plastic-Damage Model for
Cyclic Loading of Concrete Structures. Journal of En-
gineering Mechanics, 124(8):892–900, 1998.

17. Armero, Francisco and Oller, Sergio. A general frame-
work for continuum damage models. I. Infinitesimal
plastic damage models in stress space. International
Journal of Solids and Structures, 37:7409–7436, 2000.

18. Voyiadjis, George Z. and Taqieddin, Ziad N. and Kat-
tan, Peter I. Anisotropic damage-plasticity model for
concrete. International Journal of Plasticity, 24(10):
1946–1965, 2008.

19. Wu, Jian Ying and Cervera, Miguel. A thermodynami-
cally consistent plastic-damage framework for localized
failure in quasi-brittle solids: Material model and strain



Tracking algorithms for the numerical modelling of cracks in concrete and masonry structures 41

localization analysis. International Journal of Solids
and Structures, 88-89:227–247, 2015.

20. de Borst, R. and Nauta, P. Non-orthogonal cracks in
a smeared finite element model. Engineering Computa-
tions, 2(1):35–46, 1985.

21. Rots, J. G. and Nauta, P. and Kusters, G. M a and
Blaauwendraad, J. Smeared Crack Approach and Frac-
ture Localization in Concrete. Heron, 30(1), 1985.

22. Ngo, D. and Scordelis, C. Finite Element Analysis of
Reinforced Concrete Beams. ACI Journal, 64(3):152–
163, 1967.

23. Nilson, Arthur H. Nonlinear analysis of reinforced con-
crete by the finite element method. ACI Journal Pro-
ceedings, 65(9):757–766, 1968.

24. Rashid, Y.R. Ultimate strength analysis of prestressed
concrete pressure vessels. Nuclear Engineering and De-
sign, 7(4):334–344, 1968.

25. Needleman, A. Material rate dependence and mesh sen-
sitivity in localization problems. Computer Methods in
Applied Mechanics and Engineering, 67(1):69–85, 1988.

26. de Borst, R. Simulation of Strain Localization: a Reap-
praisal of the Cosserat Continuum. Engineering Com-
putations, 8(4):317–332, 1991.

27. de Borst, R. and Sluys, L.J. and Mühlhaus, H.-B. and
Pamin, J. Fundamental issues in Finite Element Anal-
yses of localization of deformation. Engineering Com-
putations, 10(2):99–121, 1993.

28. Cervera, M. and Chiumenti, M. Smeared crack ap-
proach: back to the original track. International Journal
for Numerical and Analytical Methods in Geomechan-
ics, 30(12):1173–1199, 2006.

29. Cervera, M. and Chiumenti, M. and Agelet de Saracibar,
C. Shear band localization via local J2 continuum dam-
age mechanics. Computer Methods in Applied Mechan-
ics and Engineering, 193(9-11):849–880, 2004.

30. Cervera, M. and Chiumenti, M. Mesh objective tensile
cracking via a local continuum damage model and a
crack tracking technique. Computer Methods in Applied
Mechanics and Engineering, 196(1-3):304–320, 2006.

31. Cervera, M. and Chiumenti, M. and Codina, R. Mixed
stabilized finite element methods in nonlinear solid me-
chanics. Part II: Strain localization. Computer Meth-
ods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering, 199(37-40):
2571–2589, 2010.

32. Cervera, Miguel and Pelà, Luca and Clemente, Roberto
and Roca, Pere. A crack-tracking technique for localized
damage in quasi-brittle materials. Engineering Fracture
Mechanics, 77(13):2431–2450, 2010.

33. Oliver, J. and Huespe, a. E. and Dias, I. F. Strain
localization, strong discontinuities and material frac-
ture: Matches and mismatches. Computer Methods in
Applied Mechanics and Engineering, 241-244:323–336,
2012.

34. Jirásek, Milan and Grassl, Peter. Evaluation of direc-
tional mesh bias in concrete fracture simulations using
continuum damage models. Engineering Fracture Me-
chanics, 75(8):1921–1943, 2008.

35. Rabczuk, T. Computational Methods for Fracture in
Brittle and Quasi-Brittle Solids : State-of-the-art Re-
view and Future Perspectives. ISRN Applied Mathe-
matics, 2013:1–61, 2012.

36. Nilson, Arthur H. Nonlinear Analysis of Reinforced
Concrete by the Finite Element Method. ACI Journal,
65(9):757–766, 1968.

37. Goodman, R.E. and Taylor, R.L. and Brekke, T.L. A
model for the mechanics of jointed rock. Journal of Soil

Mechanics & Foundations Div, 94(3):637–659„ 1968.
38. Rots, J.G. Computational modeling of concrete fracture.

PhD thesis, Delft University of Technology, 1988.
39. Cendón, D. A. and Gálvez, J. C. and Elices, M. and

Planas, J. Modelling the fracture of concrete under
mixed loading. International journal of fracture, 103
(3):293–310, 2000.

40. Gálvez, J. C. and Červenka, J. and Cendón, D. A. and
Saouma, V. A discrete crack approach to normal/shear
cracking of concrete. Cement and Concrete Research,
32(10):1567–1585, 2002.

41. Page, Adrian W. A Model for the In-Plane Behaviour
of Masonry and a Sensitivity Analysis of its CriticaI
Parameters. In 5th International Brick Masonry Con-
ference, pages 262–267, 1979.

42. Lotfi, H R and Shing B.P. Interface model applied to
fracture of masonry structures. Journal of Structural
Engineering, 120(1):63–80, 1994.

43. Lourenço, P. B. and Rots, J. G. Multisurface Interface
Model for Analysis of Masonry Structures. Journal of
Engineering Mechanics, 123(7):660–668, 1997.

44. Gambarotta, L. and Lagomarsino, S. Damage models
for the seismic response of brick masonry shear walls.
Part I: The mortar joint model and its applications.
Earthquake Engineering & Structural Dynamics, 26(4):
423–439, apr 1997.

45. Macorini, L. and Izzuddin, B. A. A non-linear inter-
face element for 3D mesoscale analysis of brick-masonry
structures. International Journal for Numerical Meth-
ods in Engineering, 85(12):1584–1608, 2011.

46. Petracca, Massimo and Pelà, Luca and Rossi, Riccardo
and Zaghi, Stefano and Camata, Guido and Spacone,
Enrico. Micro-scale continuous and discrete numer-
ical models for nonlinear analysis of masonry shear
walls. Construction and Building Materials, 149:296–
314, 2017.

47. Saouma, V. E. and Zatz, I. J. An automated finite ele-
ment procedure for fatigue crack propagation analyses.
Engineering Fracture Mechanics, 20(2):321–333, 1984.

48. Ingraffea, A. R. and Saouma, V. Numerical modeling of
discrete crack propagation in reinforced and plain con-
crete. In Fracture mechanics of concrete: Structural
application and numerical calculation, pages 171–225.
Springer Netherlands, Dordrecht, 1985. ISBN 978-94-
009-6152-4.

49. Shephard, Mark S. and Yehia, Nabil A B and Burd,
Gary S. and Weidner, Theodore J. Automatic crack
propagation tracking. Computers and Structures, 20(1-
3):211–223, 1985.

50. Wawrzynek, P. A. and Ingraffea, A. R. Interactive finite
element analysis of fracture processes: An integrated ap-
proach. Theoretical and Applied Fracture Mechanics, 8
(2):137–150, 1987.

51. Bocca, Pietro and Carpinteri, Alberto and Valente, Sil-
vio. Mixed mode fracture of concrete. International
Journal of solids and structures, 27(9):1139–1153, 1991.

52. Swenson, D V and Ingraffea, A.R. Modeling mixed-
mode dynamic crack propagation using finite elements:
Theory and applications. Computational Mechanics, 3:
381–397, 1988.

53. Martha, Lf and Wawrzynek, Pa and Ingraffea, Ar. Ar-
bitrary crack representation using solid modeling. En-
gineering with Computers, pages 63–82, 1993.

54. Schrefler, Bernhard A. and Secchi, Stefano and Simoni,
Luciano. On adaptive refinement techniques in multi-
field problems including cohesive fracture. Computer



42 Savvas Saloustros et al.

Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering, 195(4-
6):444–461, 2006.

55. Feld-Payet, S. and Chiaruttini, V. and Besson, J. and
Feyel, F. A new marching ridges algorithm for crack
path tracking in regularized media. International Jour-
nal of Solids and Structures, 71:57–69, 2015.

56. Areias, P. and Reinoso, J. and Camanho, P. and
Rabczuk, T. A constitutive-based element-by-element
crack propagation algorithm with local mesh refinement.
Computational Mechanics, 56(2):291–315, 2015.

57. Johnson, C. and Scott, R. A Finite Element Method
for Problems in Perfect Plasticity Using Discontinuous
Trial Functions. In Nonlinear Finite Element Analysis
in Structural Mechanics, pages 307–324. Springer Berlin
Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 1981.

58. Dvorkin, E. N. and Cuitiño, A. M. and Gioia, G. Finite
elements with displacement interpolated embedded lo-
calization lines insensitive to mesh size and distortions.
International Journal for Numerical Methods in Engi-
neering, 30(3):541–564, 1990.

59. Klisinski, Marek and Runesson, Kenneth and Sture,
Stein and Others. Finite element with inner softening
band. Journal of engineering mechanics, 117(3):575,
1991.

60. Simo, J. C. and Oliver, J. and Armero, F. An analy-
sis of strong discontinuities induced by strain-softening
in rate-independent inelastic solids. Computational Me-
chanics, 12(5):277–296, 1993.

61. Larsson, Ragnar and Runesson, Kenneth and Ottosen,
Niels Saabye. Discontinuous displacement approxima-
tion for capturing plastic localization. International
Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering, 36(12):
2087–2105, 1993.

62. Armero, Francisco and Garikipati, K. An analysis of
strong discontinuities in multiplicative finite strain plas-
ticity and their relation with the numerical simulation
of strain localization in solids. International Journal of
Solids and Structures, 33(20-22):2863–2885, 1996.

63. Oliver, J. Continuum modelling of strong discontinuities
in solid mechanics using damage models. Computational
Mechanics, 17(1-2):49–61, 1995.

64. Oliver, J and Cervera, M. and Manzoli, O. On the
Use of Strain-Softening models for the Simulation of
Strong Discontinuities in Solids. In R.de Borst and
E. V. D.Giessen, editors,Material Instabilities in Solids,
pages 104–123. John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, 1998.

65. Sancho, J M and Planas, J. and Gálvez, J. C. and Reyes,
E. and Cendón, D. A. An embedded cohesive crack
model for finite element analysis of mixed mode frac-
ture of concrete. Fatigue & Fracture of Engineering
Materials & Structures, 29(12):1056–1065, dec 2006.

66. Zhang, Yiming and Lackner, Roman and Zeiml,
Matthias and Mang, Herbert a. Strong discontinuity
embedded approach with standard SOS formulation: El-
ement formulation, energy-based crack-tracking strat-
egy, and validations. Computer Methods in Applied Me-
chanics and Engineering, 287:335–366, 2015.

67. Dias-da-Costa, D. and Alfaiate, J. and Sluys, L. J.
and Júlio, E. Towards a generalization of a discrete
strong discontinuity approach. Computer Methods in
Applied Mechanics and Engineering, 198(47-48):3670–
3681, 2009.

68. Jirásek, M. Comparative study on finite elements
with embedded discontinuities. Computer Methods in
Applied Mechanics and Engineering, 188(1-3):307–330,
2000.

69. Oliver, J. and Huespe, A. E. and Samaniego, E. A study
on finite elements for capturing strong discontinuities.
International Journal for Numerical Methods in Engi-
neering, 56(14):2135–2161, 2003.

70. Belytschko, T. and Black, T. Elastic crack growth in
finite elements with minimal remeshing. International
Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering, 45(5):
601–620, 1999.

71. Moës, Nicolas and Dolbow, John and Belytschko, Ted. A
finite element method for crack growth without remesh-
ing. International Journal for Numerical Methods in
Engineering, 46(1):131–150, 1999.

72. Melenk, J.M. and Babuška, I. The partition of unity
finite element method: Basic theory and applications.
Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineer-
ing, 139(1-4):289–314, 1996.

73. Babuška, Ivo and Melenk, J. M. The partition of unity
method. International Journal for Numerical Methods
in Engineering, 40(4):727–758, 1997.

74. Hansbo, Anita and Hansbo, Peter. A finite element
method for the simulation of strong and weak discon-
tinuities in solid mechanics. Computer Methods in
Applied Mechanics and Engineering, 193(33-35):3523–
3540, 2004.

75. Song, Jeong Hoon and Areias, Pedro M A and Be-
lytschko, Ted. A method for dynamic crack and shear
band propagation with phantom nodes. International
Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering, 67(6):
868–893, 2006.

76. Chau-Dinh, Thanh and Zi, Goangseup and Lee, Phill
Seung and Rabczuk, Timon and Song, Jeong Hoon.
Phantom-node method for shell models with arbitrary
cracks. Computers and Structures, 92-93:242–246, 2012.

77. Duarte, C.A. and Babuška, I. and Oden, J.T. General-
ized finite element methods for three-dimensional struc-
tural mechanics problems. Computers & Structures, 77
(2):215–232, 2000.

78. Strouboulis, T. and Babuška, I. and Copps, K. The
design and analysis of the Generalized Finite Element
Method. Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and
Engineering, 181(1):43–69, 2000.

79. Strouboulis, T and Copps, K and Babuska, I. The gen-
eralized finite element method: an example of its imple-
mentation and illustration of its performance. Interna-
tional Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering,
(May 1999):1–16, 2000.

80. Strouboulis, T. and Copps, K. and Babuška, I. The
generalized finite element method. Computer Methods
in Applied Mechanics and Engineering, 190(32):4081–
4193, 2001.

81. Garzon, J. and O’Hara, P. and Duarte, C. A. and But-
tlar, W. G. Improvements of explicit crack surface
representation and update within the generalized finite
element method with application to three-dimensional
crack coalescence. International Journal for Numerical
Methods in Engineering, 97(4):231–273, 2014.

82. Karihaloo, B. L. and Xiao, Q. Z. Modelling of stationary
and growing cracks in FE framework without remeshing:
A state-of-the-art review. Computers and Structures,
81:119–129, 2003.

83. Abdelaziz, Yazid and Hamouine, Abdelmadjid. A sur-
vey of the extended finite element. Computers and
Structures, 86(11-12):1141–1151, 2008.

84. Belytschko, Ted and Gracie, Robert and Ventura,
Giulio. A review of extended/generalized finite element
methods for material modeling. Modelling and Simula-



Tracking algorithms for the numerical modelling of cracks in concrete and masonry structures 43

tion in Materials Science and Engineering, 17:043001,
2009.

85. Fries, Thomas-Peter and Belytschko, Ted. The ex-
tended/generalized finite element method: An overview
of the method and its applications. International Jour-
nal for Numerical Methods in Engineering, 84(3):253–
304, 2010.

86. Sukumar, N. and Dolbow, J. E. and Moës, N. Ex-
tended finite element method in computational fracture
mechanics: a retrospective examination. International
Journal of Fracture, 196(1-2):189–206, 2015.

87. Jirásek, Milan and Belytschko, Ted Bohdan. Computa-
tional resolution of strong discontinuities. In Fifth world
congress on computational mechanics, pages 7–12, Vi-
enna, 2002.

88. Oliver, J. and Huespe, A. E. and Sánchez, P. J. A com-
parative study on finite elements for capturing strong
discontinuities: E-FEM vs X-FEM. Computer Meth-
ods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering, 195(37-40):
4732–4752, 2006.

89. Dias-Da-Costa, D. and Alfaiate, J. and Sluys, L. J. and
Júlio, E. A comparative study on the modelling of dis-
continuous fracture by means of enriched nodal and el-
ement techniques and interface elements. International
Journal of Fracture, 161(1):97–119, 2010.

90. Dumstorff, Peter and Meschke, Günther. Crack propa-
gation criteria in the framework of X-FEM-based struc-
tural analyses. International Journal for Numerical
and Analytical Methods in Geomechanics, 31(2):239–
259, 2007.

91. Sancho, J. M. and Planas, J. and Cendón, D. A. and
Reyes, E. and Gálvez, J. C. An embedded crack model
for finite element analysis of concrete fracture. Engi-
neering Fracture Mechanics, 74(1-2):75–86, 2007.

92. Zhang, Yiming and Zhuang, Xiaoying. A softening-
healing law for self-healing quasi-brittle materials: An-
alyzing with strong discontinuity embedded approach.
Engineering Fracture Mechanics, 192:290–306, 2018.

93. Jirásek, Milan and Zimmermann, Thomas. Embedded
crack model. Part II. Combination with smeared cracks.
International Journal for Numerical Methods in Engi-
neering, 50(6):1291–1305, 2001.

94. Feist, Christian. A numerical model for cracking of
plain concrete based on the strong discontinuity ap-
proach. PhD thesis, Universität Innsbruck, 2004.

95. Samaniego, Esteban. Contributions to the continuum
modelling of strong discontinuities in two-dimensional
solids. PhD thesis, Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya
(UPC-BarcelonaTech), 2003.

96. Remmers, J. J C and de Borst, R. and Needleman, A.
A cohesive segments method for the simulation of crack
growth. Computational Mechanics, 31(1-2 SPEC.):69–
77, 2003.

97. Remmers, Joris J C and de Borst, R. and Needleman,
Alan. The simulation of dynamic crack propagation us-
ing the cohesive segments method. Journal of the Me-
chanics and Physics of Solids, 56(1):70–92, 2008.

98. Song, Jeong Hoon and Belytschko, Ted. Cracking node
method for dynamic fracture with finite elements. Inter-
national Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineer-
ing, 77(3):360–385, 2009.

99. Ghorashi, Seyed Shahram and Valizadeh, Navid and
Mohammadi, Soheil. Extended isogeometric analysis for
simulation of stationary and propagating cracks. Inter-
national Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineer-
ing, 89(9):1069–1101, 2012.

100. Tambat, A. and Subbarayan, G. Isogeometric enriched
field approximations. Computer Methods in Applied
Mechanics and Engineering, 245-246:1–21, 2012.

101. Cedolin, Luigi and Bažant, Zdeněk P. Effect of finite
element choice in blunt crack band analysis. Computer
Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering, 24(3):
305–316, 1980.

102. Pietruszczak, S. and Mroz, Z. Numerical analysis of
elastic-plastic compression of pillars accounting for ma-
terial hardening and softening. International Journal of
Rock Mechanics and Mining Sciences and Geomechan-
ics, 17(4):199–207, 1980.

103. Pietruszczak, St. and Mróz, Z. Finite element analysis of
deformation of strain-softening materials. International
Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering, 17(3):
327–334, 1981.

104. Zienkiewicz, O C and Huang, G C. A note on localiza-
tion phenomena and adaptive finite-element analysis in
forming processes. Communications in Applied Numer-
ical Methods, 6(2):71–76, 1990.

105. Zienkiewicz, O. C. and Huang, Maosong and Pastor,
M. Localization problems in plasticity using finite ele-
ments with adaptive remeshing. International Journal
for Numerical and Analytical Methods in Geomechan-
ics, 19(2):127–148, 1995.

106. Ortiz, Michael and Leroy, Yves and Needleman, Alan.
A finite element method for localized failure analysis.
Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineer-
ing, 61(2):189–214, 1987.

107. Belytschko, T. and Fish, J. and Engelmann, B. E. A
finite element with embedded localization zones. Com-
puter Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering,
70(1):59–89, 1988.

108. Simo, J. C. and Rifai, M. S. A class of mixed assumed
strain methods and the method of incompatible modes.
International Journal for Numerical Methods in Engi-
neering, 29(8):1595–1638, 1990.

109. Simo, J. C. and Armero, F. Geometrically non-linear
enhanced strain mixed methods and the method of in-
compatible modes. International Journal for Numerical
Methods in Engineering, 33(7):1413–1449, 1992.

110. Cervera, M. An orthotropic mesh corrected crack model.
Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineer-
ing, 197(17-18):1603–1619, 2008.

111. Cervera, Miguel. A smeared-embedded mesh-corrected
damage model for tensile cracking. International Jour-
nal for Numerical Methods in Engineering, 76(July):
1930–1954, 2008.

112. Slobbe, A. T. and Hendriks, M. A N and Rots, J. G.
Smoothing the propagation of smeared cracks. Engi-
neering Fracture Mechanics, 132:147–168, 2014.

113. Burnett, Damon J. A Mesh Objective Algorithm for
Modeling Mode-I Cracks Using a Standard Finite Ele-
ment Formulation. PhD thesis, University of New Mex-
ico, 2015.

114. Saloustros, Savvas and Pelà, Luca and Cervera, Miguel.
A crack-tracking technique for localized cohesive-
frictional damage. Engineering Fracture Mechanics,
150:96–114, 2015.

115. Saloustros, Savvas and Pelà, Luca and Cervera, Miguel
and Roca, Pere. Finite element modelling of internal and
multiple localized cracks. Computational Mechanics, 59
(2):299–316, 2016.

116. Saloustros, Savvas and Cervera, Miguel and Pelà, Luca.
Tracking multi-directional intersecting cracks in numer-
ical modelling of masonry shear walls under cyclic load-



44 Savvas Saloustros et al.

ing. Meccanica, 53(7):1757–1776, 2018.
117. Benedetti, Lorenzo and Cervera, Miguel and Chiumenti,

Michele. High-fidelity prediction of crack formation in
2D and 3D pullout tests. Computers & Structures, 172:
93–109, 2016.

118. Fraeijs de Veubeke, B. M. Displacement and equilibrium
models. In O. C.Zienkiewicz and H.G., editors, Stress
Analysis, pages 145–197. Wiley, London, 1965.

119. Pastor, M and Quecedo, M and Zienkiewicz, O C. A
mixed displacement-pressure formulation for numerical
analysis of plastic failure. Computers & Structures, 62
(1):13–23, 1997.

120. Pastor, M. and Li, T. and Liu, X. and Zienkiewicz, O.
C. Stabilized low-order finite elements for failure and lo-
calization problems in undrained soils and foundations.
Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineer-
ing, 174(1-2):219–234, 1999.

121. Chiumenti, M. and Valverde, Q. and Agelet de
Saracibar, C. and Cervera, M. A stabilized formula-
tion for incompressible elasticity using linear displace-
ment and pressure interpolations. Computer Methods
in Applied Mechanics and Engineering, 191(46):5253–
5264, nov 2002.

122. Cervera, M. Viscoelasticity and Rate-dependent Con-
tinuum Damage Models, Monography N-79. CIMNE,
Barcelona, 2003. ISBN 8495999374. 76 pp.

123. Chiumenti, M. and Valverde, Q. and Agelet de
Saracibar, C. and Cervera, M. A stabilized formula-
tion for incompressible plasticity using linear triangles
and tetrahedra. International Journal of Plasticity, 20
(8-9):1487–1504, aug 2004.

124. Sánchez, P. J. and Sonzogni, V. E. and Huespe, A. E.
Study of a stabilized mixed finite element with empha-
sis on its numerical performance for strain localization
problems. Communications in Numerical Methods in
Engineering, 24(4):297–320, 2007.

125. Cervera, M. and Chiumenti, M. and Codina, R. Mixed
stabilized finite element methods in nonlinear solid me-
chanics. Part I: Formulation. Computer Methods in
Applied Mechanics and Engineering, 199(37-40):2559–
2570, 2010.

126. Cervera, M. and Chiumenti, M. and Benedetti, L. and
Codina, R. Mixed stabilized finite element methods in
nonlinear solid mechanics. Part III: Compressible and
incompressible plasticity. Computer Methods in Applied
Mechanics and Engineering, 285:752–775, 2015.

127. Benedetti, L. and Cervera, M. and Chiumenti, M.
Stress-accurate Mixed FEM for soil failure under shal-
low foundations involving strain localization in plastic-
ity. Computers and Geotechnics, 64:32–47, mar 2015.

128. Benedetti, Lorenzo. Mixed finite element formula-
tions for strain localization and failure in plasticity.
PhD thesis, Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya (UPC-
BarcelonaTech), 2017.

129. Steinmann, P. and William, K. Localization within the
framework of micropolar elasto-plasticity. In Advances
in Continuum Mechanics VI, pages 293–313. Springer,
1991.

130. Bažant, Zdeněk P. and Lin, Feng B. Nonlocal Smeared
Cracking Model for Concrete Fracture. Journal of
Structural Engineering, 114(11):2493–2510, 1988.

131. Bažant, Zdeněk P. and Jirásek, Milan. Nonlocal Inte-
gral Formulations of Plasticity and Damage: Survey of
Progress. Journal of Engineering Mechanics, 128(11):
1119–1149, 2002.

132. Vardoulakis, I. A gradient flow theory of plasticity for
granular materials. Acta Mechanica, 87:197–217, 1991.

133. Muhlhaus, H. B. and Aifantis, E. C. The influence of
microstructure-induced gradients on the localization of
deformation in viscoplastic materials. Acta Mechanica,
89(1-4):217–231, 1991.

134. de Borst, R. and Mühlhaus, Hans-Bernd. Gradient-
dependent plasticity: Formulation and algorithmic as-
pects. International Journal for Numerical Methods in
Engineering, 35(3):521–539, 1992.

135. Peerlings, R. H J and Geers, M. G D and de Borst,
R. and Brekelmans, W. A M. A critical comparison
of nonlocal and gradient-enhanced softening continua.
International Journal of Solids and Structures, 38(44-
45):7723–7746, 2001.

136. Bobiński, Jerzy and Tejchman, Jacek. Comparison of
continuous and discontinuous constitutive models to
simulate concrete behaviour under mixed-mode failure
conditions. International Journal for Numerical and
Analytical Methods in Geomechanics, 40(3):406–435,
2016.

137. Francfort, G.A. and Marigo, J.-J. Revisiting brittle frac-
ture as an energy minimization problem. Journal of
the Mechanics and Physics of Solids, 46(8):1319–1342,
1998.

138. Bourdin, B. and Francfort, G. A. and Marigo, J. J. Nu-
merical experiments in revisited brittle fracture. Journal
of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids, 48(4):797–826,
2000.

139. Bourdin, Blaise and Francfort, Gilles A. and Marigo,
Jean Jacques. The variational approach to fracture.
Number April. Springer, 2008. ISBN 9781402063947.
1–164 pp.

140. Miehe, Christian and Hofacker, Martina and
Welschinger, Fabian. A phase field model for rate-
independent crack propagation: Robust algorithmic
implementation based on operator splits. Computer
Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering, 199
(45-48):2765–2778, 2010.

141. Ambati, Marreddy and Gerasimov, Tymofiy and De
Lorenzis, Laura. A review on phase-field models of brit-
tle fracture and a new fast hybrid formulation. Compu-
tational Mechanics, 55(2):383–405, 2014.

142. de Borst, R. and Verhoosel, Clemens V. Gradient dam-
age vs phase-field approaches for fracture: Similarities
and differences. Computer Methods in Applied Mechan-
ics and Engineering, 312:78–94, 2016.

143. De Borst, René and Verhoosel, Clemens V. A discussion
on gradient damage and phase-field models for brittle
fracture. In Advanced Structured Materials, volume 60,
pages 263–277. Springer Singapore, 2016. ISBN 978-
981-10-0958-7.

144. Sluys, L. J. and de Borst, R. Wave propagation and lo-
calization in a rate-dependent cracked medium-model
formulation and one-dimensional examples. Interna-
tional Journal of Solids and Structures, 29(23):2945–
2958, 1992.

145. Comi, Claudia and Mariani, Stefano and Perego, Um-
berto. An extended FE strategy for transition from
continuum damage to mode I cohesive crack propaga-
tion. International Journal for Numerical and Analyt-
ical Methods in Geomechanics, 31(2):213–238, 2007.

146. Wells, G. N. and Sluys, L. J. and de Borst, R. Sim-
ulating the propagation of displacement discontinuities
in a regularized strain-softening medium. International
Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering, 53(5):



Tracking algorithms for the numerical modelling of cracks in concrete and masonry structures 45

1235–1256, 2002.
147. Simone, A. and Wells, G. N. and Sluys, L. J. From con-

tinuous to discontinuous failure in a gradient-enhanced
continuum damage model. Computer Methods in
Applied Mechanics and Engineering, 192(41-42):4581–
4607, 2003.

148. Belytschko, Ted and Chen, Hao and Xu, Jingxiao and
Zi, Goangseup. Dynamic crack propagation based on
loss of hyperbolicity and a new discontinuous enrich-
ment. International Journal for Numerical Methods in
Engineering, 58(12):1873–1905, 2003.

149. Oliver, J. and Dias, I. F. and Huespe, A. E. Crack-
path field and strain-injection techniques in computa-
tional modeling of propagating material failure. Com-
puter Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering,
274:289–348, 2014.

150. Lloberas-Valls, O. and Huespe, A. E. and Oliver, J. and
Dias, I. F. Strain injection techniques in dynamic frac-
ture modeling. Computer Methods in Applied Mechan-
ics and Engineering, 308:499–534, 2016.

151. Ingraffea, Anthony R and Heuze, F. Finite element mod-
els for rock fracture mechanics. International Journal
for Numerical and Analytical Methods in Geomechan-
ics, 4(1):25–43, 1980.

152. Oliver, Javier. Modelling strong discontinuities in solid
mechanics via strain softening constitutive equations.
Part 2: Numerical simulation. International Journal for
Numerical Methods in Engineering, 39(21):3601–3623,
1996.

153. Alfaiate, J. and Wells, G. N. and Sluys, L. J. On the
use of embedded discontinuity elements with crack path
continuity for mode-I and mixed-mode fracture. Engi-
neering Fracture Mechanics, 69(6):661–686, 2002.

154. Linder, C. and Armero, F. Finite elements with embed-
ded branching. Finite Elements in Analysis and Design,
45(4):280–293, 2009.

155. Manzoli, O. L. Predição de propagação de fissuras
através de modelos constitutivos locais e técnica de con-
strução progressiva da trajetória de descontinuidade.
Revista Internacional de Metodos Numericos para Cal-
culo y Diseno en Ingenieria, 27(3):180–188, 2011.

156. Wu, Jian Ying and Li, Feng Bo and Xu, Shi Lang. Ex-
tended embedded finite elements with continuous dis-
placement jumps for the modeling of localized failure in
solids. Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and
Engineering, 285:346–378, 2015.

157. Clemente, Roberto. Análysis estructural de edificios
históricos mediante modelos localizados de fisuración.
PhD thesis, Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya (UPC-
BarcelonaTech), 2006.

158. Clemente, Roberto and Cervera, Miguel and Roca, Pere.
Localized damage model applied to the analysis of ma-
sonry structures. Revista Internacional de Métodos
Numéricos para Cálculo y Diseño en Ingeniería, 24(1):
67–91, 2008.

159. Pelà, Luca. Continuum Damage Model for Nonlinear
Analysis of Masonry Structures. PhD thesis, Univer-
sitat Politècnica de Catalunya (UPC-BarcelonaTech),
2009.

160. Pelà, L. and Cervera, M. and Roca, P. An orthotropic
damage model for the analysis of masonry structures.
Construction and Building Materials, 41:957–967, 2013.

161. Pelà, Luca and Cervera, Miguel and Oller, Sergio and
Chiumenti, Michele. A localized mapped damage model
for orthotropic materials. Engineering Fracture Me-
chanics, 124-125:196–216, 2014.

162. Slobbe, Arthur T. Propagation and band width of
smeared cracks. PhD thesis, Delft University of Tech-
nology, 2015.

163. Areias, Pedro M A and Belytschko, Ted. Analysis of
three-dimensional crack initiation and propagation us-
ing the extended finite element method. International
Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering, 63(5):
760–788, 2005.

164. Mergheim, J. and Kuhl, E. and Steinmann, P. Towards
the algorithmic treatment of 3D strong discontinuities.
Communications in Numerical Methods in Engineering,
23(2):97–108, 2006.

165. Jäger, Philippe and Steinmann, Paul and Kuhl, Ellen.
On local tracking algorithms for the simulation of three-
dimensional discontinuities. Computational Mechanics,
42(3):395–406, 2008.

166. Gasser, Thomas C. and Holzapfel, Gerhard A. Model-
ing 3D crack propagation in unreinforced concrete using
PUFEM. Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and
Engineering, 194(25-26):2859–2896, 2005.

167. Gasser, Thomas C. and Holzapfel, Gerhard A. 3D Crack
propagation in unreinforced concrete. A two-step algo-
rithm for tracking 3D crack paths. Computer Meth-
ods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering, 195(37-40):
5198–5219, 2006.

168. Oliver, J. and Huespe, a. E. and Samaniego, E. and
Chaves, E. W. V. Continuum approach to the numeri-
cal simulation of material failure in concrete. Interna-
tional Journal for Numerical and Analytical Methods in
Geomechanics, 28(78):609–632, 2004.

169. Oliver, J. and Huespe, A. E. Continuum approach to
material failure in strong discontinuity settings. Com-
puter Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering,
193(30-32):3195–3220, 2004.

170. Beese, Steffen and Loehnert, Stefan and Wriggers, Pe-
ter. Modeling of Fracture in Polycrystalline Materials.
In Advances in Discretization Methods, pages 79–102.
Springer, Cham, 2016.

171. Huespe, A. E. and Needleman, A. and Oliver, J. and
Sánchez, P. J. A finite thickness band method for ductile
fracture analysis. International Journal of Plasticity, 25
(12):2349–2365, 2009.

172. Huespe, A. E. and Needleman, A. and Oliver, J. and
Sánchez, P. J. A finite strain, finite band method
for modeling ductile fracture. International Journal of
Plasticity, 28(1):53–69, 2012.

173. Riccardi, Francesco and Kishta, Ejona and Richard,
Benjamin. A step-by-step global crack-tracking ap-
proach in E-FEM simulations of quasi-brittle materials.
Engineering Fracture Mechanics, 170:44–58, 2017.

174. Chaves, Eduardo W V. Tracking 3D Crack Path. In In-
ternational Conference on Mathematical and Statistical
Modeling in Honor of Enrique Castillo., Ciudad Real,
Spain, 2006.

175. Jäger, Philippe and Steinmann, Paul and Kuhl, Ellen.
Towards the treatment of boundary conditions for global
crack path tracking in three-dimensional brittle frac-
ture. Computational Mechanics, 45(1):91–107, 2009.

176. Osher, Stanley and Sethian, James A. Fronts propagat-
ing with curvature-dependent speed: Algorithms based
on Hamilton-Jacobi formulations. Journal of Computa-
tional Physics, 79(1):12–49, 1988.

177. Belytschko, T. and Moës, N. and Usui, S. and Parimi,
C. Arbitrary discontinuities in finite elements. Interna-
tional Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering,
50(4):993–1013, 2001.



46 Savvas Saloustros et al.

178. Stolarska, M. and Chopp, David L and Moës, Nicolas
and Belytschko, Ted. Modelling crack growth by level
sets in the extended finite element method. Interna-
tional Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering,
51(8):943–960, 2001.

179. Sethian, James Albert. and Sethian, James Albert.
Level set methods and fast marching methods : evolv-
ing interfaces in computational geometry, fluid mechan-
ics, computer vision, and materials science. Cambridge
University Press, 1999. ISBN 9780521645577. 378 pp.

180. Gravouil, A. and Moës, N. and Belytschko, T. Non-
planar 3D crack growth by the extended finite element
and level sets-Part II: Level set update. International
Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering, 53(11):
2569–2586, 2002.

181. Stolarska, M. and Chopp, D. L. Modeling thermal fa-
tigue cracking in integrated circuits by level sets and the
extended finite element method. International Journal
of Engineering Science, 41(20):2381–2410, 2003.

182. Colombo, Daniele and Massin, Patrick. Fast and robust
level set update for 3D non-planar X-FEM crack prop-
agation modelling. Computer Methods in Applied Me-
chanics and Engineering, 200(25-28):2160–2180, 2011.

183. Ventura, G. and Budyn, E. and Belytschko, T. Vector
level sets for description of propagating cracks in finite
elements. International Journal for Numerical Methods
in Engineering, 58(10):1571–1592, 2003.

184. Fries, Thomas-Peter and Baydoun, Malak. Crack prop-
agation with the extended finite element method and a
hybrid explicit-implicit crack description. International
Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering, 89(12):
1527–1558, 2012.

185. Colombo, Daniele. An implicit geometrical approach
to level sets update for 3D non planar X-FEM crack
propagation. Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics
and Engineering, 237-240:39–50, 2012.

186. Sukumar, N. and Prévost, J. H. Modeling quasi-static
crack growth with the extended finite element method
Part I: Computer implementation. International Jour-
nal of Solids and Structures, 40(26):7513–7537, 2003.

187. Sukumar, N. and Chopp, D. L. and Béchet, E. and Moës,
N. Three-dimensional non-planar crack growth by a cou-
pled extended finite element and fast marching method.
International Journal for Numerical Methods in Engi-
neering, 76(5):727–748, oct 2008.

188. Shi, Jianxu and Chopp, David and Lua, Jim and Suku-
mar, N. and Belytschko, Ted. Abaqus implementation
of extended finite element method using a level set rep-
resentation for three-dimensional fatigue crack growth
and life predictions. Engineering Fracture Mechanics,
77(14):2840–2863, 2010.

189. Duflot, Marc. A study of the representation of cracks
with level sets. International Journal for Numerical
Methods in Engineering, 70(11):1261–1302, 2007.

190. Holl, Matthias and Rogge, Timo and Loehnert, Stefan
andWriggers, Peter and Rolfes, Raimund. 3D multiscale
crack propagation using the XFEM applied to a gas tur-
bine blade. Computational Mechanics, 53(1):173–188,
2014.

191. Sadeghirad, Alireza and Chopp, David L. and Ren, Xi-
ang and Fang, Eugene and Lua, Jim. A novel hybrid ap-
proach for level set characterization and tracking of non-
planar 3D cracks in the extended finite element method.
Engineering Fracture Mechanics, 160:1–14, 2016.

192. Moës, N. and Gravouil, A. and Belytschko, T. Non-
planar 3D crack growth by the extended finite element

and level sets-Part I: Mechanical model. International
Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering, 53(11):
2549–2568, 2002.

193. Bordas, Stéphane and Moran, Brian. Enriched finite
elements and level sets for damage tolerance assessment
of complex structures. Engineering Fracture Mechanics,
73(9):1176–1201, 2006.

194. Paul, B. and Ndeffo, M. and Massin, P. and Moës,
N. An integration technique for 3D curved cracks and
branched discontinuities within the extended Finite Ele-
ment Method. Finite Elements in Analysis and Design,
123(May 2016):19–50, 2017.

195. Agathos, Konstantinos and Ventura, Giulio and Chatzi,
Eleni and Bordas, Stéphane P. A. Stable 3D
XFEM/vector level sets for non-planar 3D crack propa-
gation and comparison of enrichment schemes. Interna-
tional Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering,
113(2):252–276, jan 2018.

196. Haghighat, E. and Pietruszczak, S. On modeling of
discrete propagation of localized damage in cohesive-
frictional materials. International Journal for Numer-
ical and Analytical Methods in Geomechanics, 39(16):
1774–1790, 2015.

197. Feist, C. and Hofstetter, G. An embedded strong dis-
continuity model for cracking of plain concrete. Com-
puter Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering,
195(52):7115–7138, 2006.

198. Feist, C. and Hofstetter, G. Three-dimensional fracture
simulations based on the SDA. International Journal
for Numerical and Analytical Methods in Geomechan-
ics, 31(2):189–212, 2007.

199. Armero, F. and Kim, J. Three-dimensional finite ele-
ments with embedded strong discontinuities to model
material failure in the infinitesimal range. International
Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering, 91(12):
1291–1330, 2012.

200. Dias, I. F. and Oliver, J. and Lemos, J. V. and Lloberas-
Valls, O. Modeling tensile crack propagation in concrete
gravity dams via crack-path-field and strain injection
techniques. Engineering Fracture Mechanics, 154:288–
310, 2016.

201. Dias, I. F. Crack path field and strain injection tech-
niques in numerical modeling of propagating mate-
rial failure. PhD thesis, Universitat Politècnica de
Catalunya (UPC-BarcelonaTech), 2012.

202. Dias, I. F. and Oliver, J. and Huespe, A.E. Strain in-
jection techniques in numerical modeling of propagating
material failure. Monography CIMNE, 134, 2012.

203. Oliver, J. and Caicedo, M. and Roubin, E. and Huespe,
A.E. and Hernández, J.A. Continuum approach to com-
putational multiscale modeling of propagating fracture.
Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineer-
ing, 294:384–427, 2015.

204. Tamayo-Mas, Elena and Rodríguez-Ferran, Antonio. A
medial-axis-based model for propagating cracks in a
regularised bulk. International Journal for Numerical
Methods in Engineering, 101(7):489–520, 2015.

205. Tamayo-Mas, E. Continuous-discontinuous modelling
for quasi-brittle failure : propagating cracks in a reg-
ularised bulk. PhD thesis, Universitat Politècnica de
Catalunya (UPC-BarcelonaTech), 2013.

206. Tamayo-Mas, Elena and Rodríguez-Ferran, Antonio. A
new continuous-discontinuous damage model: Cohesive
cracks via an accurate energy-transfer process. Theoret-
ical and Applied Fracture Mechanics, 69:90–101, 2014.



Tracking algorithms for the numerical modelling of cracks in concrete and masonry structures 47

207. Bouchard, P.O. and Bay, F. and Chastel, Y. Numerical
modelling of crack propagation: automatic remeshing
and comparison of different criteria. Computer Meth-
ods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering, 192(35-36):
3887–3908, 2003.

208. Unger, Jörg F. and Eckardt, Stefan and Könke, Carsten.
Modelling of cohesive crack growth in concrete struc-
tures with the extended finite element method. Com-
puter Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering,
196:4087–4100, 2007.

209. Erdogan, F. and Sih, G.C. On the Crack Extension in
Plates under Loading and Transverse Shear. Journal of
Fluids Engineering, 85(4):519–527, 1963.

210. Schöllmann, Matthias and Richard, Hans A. and
Kullmer, Gunter and Fulland, Markus. A new criterion
for the prediction of crack development in multiaxially
loaded structures. International Journal of Fracture,
117(2):129–141, 2002.

211. Sih, G.C. Some basic problems in fracture mechanics
and new concepts. Engineering Fracture Mechanics, 5
(2):365–377, 1973.

212. Sih, G. C. GC. Strain-energy-density factor applied to
mixed mode crack problems. International Journal of
fracture, 10(3):305–321, 1974.

213. Sih, G. C. and Macdonald, B. Fracture mechanics ap-
plied to engineering problems-strain energy density frac-
ture criterion. Engineering Fracture Mechanics, 6(2):
361–386, 1974.

214. Ingraffea, Anthony R and Gerstle, Walter and Gergely,
Peter and Saoume, Victor. Fracture mechanics of bond
in reinforced concrete. Journal of Structural Engineer-
ing, 110(4):871–890, 1984.

215. Byskov, Esben. The calculation of stress intensity fac-
tors using the finite element method with cracked ele-
ments. International Journal of Fracture Mechanics, 6
(2):159–167, 1970.

216. Tracey, Dm. Finite elements for determination of crack
tip elastic stress intensity factors. Engineering Fracture
Mechanics, 3(3):255–265, 1971.

217. Barsoum, Roshdy S. Triangular quarter-point elements
as elastic and perfectly-plastic crack tip elements. Inter-
national Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineer-
ing, 11(1):85–98, 1977.

218. Henshell, R. D. and Shaw, K. G. Crack tip finite ele-
ments are unnecessary. International Journal for Nu-
merical Methods in Engineering, 9(3):495–507, 1975.

219. Barsoum, Roshdy S. On the use of isoparametric fi-
nite elements in linear fracture mechanics. International
Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering, 10(1):
25–37, jan 1976.

220. Lim, I. L. and Johnston, I. W. and Choi, S. K. A finite
element code for fracture propagation analysis within
elasto-plastic continuum. Engineering fracture mechan-
ics, 53(2):193–211, 1996.

221. Moës, N. and Belytschko, T. Extended finite element
method for cohesive crack growth. Engineering Fracture
Mechanics, 69(7):813–833, 2002.

222. Zi, Goangseup and Belytschko, Ted. New crack-tip el-
ements for XFEM and applications to cohesive cracks.
International Journal for Numerical Methods in Engi-
neering, 57(15):2221–2240, 2003.

223. Natarajan, S. and Mahapatra, R. and Bordas, Stéphane.
Integrating strong and weak discontinuities without
integration subcells and example applications in an
XFEM/GFEM framework. International journal for
numerical methods in engineering, 83:269–294, 2010.

224. Vu-Bac, N. and Nguyen-Xuan, H. and Chen, L. and Lee,
C. K. and Zi, G. and Zhuang, X. and Liu, G. R. and
Rabczuk, T. A phantom-node method with edge-based
strain smoothing for linear elastic fracture mechanics.
Journal of Applied Mathematics, 2013(1), 2013.

225. Griffith, A. A. The Phenomena of Rupture and Flow in
Solids. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society
A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences,
221:163–198, 1921.

226. Griffith, A. The theory of rupture. In C.Biereno and
J.Burgers, editors, First International Congress of Ap-
plied Mechanic, pages 54–63, Delft, 1924.

227. Nuismer, R. J. An energy release rate criterion for mixed
mode fracture. International Journal of Fracture, 11(2):
245–250, 1975.

228. Wu, C.-H. Fracture Under Combined Loads by
Maximum-Energy-Release-Rate Criterion. Journal of
Applied Mechanics, Transactions ASME, 45(3):553–
558, 1978.

229. Xie, Ming and Gerstle, Walter H and Rahulkumar,
Pakal. Energy-Based Automatic Mixed-Mode Crack-
Propagation Modeling. Journal of Engineering Mechan-
ics, 121(8):914–923, 1995.

230. Meschke, Günther and Dumstorff, Peter. Energy-based
modeling of cohesive and cohesionless cracks via X-
FEM. Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and
Engineering, 196(21-24):2338–2357, 2007.

231. Wells, G. N. and Sluys, L. J. A new method for mod-
elling cohesive cracks using finite elements. Interna-
tional Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering,
50(12):2667–2682, 2001.

232. Mergheim, J. and Kuhl, E. and Steinmann, P. A fi-
nite element method for the computational modelling
of cohesive cracks. International Journal for Numerical
Methods in Engineering, 63(2):276–289, 2005.

233. Verhoosel, Clemens V. and Remmers, Joris J. C. and
Gutiérrez, Miguel A. A partition of unityâĂŘbased mul-
tiscale approach for modelling fracture in piezoelectric
ceramics. International Journal for Numerical Methods
in Engineering, 82(8):966–994, 2010.

234. Gálvez, J. C. and Planas, J. and Sancho, J. M. and
Reyes, E. and Cendón, D. a. and Casati, M. J. An em-
bedded cohesive crack model for finite element analy-
sis of quasi-brittle materials. Engineering Fracture Me-
chanics, 109:369–386, 2013.

235. Alfaiate, J and Pires, E B and Martins, J a C. A Finite
Element Analysis of Non-Prescribed creck propation in
concrete. Computers and Structures, 63(I):17–26, 1997.

236. Mariani, S. and Perego, U. Extended finite element
method for quasi-brittle fracture. International Journal
for Numerical Methods in Engineering, 58(1):103–126,
2003.

237. Hill, R. Acceleration waves in solids. Journal of the
Mechanics and Physics of Solids, 10(1):1–16, 1962.

238. Rudnicki, J. W. and Rice, J. R. Conditions for the local-
ization of deformation in pressure-sensitive dilatant ma-
terials. Journal of the Mechanics and Physics of Solids,
23(6):371–394, 1975.

239. Rice, J. R. and Rudnicki, J. W. A note on some features
of the theory of localization of deformation. Interna-
tional Journal of Solids and Structures, 16(7):597–605,
1980.

240. Ottosen, Niels Saabye and Runesson, Kenneth. Discon-
tinuous bifurcations in a nonassociated Mohr material.
Mechanics of Materials, 12(3-4):255–265, 1991.



48 Savvas Saloustros et al.

241. Oliver, Javier. Modelling strong discontinuities in solid
mechanics via strain softening constitutive equations.
Part 1: fundamentals. International Journal for Numer-
ical Methods in Engineering, 39(21):3575–3600, 1996.

242. Peerlings, R. H J and de Borst, R. and Brekelmans, W.
A M and Geers, M. G D. Localisation issues in local and
nonlocal continuum approaches to fracture. European
Journal of Mechanics, A/Solids, 21(2):175–189, 2002.

243. Runesson, Kenneth and Saabye Ottosen, Niels and
Dunja, Perić. Discontinuous bifurcations of elastic-
plastic solutions at plane stress and plane strain. In-
ternational Journal of Plasticity, 7(1-2):99–121, 1991.

244. Benallal, Ahmed and Comi, Claudia. Localization anal-
ysis via a geometrical method. International Journal of
Solids and Structures, 33(1):99–119, 1996.

245. Oliver, J. and Cervera, M. and Manzoli, O. Strong dis-
continuities and continuum plasticity models: the strong
discontinuity approach. International Journal of Plas-
ticity, 15(3):319–351, 1999.

246. Mosler, J. Numerical analyses of discontinuous material
bifurcation: Strong and weak discontinuities. Computer
Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering, 194(9-
11):979–1000, 2005.

247. Oliver, J. and Huespe, A. E. and Cante, J. C. and
Díaz, G. On the numerical resolution of the discontinu-
ous material bifurcation problem. International Journal
for Numerical Methods in Engineering, 83(6):786–804,
2010.

248. Wu, Jian-Ying and Cervera, Miguel. On the equivalence
between traction- and stress-based approaches for the
modeling of localized failure in solids. Journal of the
Mechanics and Physics of Solids, 82:137–163, 2015.

249. Oliver, J. and Linero, D. L. and Huespe, A. E. and Man-
zoli, O. L. Two-dimensional modeling of material failure
in reinforced concrete by means of a continuum strong
discontinuity approach. Computer Methods in Applied
Mechanics and Engineering, 197(5):332–348, 2008.

250. Cervera, M. and Chiumenti, M. and Di Capua, D.
Benchmarking on bifurcation and localization in J2 plas-
ticity for plane stress and plane strain conditions. Com-
puter Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering,
241-244:206–224, 2012.

251. Rabczuk, T. and Belytschko, T. Cracking particles:
A simplified meshfree method for arbitrary evolving
cracks. International Journal for Numerical Methods
in Engineering, 61(13):2316–2343, 2004.

252. Rabczuk, T. and Belytschko, T. A three-dimensional
large deformation meshfree method for arbitrary evolv-
ing cracks. Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics
and Engineering, 196(29-30):2777–2799, 2007.

253. Weed, D. A. and Foster, C. D. and Motamedi, M. H.
A robust numerical framework for simulating localized
failure and fracture propagation in frictional materials.
Acta Geotechnica, 12(2):253–275, 2017.

254. Armero, Francisco and Linder, Christian. Numerical
simulation of dynamic fracture using finite elements
with embedded discontinuities. International Journal
of Fracture, 160(2):119–141, 2009.

255. Daux, Christophe and Moes, N. and Dolbow, John. Ar-
bitrary branched and intersecting cracks with the ex-
tended finite element method. International Journal
for Numerical Methods in Engineering, 48(September
1999):1741–1760, 2000.

256. Duarte, C. A. and Reno, L. G. and Simone, A. and Van
Der Giessen, E. Hp generalized finite elements for three-
dimensional branched cracks and polycrystals. AIP

Conference Proceedings, 973(February):39–44, 2008.
257. Saloustros, Savvas and Pelà, Luca and Cervera, Miguel

and Roca, Pere. An Enhanced Finite Element Macro-
Model for the Realistic Simulation of Localized Cracks
in Masonry Structures: A Large-Scale Application. In-
ternational Journal of Architectural Heritage, 12(3):
432–447, 2018.

258. COMET. Coupled Mechanical and Thermal analysis,
http://www.cimne.com/comet/, 2016.

259. GiD. The personal pre and post-processor,
http://www.gidhome.com/, 2014.

260. Saloustros, Savvas. Tracking Localized Cracks in the
Computational Analysis of Masonry Structures. PhD
thesis, Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya (UPC-
BarcelonaTech), 2017.

261. Lourenço, Paulo B. Computational strategies for ma-
sonry structures. PhD thesis, Delft University of Tech-
nology, 1996.

262. Fouchal, Fazia and Lebon, Frédéric and Titeux, Isabelle.
Contribution to the modelling of interfaces in masonry
construction. Construction and Building Materials, 23
(6):2428–2441, 2009.

263. Zhang, Yiming. Simulation methods for durability as-
sessment of concrete structures: multifield framework
and strong discontinuity embedded approach. PhD the-
sis, Vienna University of Technology, 2013.

264. Reyes, E. and Gálvez, J. C. and Casati, M. J. and
Cendón, D. A. and Sancho, J. M. and Planas, J. An
embedded cohesive crack model for finite element analy-
sis of brickwork masonry fracture. Engineering Fracture
Mechanics, 76(12):1930–1944, 2009.

265. ASTM:C496/C496M. Standard Test Method for Split-
ting Tensile Strength of Cylindrical Concrete Speci-
mens. ASTM International, (336):1–5, 2011.

266. ASTM:D3967-08. Standard Test Method for Splitting
Tensile Strength of Intact Rock Core Specimens. ASTM
International, 2008.

267. Malárics, Viktória. Ermittlung der Betonzugfestigkeit
aus dem Spaltzugversuch an zylindrischen Betonproben.
PhD thesis, Karlsruher Institut für Technologie, 2010.

268. Malárics, V and Müller, H S. Evaluation of the split-
ting tension test for concrete from a fracture mechani-
cal point of view the. Proceedings of the Fracture Me-
chanics of Concrete and Concrete Structures - Assess-
ment, Durability, Monitoring and Retrofitting of Con-
crete Structures, pages 709–716, 2010.

269. Nakamura, Hikaru and Takeshi, Higai. Compressive
Fracture Energy and Fracture Zone Length of Concrete.
In US-Japan Seminar on Post-Peak Behavior of Rein-
forced Concrete Structures Subjected to Seismic Loads:
Recent Advances and Challenges on Analysis and De-
sign, pages 471–487, Tokyo, Japan, 2000.

270. Hendriks, M.A.N. and de Boer, A. and Belletti, B.
Guidelines for Nonlinear Finite Element Analysis of
Concrete Structures. Technical report, Rijkswaterstaat
Centre for Infrastructure, 2017.

271. Augenti, N. and Parisi, F. and Prota, A. and Manfredi,
G. In-Plane Lateral Response of a Full-Scale Masonry
Subassemblage with and without an Inorganic Matrix-
Grid Strengthening System. Journal of Composites for
Construction, 15(4):578–590, 2011.

272. Saloustros, S. and Pelà, L. and Cervera, M. and Roca,
P. A macro-modelling finite element technique for
the realistic simulation of cracking in masonry struc-
tures. Structural Analysis of Historical Constructions
- Anamnesis, diagnosis, therapy, controls, (2010):284–



Tracking algorithms for the numerical modelling of cracks in concrete and masonry structures 49

290, 2016.
273. Roca, Pere and Cervera, Miguel and Pelà, Luca and

Clemente, Roberto and Chiumenti, Michele. Contin-
uum FE models for the analysis of Mallorca Cathedral.
Engineering Structures, 46:653–670, 2013.

274. Petromichelakis, Yiannis and Saloustros, Savvas and
Pelà, Luca. Seismic assessment of historical ma-
sonry construction including uncertainty. In Á.Cunha,
E.Caetano, P.Ribeiro, C.Papadimitriou, C.Moutinho,
and F.Magalhães, editors, 9th International Conference
on Structural Dynamics, EURODYN 2014, pages 297–
304, Porto, Portugal, 2014. ISBN 9789727521654.

275. Saloustros, S. and Pelà, L. and Cervera, M. and Roca,
P. and D’Ayala, D. F. Effect of pier-spandrel geome-
try on the in-plane response of masonry structures. In
C.Modena, F.da Porto, and M.Valluzzi, editors, 16th In-
ternational Brick and Block Masonry Conference, pages
339–346, Padova, Italy, 2016. CRC Press 2016. ISBN
9781138029996.

276. Anthoine, A. and Magenes, G. and Magonette, G. Shear
compression testing and analysis of brick masonry walls.
In 10th European Conference on Earthquake Engineer-
ing, pages 1657–1662, Vienna, 1994.

277. Anthoine, Armelle. Research of unreinforced masonry at
the joint research center of the European Commision. In
D. P.Abrams and G. M.Calvi, editors, U.S.-Italy Work-
shop on Guidelines for Seismic Evaluation and Rehabil-
itation of Unreinforced Masonry Buildings, Pavia, 1994.
National Center for Earthquake Engineering Research.

278. Binda, Luigia and Mirabella Roberti, Giulio and Tira-
boschi, Claudia and Abbaneo, Silvia. Measuring Ma-
sonry Material Properties. U.S.-Italy Workshop on
Guidelines for Seismic Evaluation and Rehabilitation of
Unreinforced Masonry Buildings, pages 326–347, 1994.

279. Magenes, Guido and Calvi, Gian Michele. In-plane seis-
mic response of brick masonry walls, 1997. ISSN 0098-
8847.

280. Brencich, A and Gambarotta, L and Lagomarsino,
S. Catania Project: Research on the seismic response
of two masonry buildings. Chapter 6: Analysis of a
masonry building in Via Martoglio. CNR Gruppo
Nazionale per la Difesa dei Terremoti, pages 107–143,
2000.

281. Milani, Gabriele and Lourenço, P.B. and Tralli, A. Ho-
mogenised limit analysis of masonry walls, Part II:
Structural examples. Computers & Structures, 84(3-4):
181–195, 2006.

282. Addessi, D and Liberatore, D and Masiani, R. Force-
Based Beam Finite Element (FE) for the Pushover
Analysis of Masonry Buildings. International Journal
of Architectural Heritage, 9(3):231–243, 2015.

283. Italian Ministry of Infrastructure and Transport.
Circolare 2 febbraio 2009, n. 617, Istruzioni per
l’applicazione delle “Nuove norme tecniche per le
costruzion” di cui al decreto ministeriale 14 gennaio
2008. Rome, Italy, 2009.

284. Lemaitre, J and Chaboche, J L. Aspect Phe-
nomenologique de la Rupture par Endommagement.
Journal de Mécanique Appliquée, 2(3), 1978.

285. Ju, J. W. On energy-based coupled elastoplastic dam-
age theories: Constitutive modeling and computational
aspects. International Journal of Solids and Structures,
25(7):803–833, 1989.

286. Faria, R. and Oliver, Javier. A Rate Dependent Plastic-
Damage Constitutive Model for Large Scale Com-
putations in Concrete Structures, Monography N-17.

CIMNE, 1993. ISBN 9788578110796.
287. Petracca, Massimo and Pelà, Luca and Rossi, Riccardo

and Oller, Sergio and Camata, Guido and Spacone, En-
rico. Regularization of first order computational homog-
enization for multiscale analysis of masonry structures.
Computational Mechanics, 57(2):257–276, 2016.

288. Petracca, Massimo. Computational Multiscale Analy-
sis of Masonry Structures. PhD thesis, University G.
d’Annunzio of Chieti- Pescara (UNICH) - Universitat
Politècnica de Catalunya (UPC-BarcelonaTech), 2016.

289. Oliver, Javier and Cervera, Miguel and Oller, Sergio and
Lubliner, J. Isotropic damage models and smeared crack
analysis of concrete. In SCI-C Computer Aided Analy-
sis and Design of Concrete Structures, pages 945–957,
1990.

290. Oliver, J. A consistent characteristic length for smeared
cracking models. International Journal for Numerical
Methods in Engineering, 28(2):461–474, 1989.

291. Slobbe, A.T. and Hendriks, M.A.N. and Rots, J.G. Sys-
tematic assessment of directional mesh bias with peri-
odic boundary conditions: Applied to the crack band
model. Engineering Fracture Mechanics, 109:186–208,
2013.

View publication statsView publication stats

https://www.researchgate.net/publication/325334954

	Introduction
	Finite element approaches to cracking
	Tracking algorithms
	Local tracking algorithm - Monotonic loading
	Applications of the tracking algorithm under monotonic loading
	Local tracking algorithm - Cyclic loading
	Structural application under cyclic loading
	Large-Scale structural application
	Conclusions
	Continuum damage mechanics model

