












































Microsoft Word - FDM2014_Oliver


Continuum approach to computational multi-scale modeling of fracture 

J. Oliver1,a, M. Caicedo1,b, E. Roubin1,c and A.E. Huespe1,2,d  
1Technical University of Catalonia (UPC)/International Center for Numerical Methods in 

Engineering (CIMNE), Campus Nord UPC, Edifici C-1, 08034 Barcelona, Spain 
2CIMEC-Universidad del Litoral (UNL), Santa Fe, Argentina 

axavier.oliver@upc.edu, bmcaicedo@cimne.upc.edu, ceroubin@cimne.upc.edu, 
dahuespe@intec.unl.edu.ar 

 
Keywords: Fracture, computational multi-scale modeling, strain injection, crack path field, 
Continuum Strong Discontinuity Approach  
Abstract. This paper presents a FE2 multi-scale framework for numerical modeling of the structural 
failure of heterogeneous quasi-brittle materials. The model is assessed by application to 
cementitious materials. Using the Continuum Strong Discontinuity Approach (CSD), innovative 
numerical tools, such as strain injection and crack path field techniques, provide a robust, and 
mesh-size, mesh-bias and RVE-size objective, procedure to model crack onset and propagation at 
the macro-scale.  

Introduction 
In view of the significant impact of low-scale material morphology in regards to macroscopic 
responses, numerical strategies has been wildly developed in order to both analyze and model the 
complex relationship between scales. Among the different issues that yet remain to be explored, this 
paper focuses on softening behavior modeling, i.e. non-smooth behaviors, and complex small scale 
failure mechanisms. These problematic find their applications, inter alia, in multi-scale modeling of 
the quasi-brittle fracture of cementitious materials. 

The theoretical framework used in this work is based on the so-called (FE2 ) methods. A coupled 
FEM is used in both scales. Homogenized quantities at the lower scale, represented by a so-called 
failure-cell, are therefore transferred, in a one-way fashion, to material points (Gauss points) of the 
macroscopic structure. Such a direct homogenization procedure eventually links this failure-cell to 
the notion of statistical Representative Volume Element (hereafter referred to as RVE). However, in 
case of softening behavior, the non-smooth kinematical description of the thin scale raises the 
problematic of existence of an RVE and the lack of objectivity of the response with respect to its 
size. Solutions have been provided, for example, in the context of regularized non-local damage 
models [1], or in the context of homogenized discrete models [4]. 

In contrast, this work is an attempt to address this issue in the context of local and continuum 
models and the Continuum Strong Discontinuity Approach (hereafter referred to as CSDA) [2]. The 
different key ingredients of the theoretical and numerical framework, which unlock the different 
issues and flaws mentioned above are: a) at the macroscopic level, the non-smooth kinematics 
representation is captured using strain-localization and FE with embedded regularized strong 
discontinuities, b) at the mesoscopic level, the failure-cell fracture behavior is fitted with cohesive-
bands with predefined position, even though there is no “a priori” limitation on the considered 
failure mechanisms, c) from the standard homogenization at the RVE the usual set of macroscopic 
quantities, in terms of a strain/stress relationship, emerges, together with, and specifically for this 
approach, a physically meaningful internal length linked with the size of the RVE and the activated 
microscopic fracture mechanism. This internal length is exported to the upper scale and used as the 
macroscopic strain localization bandwidth, this providing both an objective regularization 
parameter ---leading to a macroscopic response completely insensitive to RVE size--- and a 
consistent up-scaling scheme of the failure material properties ---such as the fracture energy. 

 
 



Model description 
 
Mesoscopic scale description and homogenization procedure. The dissipative processes that 

occur at the mesoscale are modeled using cohesive bands (that are much thinner than the cell 
dimensions) scattered within the matrix, the aggregates and the interfaces between them. In this 
way, they can model a set of predefined crack patterns including several mechanisms such as 
percolation of the crack through the matrix (necessary for softening behavior), mortar/aggregate 
decohesion and rupture within the aggregates. Eventually, as the damage stage increases, a 
dominant mechanism naturally prevails, thus representing the final pattern of the micro-crack. This 
mechanism is now referred to as mesoscopic failure mechanism.  

The meso-structure constitutive behavior is considered elastic outside these cohesive bands, 
whereas the material exhibits strain softening inside the bands (using a classical isotropic damage 
model), thus, eventually leading to strain localization. From the CSDA [2] it is well known that this 
kind of narrow bands represents, in a consistent way, a strong discontinuity in which the regularized 
parameter is given by its bandwidth, ensuring the equivalence of the fracture energy in both scales. 

The approach is based on a first order homogenization of strains under a small strain framework 
in both scales, ensuring energetic balance through the Mandel-Hill principle). Though the 
mathematical framework is not developed here, attention is focused on the outcome of this 
homogenization procedure within the overall framework of the strong discontinuity kinematics. The 
macroscopic constitutive response is point-wise equivalent to an inelastic law (in an incremental 
fashion) as a function of the homogenized elastic tangent tensor, , and the incremental 
homogenized inelastic strain rate   i.e. 

 ∶   .         (1) 
 
The main interest of this result lies in the evolution of the latter inelastic strain tensor, as it can 

be expressed in terms of failure mechanism variables at the meso-scale: 
     ⊗   ,          (2) 
 

where the barked notation represents the average value the symmetrical tensor product between the 
strong discontinuity normal, ,  and the rate of the displacement jump,  , of each cohesive band, 
belonging to the manifold of the mesoscopic failure mechanism , i.e. the mesoscopic crack. In 
addition, and defined as the ration between the measure (volume or area) of the RVE and the 
measure (surface or length) of ,  stands the aforementioned  material internal length. 
 
Numerical aspects at the meso-cell. The cohesive bands are modeled by quadrilateral elements of 
very small thickness. Even though more general phenomenological models can be set, herein a 
constitutive only tension constitutive model [2] governs the softening behavior in order, first, to 
represent the typical tensile failure mechanisms of cementitious materials and second, to exhibit the 
structural impact of the heterogeneities that can lead to complex macroscopic responses.  

The external force for the equilibrium equation is the macroscopic strain tensor since, 
consistently with the considered homogenization theory, no external force comes into play. 
Furthermore, and following the usual minimal boundary restrictions at the RVE, Dirichlet boundary 
conditions, avoiding rigid body motions, are applied.  

Finally, it is worth noticing that the mesoscopic failure mechanism propagates naturally through 
the strain localization that takes place within the cohesive bands. At each time step of the problem, 
the in-loading cohesive bands define the active failure mechanism and therefore they define the set 
of elements used to upscale non-linear features such as the characteristic length of Eq. (2).  

Material failure propagation at the structural level. The strain injection technique [5] is used 
in order to provide a robust and efficient model that can capture failure propagation even with high 



strain localization states. Two specific strain-rate modes (weak and strong discontinuity modes) are 
injected within two evolving sets of elements, following criteria based on up-scaled non-linear 
features, such as bifurcation analysis of the homogenized localization tensor, or based on the 
dissipated energy. In addition, the crucial matter of positioning strong discontinuities is tackled by a 
parallel technique termed crack path field [5]. This technique uses a directional derivative of a 
scalar field, based on the internal strain-like variables, whose zero level set defines the crack path.  

Based on physical considerations of the crack characteristics ---both in terms of path and 
kinematics---, the coupling of these methods leads to a numerical framework capable of drastically 
reducing the classical drawbacks of propagating fracture approaches, such as stress locking, 
hourglass modes, mesh bias, etc. More details can be found,  in a one-scale framework in [5].  

Numerical results: application to classical concrete-like simulations 
Mesoscopic material properties. The description of the meso-cell is taken to be the same for 

both tests. The FE discretization is depicted in Fig. 1a where the morphology and the considered 
pattern of cohesive bands can be seen (from dark to light gray: elastic aggregates, elastic mortar 
matrix and cohesive bands). The material elastic properties are taken to be the same for elastic and 
cohesive band elements.  

 

 

 Mortar Aggregates  
Young 
Modulus 

21 220 100 000 [MPa] 

Poisson 
ratio 

0.15 0.15 [-] 

Yield stress 3 - [MPa] 
Fracture 
energy 

20 - [N/m] 

Fig. 1. Mesoscopic FE discretization and considered material properties 

Nooru-Mohamed test. This test has been simulated following the detail in [3] (load-path 1) where 
prior to a tension loading, the specimen is subjected to shear load up to 5kN and 10kN. First, a 
typical mesoscopic failure mechanism is depicted in Fig. 2a, where the activated cohesive bands are 
clearly shown. Figs. 2b and 2c represent the injection state (light gray for weak and dark gray for 
strong injection) for two different time steps, thus showing its evolving aspect. By enhancing the 
kinematics only in a narrow zone around the strain localization, the displacement discontinuity can 
be well capture and yet, instable modes (hourglass) are avoided. It can be checked that the injection 
pattern follows the crack path field shown Fig. 2d.  
a) 

 

b) c) d) 

Fig. 2a: a) Damage in cell, b) Strain-injection pattern (5kN), c) Strain-injection pattern (10kN) and 
d) Crack path fields for 5kN and 10kN. 

The latter figure also represents the crack path field in the case of a shear loading of 10kN. 
Matching the results of [3], a larger spacing between the two cracks along with a larger curvature 
can be noticed. 



Four point bending test. This example shows the impact of the meso-cell failure mechanisms onto 
the macroscopic response. The meso-cell (Fig. 1) has been slightly modified in order to perform 
four different tests whose results are depicted in Figs. 3a and 3b, in terms of the crack path field and 
the macroscopic responses, respectively. The first two meso-cells (top left and top right in Fig. 3a) 
allow and preclude, respectively, intra-aggregate failure. Therefore, they could correspond to 
typical failure mechanisms for hard and light-aggregate concrete. The other two tests (bottom right 
and bottom left) have the cohesive bands locked for failure excepting one horizontal and one 
vertical path, respectively, therefore restricting the set of possible mesoscopic failure mechanisms 
to a predetermined one. In Fig. 3a, the link of the mesoscopic failure mechanisms and the obtained 
macroscopic crack path can clearly be observed. Furthermore, in Fig. 3b, the translation of the 
considered failure-mechanisms into structural responses can be observed.  

a) 

 

b) 

Fig. 3. Four-point bending test: a) crack path fields for different activated mesoscopic failure 
mechanisms (crack patterns), b) macroscopic (structural) responses 

Conclusions 
 
The result of this work is a multi-scale framework that preserves the correct dissipation and 
objectivity with respect to the size and bias of the FE mesh. Furthermore, the two presented 
simulations show the, physically meaningful, effects of the activated meso-scale failure 
mechanisms on the structural response. The proposed framework allows extending the classical FE2 
computational homogenization procedures from smooth problems to fracture mechanics analyzes. 

Acknowledgments 
The research leading these results has received funding from the European Research Council under 
the European Union's Seventh Framework Program (FP/2007-2013) / ERC Grant Agreement  
n. 320815, Advanced Grant Project COMP-DES-MAT. The third author would also like to thanks 
the École Normale Supérieur de Cachan (FR) for their financial support.  

References 
[1] V.P. Nguyen, O. Lloberas-Valls, M. Stroeven and L. J. Sluys, in: Computer Methods in Applied 

Mechanics and Engineering, (2010)  
[2]  J. Oliver, A.E. Huespe, M.D.G Pulido and E. Chaves, in: Engineering Fracture Mechanics, 

2002  
[3]  M.B Nooru-Mohamed, E. Schlangen and J.G.M. Van Mier, in: Cement Based Materials, 1993  
[4]  P.J. Sánchez, P.J. Blanco, A.E. Huespe, and R.A. Feijóo in: Comp. Meth. In Appl. Mech. And 

Eng., 2013. 
[5]  J. Oliver, A. Huespe and I.F. Dias, in: Comp. Meth. In Appl. Mech. And Eng., 2014 


