































Compass


Computer Programming of free GUIs for the Analysis of the 
Behaviour of Marine Structures
José Enrique Gutiérrez Romero, Zamora-Parra B, Julio García-Espinosa, Maria Rosa 
Peyrau Rubio

This work presents the development of two free Graphical User Interfaces (GUI), called 
''FASTLognoter'' and ''MorisonForm'', both focused on the analysis of the behaviour of 
offshore structures, especially of offshore wind turbines. The first one is related to the 
aeroelastic analysis of wind turbines, and the second is concerned with the seakeeping of 
marine structures. The development of these tools has been carried out using a powerful 
software called ''Lognoter''. This tool is free software for Knowledge Management in 
Technology (KMT), which integrates computer programming for allowing the development 
of GUIs. These GUIs give an open platform for conducting a parametric study of the 
structural and dynamic behaviour of marine structures. Their coupling permits the user to 
set a suitable way to evaluate new concepts in marine structures. Finally, an application for 
the intensive analysis of offshore wind turbines is shown.

 Published: 23/11/2016 
Keywords: Marine Structures, 
Dynamic Behaviour, Open 
Platforms, Computer 
Programming, Free Tools 

Collection of Papers on 
Computational Methods in Naval 
Architecture and Offshore 
Engineering

https://www.scipedia.com/public/JE_et_al_2015a 1

Abstract
This work presents the development of two free Graphical User 
Interfaces (GUI), called FASTLognoter and MorisonForm, both 
focused on the analysis of the behaviour of offshore structures, 
especially of offshore wind turbines. The first one is related to 
the aeroelastic analysis of wind turbines, and the second is 
concerned with the seakeeping of marine structures. The 
development of these tools has been carried out using a 
powerful software called Lognoter. This tool is free software for 
Knowledge Management in Technology (KMT), which integrates 
computer programming for allowing the development of GUIs. 
These GUIs give an open platform for conducting a parametric 
study of the structural and dynamic behaviour of marine 
structures. Their coupling permits the user to set a suitable way 
to evaluate new concepts in marine structures. Finally, an 
application for the intensive analysis of offshore wind turbines 
is shown.

1 Introduction
The increase in developments in the field of large offshore 
structures (Offshore Wind Turbines, OWT, for instance), requires 
a precise study of their dynamic behaviour. The sea constitutes 
an aggressive environment for offshore installations and the 
behaviour of these structures includes several phenomena, 
which makes it harder to study the structural response of 
marine devices. Due to the high cost of offshore wind 
technology, numerous countries recently started a challenge to 
find the best suitable support platform for OWT in renewable 
energy industries (Tong 1988, Sclavounos, Butterfield, et al. 
2005, Breton and Moe 2009). The current fixed bottom 
technology has probably reached a limit, but both cost 
reduction and deep-water technology constitute the main way 
to favour the proliferation of this technology. Since the field is 
wide and involves different aspects (wind resource estimation, 
platform design, structural response, soil studies, etcetera), 
ambitious software is required. So, tool integration, parametric 
design and optimization can be considered as key issues for 
researchers, scientists and engineers, in order to obtain 
suitable solutions. In a brief literature survey, numerous works 
related to this problem in several fields can be found (Tracy 
2007, Collu, Brennan, et al. 2012, Seebai and Sundaravadivelu 
2013, Kaiser and Snyder 2014, Passon and Branner 2014).

1.1 Simulation tools for OWT
In the offshore wind industry, some interesting computer codes 
can be found for simulating appropriately a wind turbine, as 
well as for determining the behaviour and the optimizing of 
marine structures. Most of them are not free, and others are 
free available but are complex, such as Computer Aided 
Engineering Tools (CAE) offered by the National Renewable 
Energy Laboratory, NREL (www.wind.nrel.gov/designcodes), 
which permits engineers to make a complete study of both 
onshore and offshore wind turbines.

In the first group, different commercial codes can be found. 
GH-Bladed (GL Garrad-Hassan, www.gl-garradhassan.com) 
allows a complete calculation of OWT systems. Other codes are 
SamCEF (Samtech, www.samtech.com), SIM-PACK (Simpack, 
www.simpack.com), SIMO/RIFLEX/HAWC2 (Marintek, 
www.sintef.no/home/MARINTEK), or WAMIT (Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology, MIT, www.wamit.com), which is one of 
the most advanced tools for analysing wave-structure 
interaction. Finally, SeaFEM (CompassIS, www.compassis.com) 
can be regarded as a suite of tools for the computational 
analysis of the effect of waves, wind and currents on naval and 
offshore structures, and for manoeuvring studies (Borja and 
Garcia-Espinosa 2013).

Alternatively, free tools such as QBlade (University of Berlin, 
www.qblade.de.to) or toolkits for the analysis of rotor 
aerodynamics, aeroelastic or hydrodynamics, can be found. 
Perhaps the most relevant free available package is that offered 
by NREL, i.e., FAST/AeroDyn/HydroDyn package (Laino and 
Hansen 2002, Jonkman and Buhl 2005). This code allows a wide 
study of aero-hydrodynamics, including the structural response 
of all types of HAWTs (Horizontal Axis Wind Turbines). Recently, 
we have coupled the reference code FAST to Lognoter software 
(CompassIS, www.compassis.com), giving a consistent GUI for 
management of the package (see Gutierrez, Zamora, et al. 
2013), adding new features, and achieving a Design Optimization 
Tool (DOT). The new tool has been called FASTLognoter 
(Gutierrez, Zamora, et al. 2013), and has been developed with 
the aim of generating and providing an interface to help the 
user in the normal operation with FAST/AeroDyn/HydroDyn, as 
well as to facilitate the design optimization of wind turbines, 
focused mainly on offshore wind turbines.



https://www.scipedia.com/public/JE_et_al_2015a 2

Computer Programming of free GUIs for the Analysis of the 
Behaviour of Marine Structures

1.2 The aim of this work
The purpose of this work is to provide a successful toolkit for 
the behaviour analysis of marine structures. Hence, the 
development of an open and free available platform for the 
rough estimation of the seakeeping of marine structures 
(especially OWT), using the features of Lognoter software (a free 
programmable platform), is presented. The developed tool, 
called MorisonForm, has been coupled with FASTLognoter to 
make a DOT for optimizing marine structures. FASTLognoter is 
related to complete calculations of aerodynamics and structural 
response of HAWTs, whereas MorisonForm is a GUI for 
calculating the forces exerted by waves on the support 
platforms and for analyzing their dynamic response. The 
features and capabilities of new GUIs are presented. The 
programming work is carried out using XML (Extensible Markup 
Language) and Tcl/Tk (Tool command language/Toolkit). Finally, 
an intensive analysis of different types of support platform for 
OWT using coupled calculation (i.e., linking the aerodynamic 
and the hydrodynamic studies), is presented.

2 Computer programming of GUIs

2.1 Programming approach

Regarding the programming approach, a detailed explanation 
of the capabilities of Lognoter is required, because the 
presented GUI has been developed by means of Lognoter forms. 
As explained above, Lognoter may be classified as a free 
available computer code (available on the website 
www.compassis.com) employed for the knowledge and 
information management of processes in the engineering field, 
for instance. Furthermore, Lognoter can be used for creating 
powerful forms and GUIs by means of the project Lognoter 
forms.

In brief, Lognoter has the following important features: 
database storage using, for instance, in-process library SQlite 
(www.sqlite.org); insertion of tables and pictures; embedding of 
links; adapted sight; back-up copy; database and page 
encryption; design and graphics creation tools; 
importation/exportation; mathematical utilities; 
synchronisation; easy page navigation, and finally the most 
important, the creation of GUIs.

As already mentioned, the forms of Lognoter can be placed into 
project Lognoter forms (www.lognoter.com/c/lognoterforms). 
This is a website based on the wiki concept, whose main 
objective is the development of a site where developers and 
users can exchange forms, add tools, experiences, procedures, 
help, etcetera (Gutierrez, Zamora, et al. 2013). The users of the 
forms can download the presented GUIs and use them in an 
exhaustive manner, adding new functions according to new 
requirements. Advanced capacities, such as XML and Tcl/Tk 
programming, should be underlined, since the development of 
powerful tools and the extension of capabilities of GUIs can be 
conducted easily. Figure 1 shows how the user can use Lognoter 
as a collaboration tool in the engineering field; from Lognoter, 
the forms lead to obtaining tools such as MorisonForm or 
FASTLognoter, through the use of databases like SQlite, and Tcl, 
Tk or XML. Following this philosophy, Fig. 2 shows a screen 
example in MorisonForm GUI.

Figure 1: Scheme showing the general approach of the software application.

2.2 Editing Lognoter forms using XML 
programming

One of the most useful advantages of using Lognoter forms is 
the XML format for editing the GUIs. XML programming is an 
open and flexible standard derived from SGML (Standard 
Generalised Markup Language). It was designed to transport and 
store data (with focus on what data is), constitutes a W3C 
recommendation (World Wide Web Consortium, www.w3.org) 
and is endorsed by software market leaders. In Lognoter forms, 
the information is stored in plain text format. It can be viewed 
in all major browsers and is designed to be self-descriptive. The 
elements in a Lognoter GUI outline a tree-structure, starting at 
the root and progressing towards the leaves, through the 
branches, with different relationships between the nested 
elements. The XML elements are defined using fixed tags and 
can have attributes, which provide additional information about 
elements inserted into Lognoter form. Lognoter GUI also allows 
the user to edit and create new forms using its tools, avoiding 
programming editions. Figure 3 shows the option edit field on 
Lognoter GUI.



https://www.scipedia.com/public/JE_et_al_2015a 3

Computer Programming of free GUIs for the Analysis of the 
Behaviour of Marine Structures

Figure 2: Advanced capacities of Lognoter forms. Screen example taken from MorisonForm 
GUI.

Figure 3: Screen showing the edit field option on Lognoter GUI.

2.3 Adding new functions and procedures using 
Tcl/Tk programming

Today, Tcl is considered an easy and dynamic programming 
language, suitable for innumerable uses, web and desktop 
applications, networking, administration or testing, for instance. 
Because it is a dynamic language, the resulting codes are 
shorter and faster to develop. These features make the Lognoter 
GUIs an open platform for adding new code easily. It is usually 
common to find facilities in most modern dynamic languages 
(objects, namespaces) to develop large applications, for 
instance, MorisonForm. Regarding Tk, this is a Graphical User 
Interface (GUI) toolkit. Tk may be a standard GUI for Tcl, but it is 
found in many other dynamic languages. In our case (see Fig. 
2), the user can modify the code forming MorisonForm to add 
new functions. For example, the user may add functions to take 
into account new spectral density functions.

2.4 Handling the database of Lognoter forms

It is well known that when engineers use a computer code for 
analysing anything, a readily available database to store 
ongoing cases is often required. Lognoter employs several 
Application Programming Interface (API) of databases (for 
instance, MySQl or SQlite). SQlite (www.sqlite.org) is a 
representative in-process compact library, carefully tested, 
which implements a self-contained, serverless, 
zero-configuration and transactional SQL database engine. In 
addition, international leading companies have supported it. 
MorisonForm uses some routines in order to get the input data 
of a database for making the calculations. This feature allows 
the users a parametric calculation, since they can be stored 
cases, which vary in one or more parameters.

2.5 Generalization of the procedure

The explained methodology is versatile and it can be used for 
solving engineering problems. The generalized procedure can 

be summarized as:

1. Setting the problem statement. For example, the basic 
equations, the needed inputs, and the required results 
should be stated.

2. Setting the GUIs design plan. The information required per 
page, the buttons and entries, and any other details, 
should be conducted through the capabilities and features 
of Lognoter.

3. Programming the GUI. The users can get code source from 
other GUIs uploaded into Lognoter forms webpage, or 
implement their own programming.

3 The MorisonForm GUI
The aim of the MorisonForm tool is to set a free available code 
capable of making an approximate assessment of the dynamic 
behaviour of floating structures composed mainly by slender 
elements in frequency domain approach. The forces exerted by 
linear waves are calculated using Morison's formulation 
(Morison, O'Brien, et al. 1950) and GUI solves the resulting 
linear systems. The tool outputs are the Response Amplitude 
Operators (RAOs) of the structure for different degrees of 
freedom, the computed loads and moments, natural 
frequencies, and standard deviations of the motions, always 
assuming that the OWT device is a linear system (Faltinsen 
1990, Newman 1962).

3.1 Summary of linearized analysis of OWT in 
frequency domain

A typical form of the response equation of free floating OWT in 
frequency domain with a rigid wind turbine placed above it, 
including six degrees of freedom for steady state sinusoidal 
motions, can be written as

∑
j =1

6
[(AM(ω )kj + Mkj + MTkj )η̈ (1)

+ (B(ω )kj + BTkj )η̇ + (Ckj + CMkj + CTkj )η ]

= Fk (ω )e−iωt , for k = 1, . . . , 6,

where AM ( ω )kj , Mkj  and MTkj  are matrices of platform added 
mass, inertia, and wind turbine masses, respectively. On the 
other hand, B ( ω )kj  and BTkj  are platform and wind turbine 
damping. In addition, Ckj , CMkj  and CTkj  are hydrostatic 
restoring terms, restoring the effects of mooring systems, and 
restoring matrix for wind turbine, respectively. Finally, Fk (ω ) are 
complex amplitudes for existing forces and moments exerted 
on body (Faltinsen 1990, Newman 1962). Each term of the last 
matrices (inertia of the platform, restoring and radiation terms) 
are completely described in the literature (Bertram 2000, Lewis 
1989, Jonkman 2007, for instance).

The flow passing around a slender element is considered a key 
problem of hydrodynamics on offshore structures. The forces 
exerted by surface waves on a slender body in an unsteady 
viscous flow may be determined by Morison's equations 
(Morison, O'Brien, et al. 1950). The forces are made up of three 
components named drag forces (generated by normal 
component of the flow velocity), inertia forces (generated by 
normal component of the flow acceleration), and lift forces 
(oriented normal to the velocity vector and normal to the axis of 
the slender element). MorisonForm takes into account this 
formulation to estimate the forces exerted on the support 
platform.

If members of the structure are considered circular or similar, 
the lift forces are not considered in the calculus. The total 



https://www.scipedia.com/public/JE_et_al_2015a 4

Computer Programming of free GUIs for the Analysis of the 
Behaviour of Marine Structures

linearized forces acting on the slender element can be 
expressed as (Gran 1992)

F
→

= 1
2

ρDCD ( l
→

× v→ × l
→

) | l
→

× v→ × l
→

| +

CM ρS ( l
→

× a→ × l
→

) ,
(2)

being l
→

 a unit vector with directional cosines, v→  a local fluid 
velocity vector, a→  a local fluid acceleration vector, D  the 
diameter of the slender element, S  the transversal area of the 
body, and ρ  the water density. Finally, CD  and CM  are the drag 
and inertia coefficients, respectively. There are several 
limitations to Eq. (2), since it does not consider the influence of 
the adjacent section's flow and does not take into account the 
piercing phenomena. Note that velocity and acceleration 
vectors are then rotating 90 degrees out of phase with each 
other.

The presented tool evaluates some of these matrices (inertia, 
mooring, and loads) to solve the coupled equations. The rest of 
the terms are estimated using FASTLognoter tool. Codes to 
evaluate the added mass and radiation terms are also required; 
for instance, WAMIT or SeaFEM may be a suitable tool to get 
them. Equation (1) can be solved by substituting

η∗ = η eiwt , (3)

which leads to obtaining six coupled algebraic equations for 
real and imaginary parts, which can be solved by standard 
methods. This procedure is implemented in MorisonForm GUI. 
Thus,

Ξ( ω ) = F ( ω )
[ − ω2M( ω ) + iωB ( ω ) + C ]

, (4)

where Ξ is a vector column that contains the response of the 
OWT device. So, the transfer functions of OWT for translational 
modes (surge, sway and heave) are expressed as

RAOi ( ω ) = | Ξi ( ω )ξwave | , for ( i = 1, 2, 3) , (5)
and rotational modes (roll, pitch and yaw),

RAOi ( ω ) = | Ξi ( ω )ξwave /Lc | , for ( i = 4, 5, 6 ) , (6)
where Lc  is the characteristic length of the floating platform.

3.2 Main features of MorisonForm code
MorisonForm is developed using Lognoter and employing the 
advanced features of this tool; that is to say, Tcl/Tk, XML and a 
database such as SQlite computer programming. This allows 
the addition of a database with the tubular elements that form 
the structure. The tool can classify different types of project and 
sea conditions. To give the user more information about the 
software management, theory introduction and several 
explanations are included in an options tree, as well as dynamic 
help and adapted sight. The results can be exported to a 
compatible format with data processing programs, and can be 
plotted through Tk tool added into GUI (see Fig. 4).

Figure 4: MorisonForm GUI.

Regarding other features of the presented GUI, those exposed 
above for Lognoter forms can be underlined. The GUI is divided 
into pages related to specific parameters of the calculus (see 
Fig. 5). These pages are the following:

Initial data. Here, the basic data related to the working 
directory or project date, for instance, are established.

Geometry. The data related to geometry are inserted on this 
page.

Wave data. The user can set the interval of the wave period 
for analysis, currents, specific values of drag and inertia 
coefficients, roughness of slender elements, wave 
direction, depth, and so on.

Structure data. This page leads to establishing the main 
characteristics of the platform, such as position of centre of 
gravity, draught, radii of gyrations, transversal and 
longitudinal height of metacentre, etcetera.

Mass matrix. The user can set the values of added mass of 
the platform (in a list form) or additional masses (for 
instance, the wind turbine mass matrix).
Damping matrix. As on the preceding page, the user can 
insert the values of radiation problem (in a list form) or 
additional values (for instance, the structural damping of 
the wind turbine).
Restoring matrix. The additional restoring term can be 
inserted on this page. MorisonForm also includes the 
possibility of calculating the linear effects of the mooring 
system.

Analysis. Here, the buttons for carrying out the analysis and 
plotting the results are placed.

Wave analysis. The variance of the motion for different 
spectral density of the ambient waves can be evaluated in 
this section.

Figure 5: Page distribution of MorisonForm.

MorisonForm includes the capability of adding mooring effects 
into restoring terms. The user can insert catenary or taut lines, 
and also spread mooring lines. Note that these terms are static 
and only give the user a rough approximation about the effects 
into the behaviour of the OWT devices (Faltinsen 1990). In 
additon, use of presented GUI leads to obtaining the variance of 
the motion, using different spectral models, such as 
Pierson-Mostkowitz or JONSWAP (Gran 1992). Finally, one of the 
most advanced features of the GUIs is the capability of 
modifying, adding or removing code from the form. Therefore, 



https://www.scipedia.com/public/JE_et_al_2015a 5

Computer Programming of free GUIs for the Analysis of the 
Behaviour of Marine Structures

the user can edit the form and add code easily. This fact 
achieves the feature improvement of the forms, making the GUI 
a powerful tool; besides, the tool can be adapted to several 
projects and subjects.

3.3 Coupling between MorisonForm and 
FASTLognoter

In order to analyze the dynamic behaviour of offshore 
structures, coupling between hydrodynamics, aerodynamics 
and mooring effects is required. Obviously, several complex 
effects can be found in OWT devices, and this fact makes it 
harder to do a complete study of marine structures. So, the aim 
of the MorisonForm development is to get a rough estimation of 
the dynamics of OWT, as previously explained. The preliminary 
idea concerning the coupling between the presented GUI and 
FASTLognoter is outlined in Fig. 6. FASTLognoter allows the 
linearization of the wind turbine, using FAST code, at the 
operation point. The results of the linearization are periodic 
state matrices, which can be added into MorisonForm GUI; then, 
the user can conduct an appropriate coupled analysis of the 
OWT in working operation.

Figure 6: Preliminary idea of coupling with FASTLognoter.

Most of the data may be estimated using the pre-processors 
added into FASTLognoter GUI. Thus, MorisonForm acts when the 
user has obtained the periodic state matrix. Finally, the user can 
calculate the forces and moments exerted by wave loads, and 
the transfer functions of the OWT device, i.e., Response 
Amplitude Operators (RAOs), which are key elements in the 
study of the behaviour of marine structures.

4 Discussion of results

4.1 Background

In order to illustrate the use of the presented GUIs, a study of 
different types of OWT platform is chosen as a powerful 
application. The seakeeping analysis for three representative 
kinds of typical platform design (see Fig. 7) for FOWT (Flotating 
Offshore Wind Tubine) is carried out, assuming the marine wind 
turbines are under steady-state operating conditions. The study 
is mandatorily coupled, that is, both the aerodynamic and the 
hydrodynamic effects are included and linked. FASTLognoter 
(Gutiérrez, Zamora, et al. 2013) is employed for calculating the 
linear representation of a given wind turbine (NREL baseline 5 
MW, Jonkman, Butterfield, et al. 2009), whereas WAMIT 
(www.wamit.com) or SeaFEM (www.compassis.com) are used to 
get the added mass and radiation terms of the FOWT. Typical 
results are the RAOs of the structures studied for different 
degrees of freedom, which leads to systematic comparisons 
between the behaviour of devices.

Figure 7: Different types of analysed platforms.

4.2 Dynamic analysis of FOWTs and validation

The features of MorisonForm are presented by means of 
coupled studies for three representative OWT devices (Fig. 7). As 
a preliminary matter, two of them are platforms used in 
Offshore Code Comparison Collaboration (www.ieawind.org, OC3 
and OC4 Projects); the aim of these collaboration projects is to 
carry out comparisons between different codes focused on the 
analysis of OWT. In fact, the Offshore Code Comparison 
Collaboration establishes a suite of benchmark simulations to 
survey and test new computer codes, new methodologies in the 
analysis of OWT, identify further research, and develop new 
concepts for OWT technologies.

The first analysed OWT platform is based on the OC3-Hywind 
Spar Buoy concept (a ballast stabilised type). This structure can 
be considered the world's first operational deepwater platform 
(owned by the Norwegian company StatoilHydro, constructed 
by Siemens Wind Power), in the North Sea off Norway (Jonkman 
2007, Jonkman 2010, Jonkman and Matha 2011). The second 
OWT device uses a Tension Leg Platform (TLP) developed by 
MIT/NREL (Matha 2010) (a mooring stabilised platform). The last 
considered platform is a semisubmersible platform based on 
the OC4 Project Phase II (DeepCWind concept, a buoyancy 
stabilised type, Coulling 2013; Robertson, Jonkman et al. 2014). 
The main characteristics of the platforms can be found in Table 
1. Firstly, the Spar Buoy and semisubmersible platforms are 
assumed as no-wind conditions. Secondly, the TLP platform is 
considered under steady-state operating conditions, coupling 
both the aerodynamic and the hydrodynamic effects, which are 
included and linked.

Table. 1 Properties of analysed platforms (Fig. 7).

Platform 
characteristics

OC3 OC4 NREL/MIT TLP

Diameter (m) 6.5 − 9.4 47.54 18.0
Draft (m) 120 20 47.9



https://www.scipedia.com/public/JE_et_al_2015a 6

Computer Programming of free GUIs for the Analysis of the 
Behaviour of Marine Structures

Depth (m) 320 200 200
Water displacement (m
3)

8029 13140 12180

Mass, including ballast 
(kg) 7.466 × 10

7 1.347 × 107 8.600 × 106

CM location below 
SWL1 (m) − 89.92 − 13.46 − 40.61

Roll inertia about CM 
(kg.m2) 4.230 × 10

9 6.827 × 109 5.716 × 109

Pitch inertia about CM 
(kg.m2) 4.230 × 10

9 6.827 × 109 5.716 × 109

Yaw inertia about CM 
(kg.m2) 1.640 × 10

8 1.226 × 1010 3.614 × 109

Number of mooring 
lines

3 3 8(4 pairs)

Unstretched line 
length (m) 902.2 835.5 151.7

Line diameter (m) 0.09 0.077 0.127
Line mass density 
(Kg.m−1)

77.71 113.4 116.0

Line extensional 
stiffness (N) 3.840 × 10

8 7.530 × 108 1.500 × 109

 (1) Still water level

The dynamic analysis if FOWTs is carried out through the RAOs 
obtained as a function of the frequency of waves, as weel as 
with the corresponding natural frequencies (Table 2). RAO 
curves are shown for surge, heave and pitch movements for the 
OC3 Spar-Hywind and the TLP MIT/NREL design in Figs. 8 and 9, 
respectively. Then, RAO curves of surge and pitch for the OC4 
semisubmersible platform is presented in Fig. 10

Table. 2 Natural frequencies (rad/s) of analysed OWT 
devices.

Platform characteristics OC3 OC4 NREL/MIT TLP
Surge 0.05051 0.05450 0.1037
Sway 0.05051 0.05450 0.1037
Heave 0.2026 0.3468 2.749
Roll 0.2149 0.1820 1.422
Pitch 0.2155 0.1820 1.389
Yaw 0.7603 0.1699 0.6107

Figure 8: Response Amplitude Operators (RAOs) for a) surge, b) heave and c) pitch, for a 
OC3 Spar-Hywind platform.

Figure 9: Response Amplitude Operators (RAOs) for a) surge, b) heave and c) pitch, for a 
TLP MIT/NREL platform.

Figure 10: Response Amplitude Operators (RAOs) for a) surge and b) pitch, for a OC4 
semisubmersible platform.

As explained, FASTLognoter GUI is used for coupling linearized 
wind turbine effects with seakeeping of floating structures 
under regular waves (Gutierrez, Zamora, et al. 2013). Regarding 
the results obtained with MorisonForm, the trends for RAOs 
presented in Fig. 8 for the OC3 Spar-Hywind, are consistent with 
those found in the literature (Ramachandran, Robertson, et al. 
2013). This figure shows a comparison between the results 
obtained for the surge, heave and pitch RAOs with 
FASTLognoter , and those obtained with the HydroDyn module of 
FAST, as well as through WAMIT; it can be observed that the 
agreement of the results is good. Figure 9 shows the results 
obtained for TLP MIT/NREL platform, compared to those taken 
from literature (MIT, Matha 2010, WAMIT and SeaFEM). In this 
case, the trends of the results are similar, although some 
differences between the results from different sources can be 
found. Finally, Fig. 10 shows the comparison between the result 
obtained by means of MorisonForm and SeaFEM code 
(www.compassis.com), for the OC4 semisubmersible platform. 
Note that the agreement of the results for surge and pitch 
motions is excellent.

4.3 A note on preliminary design

In a brief discussion on the trends of the presented RAOs, the 
importance of the obtained results in a preliminary design must 
be noted. Wave frequencies in which the behaviour of the wind 
turbine does not perform properly should be identified. 
Obviously, decisions like the choice between one or other 
platform will depend on additional parameters, such as 
operability, ease of construction, transport maintenance, 
environmental impact and regulations, but at least, once the 
RAO curves are known, it is possible to determine the significant 
values for irregular seas for each degree of freedom, using the 
features of MorisonForm. Finally, it can be concluded that there 
is no clear winner for support platform between the studied 



https://www.scipedia.com/public/JE_et_al_2015a 7

Computer Programming of free GUIs for the Analysis of the 
Behaviour of Marine Structures

OWT devices; this finding is a reflection of what happens in 
practice: different platforms are suitable for different operating 
conditions.

5 Concluding remarks

The advanced capacities of Lognoter (a software used for 
computer programming of Graphical User Interfaces, GUI) 
are shown, with the aim of carrying out preliminary studies 
of Offshore Wind Turbine (OWT) devices.
Computer programming with XML, a database such as 
SQlite, and Tcl/Tk is employed. The resulting software 
provides a suitable tool, called MorisonForm, for a rough 
estimation (in the frequency domain) of the behaviour 
under regular waves of floating structures, especially 
focused on OWT devices.
MorisonForm tool is fully complemented with another tool 
described in a previous work, FASTLognoter (a GUI coupled 
to the reference code FAST, of NREL). The linking of 
MorisonForm with FASTLognoter enables the user to carry 
out a coupled analysis of floating offshore wind turbines.

A key feature of the new toolkit presented is the capability 
of achieving parameterized studies and intensive analysis 
of OWT devices. The users can modify the code in an easy 
manner to improve its capabilities and add their own 
routines.
Finally, an illustrative analysis has been conducted for three 
OWT samples. Although MorisonForm tool only allows this 
'rough' estimation, it is clear that successful conclusions 
can be obtained from this preliminary study carried out by 
means of the studied GUIs.

References
Bertram V. 2000. Practical ship hydrodynamics. 2nd Ed. Oxford 
(UK): Butterworth Heinemann-Elsevier.

Breton SP, Moe H. 2009. Status, plans and technologies for 
offshore wind turbines in Europe and North America. Renew 
Energy. 34:646-654.

Collu M, Brennan FP, Patel MH. 2014. Conceptual design of a 
floating support structure for an offshore vertical axis wind 
turbine: the lessons learnt. Ships Offshore Struct. 9(1):3-21.

Coulling AJ, Goupee AJ, Robertson AN, Jonkman JM, Dagher JH. 
2013. Validation of a FAST semi-submersible floating wind 
turbine numerical model with DeepCwind test data, J Renew 
Sust Energy. 5:023116. DOI 10.1063/1.4796197.

Faltinsen OM. 1990. Sea loads on ships and offshore structures. 
Cambridge (UK): Cambridge University Press.

Gran S. 1992. A course in ocean engineering. Developments in 
marine technology (Vol. 8). Elsevier.

Gutierrez JE, Zamora B , García-Espinosa J, Peyrau MR. 2013. 
Tool development based on FAST for performing design 
optimization of offshore wind turbines: FASTLognoter. Renew 
Energy. 55:69-78.

Jonkman JM. 2007. Dynamics modeling and loads analysis of an 
offshore floating wind turbine. Technical Report 
NREL/TP-500-41958. Colorado (USA): National Renewable 
Energy Laboratory (www.nrel.gov).

Jonkman JM. 2010. Definition of the floating system for Phase IV 
of OC3. Technical Report NREL/TP-500-47535. Colorado (USA): 
National Renewable Energy Laboratory (www.nrel.gov).

Jonkman JM, Buhl Jr ML. 2005. FAST user's guide, Technical 
Report NREL/EL-500-29798. Colorado (USA): National Renewable 
Energy Laboratory (www.nrel.gov).

Jonkman JM, Butterfield S, Musial W, Scott G. 2009. Definition of 
a 5-MW reference wind turbine for offshore system 
development. Technical Report NREL/TP-500-38060. Colorado 
(USA): National Renewable Energy Laboratory (www.nrel.gov).

Jonkman JM, Matha D. 2011. Dynamics of offshore floating wind 
turbines. Analysis of three concepts. Wind Energy. 14:557-569.

Kaiser MJ, Snyder BF. 2014. Offshore wind structure weight 
algorithms-technical note. Ships Offshore Struct. DOI 
10.1080/17445302.2013.870772.

Laino DJ, Hansen AC. 2002. User's guide to the wind turbine 
aerodynamics computer software AeroDyn. Spanish Fork (USA): 
Windward Engineering LC (www.windwardengineering.com).

Lewis EV. 1989. Principles of naval architecture (Vol. III). 2nd Ed. 
SNAME (USA).

Matha D. 2010. Model Development and Loads Analysis of an 
Offshore Wind Turbine on a Tension Leg Platform, with a 
Comparison to Other Floating Turbine Concepts. Technical 
Report NREL/SR-500-45891. Colorado (USA): National 
Renewable Energy Laboratory (www.nrel.gov).

Morison JR, O'Brien MP, Johnson JW, Schaaf SA. 1950. The force 
exerted by surface wave on piles. J Petrol Trans 189:149-154.

Newman JN. 1962. The existing forces on fixed bodies in waves. 
J. Ship Res. 6:10-17.

Passon P, Branner K. 2014. Load calculation methods for 
offshore wind turbine foundations. Ships Offshore Struct. 
9(4):433-449.

Ramachandran GKV, Robertson A, Jonkman JM, Masciola MD. 
2013. Investigation of response amplitude operators for 
floating offshore wind turbines. Paper presented at The 23rd 
International Ocean, Offshore and Polar Engineering 
Conference (ISOPE 2013); Anchorage, Alaska, USA.

Robertson A, Jonkman J, Masciola M, Song H, Coupee A, Coulling 
A, Luan C. Definition of the Semisubmersible Floating System 
for Phase II of OC4. Technical Report NREL/TP-5000-60601. 
Colorado (USA): National Renewable Energy Laboratory 
(www.nrel.gov).

Sclavounos P, Butterfield S, Musial W, Jonkman J. 2005. 
Engineering challenges for floating offshore wind turbines. 
Paper preseted at Copenhagen Offshore Wind Conference; 
Copenhagen, Denmark.

Seebai T, Sundaravadivelu R. 2013. Response analysis of spar 
platform with wind turbine. Ships Offshore Struct. 8(1):94-101.

Servan B, Garcia-Espinosa J. 2013. Accelerated 3D multi-body 
seakeeping simulations using unstructured finite elements. J 
Comput Phyx. 252:382-403.

Tong KC. 1988. Technical and economic aspects of a floating 
offshore wind farm. J Win Eng Ind Aerodyn. 74-76:399-10.

Tracy C. 2007. Parametric design of floating wind turbines. M.S. 
Thesis. Boston (USA): Massachusetts Institute of Technology.


