



























































• Research Papers •


SCIENCE CHINA 
Technological Sciences 

© Science China Press and Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2011  phys.scichina.com   www.springerlink.com 

                           
2Corresponding author (email: bugeda@cimne.upc.edu) 

• Review Article • October 2016  Vol.??  No.?: ?? 
 doi: ???  

Drag reduction via Turbulent Boundary Layer Flow Control 
Adel Abbas1, Gabriel Bugeda2,3, Esteban Ferrer1,4, Song FU5, Jacques Periaux2,   

 Jordi Pons-Prats2, Eusebio Valero1,4, Yao ZHENG6 
1ETSIAE-UPM - School of Aeronautics, Universidad Politécnica de Madrid, Pza. Cardenal Cisneros 3, Madrid, E-28040, Spain 

2CIMNE, Gran Capità s/n, Campus Nord UPC, 08034 Barcelona, Spain 
3UPC Barcelona Tech, Civil and Environmental Department, Gran Capità s/n, Campus Nord UPC, 08034 Barcelona, Spain 

4Centre for Computational Simulation-UPM, Scientific and Technological Park (Campus Montegancedo), 28223 Pozuelo de Alarcón, Spain 
5Tsinghua University, School of Aerospace Engineering, Beijing 100084, China 

6Zhejiang University, Faculty of Engineering, Yuquan Campus, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310027, China 

Received ??, 2016; accepted ??; published online ?? 

 

Turbulent Boundary Layer Control (TBLC) for skin-friction drag reduction is a relatively new technology made possible 
through the advances in computational-simulation capabilities, which have improved the understanding of the flow structures 
of turbulence. Advances in micro-electronic technology have enabled the fabrication of active device systems capable of ma-
nipulating these structures. The combination of simulation, understanding and micro-actuation technologies offer new oppor-
tunities to significantly decrease drag, and by doing so, increase fuel efficiency of future aircraft. The literature review that 
follows will show that the application of active control turbulent skin-friction drag reduction is considered of prime importance 
by industry, even though it is still at a low Technology Readiness Level (TRL). This review presents the state of the art of dif-
ferent technologies oriented to the active and passive control for turbulent skin-friction drag reduction and contributes to the 
improvement of the actual present status of these technologies.  

Turbulent boundary layer flow control, drag reduction 

PACS number(s): 47.27.Rc, 47.85.L, 47.85.lb 
 

Citation:  ?? 
 

 
 

1  Introduction 

Modern engineering and technological developments are 
becoming increasingly driven by the need to boost efficien-
cy and to reduce environmental impact. Climate change has 
become one of the major motivations for improvements in 
different technological areas, in aeronautics in particular. It 
is highly probable that the above concerns will translate into 
more complex regulatory actions over the next coming 

years. This new interest in designing friendly environment 
aircraft is a major challenge for aircraft manufacturers. The 
need for greatly reduced emissions, particularly of green-
house gases such as carbon dioxide and nitrogen oxides, 
will establish new paradigms in aircraft design. Three main 
approaches to achieving this reduction can be identified:   

 
1) Improved aerodynamic design of airframes.   
2) Lighter aircraft configurations, 
3) Improved efficiency of aero-engines, 

 
The efficient design of aero-engines can make a sig-

nificant contribution to reduce the produced level of pollu-
tion. However, emissions can only be significantly reduced 



2 , et al.   Sci China Tech Sci   January (2012)  Vol. 55  No. 1 

ultimately by burning less fuel, which can be achieved by 
reducing the drag generated during flight. 

 
With respect to the problem of drag reduction in aero-

nautical applications, two different aspects must be consid-
ered. First, most of the flows in aeronautical applications 
involve high Reynolds numbers (high speed) during flight 
regime conditions, and therefore exhibit turbulent flow 
characteristics.  Second, the main component of the total 
drag being the viscous (mostly skin-friction) drag (Figure 1), 
any reduction strategy will consider the region close to the 
wall where the friction drag is generated. In this context, a 
flow control methodology targeting turbulent boundary lay-
ers (TBL) is the most obvious option to achieve a signifi-
cant skin-friction-drag reduction and ultimately to reduce 
emissions. In spite of the extensive amount of investigation 
and work accumulated over the years, the study of turbulent 
boundary layers is still an active area of research; recently 
feed with rising interest in drag reduction and new clean 
technologies. 

 
As is illustrated in Figure 1, almost 50% of total drag is 

due to the viscous drag, which is directly related to the fric-
tion drag of the aircraft caused by the interaction of the tur-
bulent boundary layer flow with the aircraft surface. Studies 
on the aircraft and turbulent boundary layer interactions, 
to-ether with developments of advanced flow-control tech-
nologies, can effectively reduce more than 40% of the vis-
cous drag [1] (if the actuation power is ignored), which is 
equivalent to about 15% of the total drag, and has, therefore, 
major implications to fuel consumption of commercial air-
craft, even if a small proportion of this reduction level is 
obtained. 

 
 

Figure 1  Concept of aircraft drag forces and drag reduction potential 
analysis. 

The exploration of drag-reduction technologies is not 
new, initialized in the early 70’, driven by the oil crisis. 
NASA Lang-ley Research Centre found that ribbed wall 

surfaces (passive riblets) can significantly reduce resistance, 
which eventually changed the traditional belief that smooth 
surfaces are unrivalled for low drag. Subsequently, a variety 
of drag-reduction methods and theories were proposed and 
developed or realized. However, most of the drag-reduction 
technologies have not yet been incorporated into modern 
aircraft. The difficulties of applying control devices in in-
dustrial conditions is mainly related to limitations in tradi-
tional manufacturing methods and to the additional energy 
consumption and weight associated with the gross 
drag-reduction levels that may results in a negative net gain. 
More recently, new developments in micro technology and 
improved manufacturing processes are enabling new con-
cepts for active and passive flow control to be realized, 
hence creating new opportunities for the control of turbulent 
boundary layer.  

Turbulent skin-friction drag reduction through passive 
and active flow control is still at an early stage in its devel-
opment. Both moving-wall and body-force control strate-
gies have been shown to give drag reductions in both nu-
merical and experimental studies. In fact, there are strong 
indications that significant drag reductions, greater than 
40% in certain circumstances [2], can be achieved. However, 
overall efficiency remains a largely unexplored subject, and 
limited amount of studies have considered new 
state-of-the-art actuation technologies. Moreover, there are 
uncertainties in extrapolating results from low Reynolds 
number to high speed, high-Reynolds-number flows. In 
particular, it is not clear how the drag reduction varies when 
increasing the Reynolds number. To design more efficient 
devices it is still necessary to understand the interactions 
between inner and outer wall mechanisms and the role of 
these scales played for in-creasing the Reynolds number. 

2  Strategies for turbulent control  

From a technical point of view, the objective of turbu-
lent drag-reduction technologies is to reduce the turbulent 
shear stress in the near wall region. Several DNS-based 
studies [3] provided direct evidence of a link between the 
production of Reynolds stresses and the quasi-streamwise 
vortical structures in the near-wall buffer layer; 10<y+<30, 
where here and throughout this document “+” indicates 
non-dimensionalisation with respect to wall units1. Previous 
work [4] revealed that streamwise vortices tend to be locat-
ed above and a little to the side of high skin friction regions 
suggesting that the interaction between these vortices and 
the wall is critical to the generation of wall shear stress and 
thus skin friction.  

Recent discoveries explain that drag-reduction strate-
                                                           

1 Wall units are based on the friction velocity and the kinematic 
viscosity. 



 , et al.   Sci China-Tech Sci   January (2012)  Vol. 55  No. 1 3 

gies are potentially more efficient when generating vortices 
that interfere with the streak formation in the viscous in-
ner-layer (y+<10 at least for low Reynolds numbers) than 
those directed at counteracting the vortices once formed. 
However, as the Reynolds number increases, the role of the 
outer structures may become more important. Therefore, 
controlling these outer structures will be necessary for air-
craft application of industrial relevance, i.e. high Reynolds 
numbers. 

In general, the overall aim and the focus of control for 
turbulent drag reduction are to suppress or mitigate the ef-
fect of these streamwise vortices in the buffer layer. This 
can either be achieved through: 

1- Directly targeting existent vortices; 
2- Intervention elsewhere in the turbulence cycle so as 

to reduce their formation in the first place. 

The first is a control strategy that influences the outer 
layer, e.g. via a suitable body force. New research has 
shown that, as the Reynolds increases, the large coherent 
streamwise structures in the outer layer could become more 
important in the production of shear stress close to the wall. 
Outer-layer structures are relatively large (compared to 
those in the near wall) with a length scale of order ~ 10δ, δ 
being the boundary layer thickness, and may thus be ame-
nable for control. Controlling these outer structures may be 
attractive for aircraft applications. Their presence can be 
detected at the wall so wall-based sensing is appropriate. 
Alternatively, there is speculation that such large structures 
could be attenuated by periodic forcing using wall-based 
actuation. 

The second strategy, that targets the vortical structures 
as they are generated near the wall, has been the subject of a 
number of recent studies, and there is evidence that the most 
effective interaction can be obtained via the imposition of a 
spanwise forcing, either in the form of a wall movement or 
in the form of a spanwise-oriented body force. 

The actuators required by both control types need to 
meet several requirements if the technology is to be applied 
to the aircraft: 

• The size and response time of the actuators have to 
be comparable to the length and time scale typical 
of the flow structures to be controlled. 

• The flow perturbations produced by the actuators 
must be large enough to be effective in the 
boundary layer. 

The actuators must be robust in the aircraft harsh 
environment: low temperature, pressure fluctuations 
and high flow speed should not jeopardize their func-
tioning. According to the direction of the forcing creat-
ed by the actuation, one can distinguish between: 

• Out-of-plane actuation, which introduces a pertur-
bation in the direction perpendicular to the wall. 

• In-plane actuation, which introduces a perturbation 
in the direction parallel to the wall. 

From all the above, four actuation types should be 
considered: (1) local wall-surface deformations (mostly 
wavy groove), (2) moving walls, (3) jet actuators and (4) 
plasma actuators. These four classes of actuators devices are 
sketched in Figure 2. 

Outer-layer structures in the turbulent boundary layer 
are targeted to minimize their influence on the production of 
shear stresses near the wall. The approach is to disrupt the 
development of the turbulence structure using out-of-plane 
body forcing by a surface mounted actuator. This approach 
can also be used to minimize the influence of the outer 
structures on the production of shear stress near the wall; for 
example by means of periodic wall-normal body force to 
modulate the flow. Of course, by trying to influence the 
outer structures through surface mounted actuation, it is 
appreciated that the inner structures in proximity to the sur-
face actuator will also be directly affected by it. This influ-
ence requires further study and efforts towards a better un-
derstanding. 

 

 
Figure 2  Sketch of drag reduction devices: geometry modification (rib-
lets), spanwise forcing at the wall, jet actuators and plasma actuators. 

Other types of actuators aim at modifying the near-wall 
structures by introducing disturbances near the wall to in-
terrupt or alter the turbulence-production cycle. Since these 
structures are small relative to the outer structures, it be-
comes difficult to disrupt them individually, and an 
open-loop approach becomes almost mandatory. Actuation 
strategies of this type include moving walls that apply a 
time-periodic spanwise forcing. The frequency of the wall 
movement can be determined by means of mean or local 
flow variables. Another example of mechanisms targeting 
inner structures is found in jets or plasma actuators. The 
former mimic normal-to-wall deformation, whilst the latter 
produce effects akin to in-plane wall deformations. 

A more detailed review and expected advances beyond 
the state of the art of these actuators, how the boundary lay-
er is modified and the expectations on drag reduction is 
given below.  



4 , et al.   Sci China Tech Sci   January (2012)  Vol. 55  No. 1 

3  State of the Art in actuation technologies for 
turbulent drag reduction   

3.1 Change of wall geometry 

The planar geometry of the wall may be changed by 
active surface deformation, via devices that have an influ-
ence on the turbulent boundary layer by creating dynamic 
modifications of the surface shape such as bumps or dim-
ples. They create an out-of plane flow perturbation to influ-
ence coherent structures in the flow, such as high-speed 
streaks and quasi-streamwise vortices (QSV). The charac-
teristic dimension and response time of the actuators for the 
feedback control of turbulence must correspond to the scale 
of these structures. According to Kasagi et al [5,6], QSVs 
have a typical diameter d+=30 and frequency f+=0.01, which 
corresponds to a dimension below 1mm and a response time 
faster as 1 ms for aircraft turbulent flow-control applica-
tions. 

Passive surface-shape deformation has the obvious 
advantages of not requiring auxiliary actuation equipment. 
In the 1970s, many companies in the United States, Britain, 
Germany and other countries, began to engage in the usage 
of this technology to reduce the viscous drag turbulent 
boundary layer. Riblets (see Figure 3) are the passive tech-
nique which is nearest to application on airplanes. Recent 
reviews have been given by Viswanath [7] and Spalart & 
McLean [8] Laboratory studies have shown that riblets can 
reduce viscous drag by about 8%. The technology has also 
been implemented in practical applications. For example, 
part of an Airbus A320 was covered by a striped film, re-
sulting in a 1% to 2% reduction in fuel consumption. Flight 
tests on a Learjet aircraft by NASA Langley resulted in 6% 
reduction in drag. 

Studies on the local wall-surface deformation technol-
ogy and related mechanisms have been carried out for near-
ly 50 years. Walsh & Weinstein [9] investigated the rela-
tionship among the ridge structure shape, size and drag re-
duction. Bechert and coworkers [10] reported wind-tunnel 
studies for ridged-surface drag-reduction that suggested that 
the ridges could restrict the flow of spanwise vortex motion. 
Gallagher found that the grooved surface causes an effective 
increase in the thickness of the viscous sublayer, which 
plays an important role in drag. However, there are no gen-
erally accepted conclusions on the precise mechanisms at 
play. One of the reasons for this is the smaller size of the 
trend which renders it difficult the acquisition of internal 
flow information. Luchini [11] suggested that the difference 
between the longitudinal and transversal protrusion heights 
explains the drag reduction. More recently, Garcia-Majoral 
and Jiménez [12] demonstrated that riblet performance cor-
relates better with the cross-sectional area of the riblets pro-
file. At the same time, several optimizations of the stream-

wise riblets have been proposed: for example Sasamori et al 
[13] tested recently the sinusoidal-riblets concepts. 

  

 

 

Figure 3  Comparison of surface of shark (up) and V-shaped grooves 
groove (down). 

The drawbacks of this technology include cost and la-
bour to install, initially and over the life of the plane after 
erosion take place and/or the new surface peel off. New 
materials or methods are almost certain, sooner or later, to 
bring this technology into use.  

In summary, local wall surface deformation technology 
such as the ridged surface for drag reduction and the physi-
cal mechanisms at play require further study. 

3.2 Moving walls. 

Any method that aims to reduce turbulent friction drag 
has, in principle, to weaken the streaky near-wall structures 
and thus the wall-normal motions (ejections/sweeps) that 
cause wall-normal momentum exchange between in-
ner/outer structures.  The imposition of wall-parallel un-
steady transverse shear is seen as one effective way of doing 
so, in so far as it results in turbulent-reductions of 40% and 
higher in carefully chosen actuation scenarios.  The de-
tailed process by which this unsteady shear interacts with 
the streaks is complex, and is the subject of several pub-
lished papers. The main elements at play are the destabilisa-



 , et al.   Sci China-Tech Sci   January (2012)  Vol. 55  No. 1 5 

tion of the streaks by a continuous change in the direction of 
the vectorial strain in the buffer layer, a destabilization of 
the regeneration process following streak weakening within 
parts of the unsteady cycle (i.e. a lowering of turbulence 
production) and the unsteady transfer of wall-normal vorti-
city (representing streak strength) to the spanwise direction. 

 
There are many ways of applying the unsteady actuation 

– streamwise-homogenous spanwise motion, streamwise 
travelling waves and spanwise travelling waves being the 
principal methods.  Common to all these is that the un-
steady strain has to be confined to the viscous sublayer, as 
the penetration of the strain into the turbulent region leads 
to addition strain-induced turbulent production, which 
counteracts the streak-weakening effect in the viscous sub-
layer.  This dictates a relatively high frequency of actua-
tion, the most effective being around a wall-scaled period of 
T+ =100 (in channel flow). 

 
Extensive DNS simulations by Quadrio [14,15] and his 

colleagues, the large majority being at low Reynolds num-
bers, show that wave-like spanwise motion, if carefully 
chosen in terms of frequency and wave length, is much 
more effective, in terms of net-energy-saving parameters, 
than simple spanwise motion (without waves).  From a 
practical perspective, a crucial question is whether the sav-
ing in gross drag, which can be very high as the flow can be 
led to relaminarize, is higher than the actuation energy 
needed to achieve this saving.  Quadrio’s work suggests 
that the answer is ‘yes’, subject to certain caveats.  Note 
that this conclusion only applies (so far) to relatively low 
Reynolds numbers.  DNS studies by Leschziner’s group 
show that the drag reduction in spatially evolving boundary 
layers is somewhat lower than in channel flow, and that the 
optimum actuation parameters are slightly different.  

 
The DNS work of the groups of Leschziner [16-18] and 

Chung [19] (at Imperial College and Warwick University, 
respectively), have focused on issues somewhat different 
from those of Quadrio’s, the latter concerned primarily with 
predicting the wall friction. Leschziner’s work is aimed at 
developing a better understanding of the fundamental inter-
actions between the spanwise forcing and the turbulent flow 
in the presence of purely oscillatory spanwise wall motion.  
More recently, these groups have examined the effects of 
energetic outer structures (in the log-law region) on the 
near-wall flow at a relatively high friction Reynolds number 
of 1020.  Importantly, these outer structures are decoupled 
from the mode of near-wall actuation; i.e. these are very 
similar to wavy or streamwise-constant actuations.  The 
latter observation enables the study in relatively simple ac-
tuation scenarios. 
                  

 
 

Figure 4  Streaky structure in buffer layer of channel flow at friction 
Reynolds number 1020 and wall-scaled actuation period 200 (note the 
weakening/strengthening of steaks in different parts of the large-scale 
footprints). 

The potential importance of large outer scales on the 
near-wall physics is conveyed by Figure 4, relating to a 
channel flow subjected to oscillatory motion at a 
wall-scaled period T+=200.  This shows the streaky struc-
ture in a plane lying within the buffer region.  The middle 
and right-hand plots show, respectively, the large-scale 
structures and small-scale (streaky) structures, the two sep-
arated by a particular spectral-separation method.  The 
large-scale structures near the wall are a consequence of 
strong foot-printing of energetic structures residing in the 
log-law region. The most important feature to highlight is 
the strong alteration of the small-scale pattern by the 
large-scale motions, a process termed ‘modulation’.  This 
modulation may well be a crucial player in the observed 
decline in the drag-reduction effectiveness as the Reynolds 
number increases.  It is understood, based on simple ob-
servations of the upward shift in the log law in actuated 
conditions, that there should be a gentle decrease in the 
drag-reduction margin when increasing the Reynolds num-
ber.  However, the observed dependence is much stronger, 
and this poses a substantial question mark on the wall of 
oscillatory wall actuation in high Re flows of industrial in-
terest.     

 
Experimental work on unactuated boundary layers by 

Marusic [20] and his colleagues shows that the large-scale 
outer motions increase in strength and energy as the Reyn-
olds number increases, while the small-scale near-wall sta-
tistics are universal, in so far as scaling by the wall shear 
stress collapses the small-scale energy.  This disparity of 
behaviour and effects has important implications to actuated 
conditions, and suggest that there is an urgent need to un-
derstand the effect of the large-scale on the near-wall be-
haviour of the small-scale steaks  and in particular, their 
stability.  

 

Footprint of “Super streaks” Modulated Streaks Raw field 



6 , et al.   Sci China Tech Sci   January (2012)  Vol. 55  No. 1 

3.3  Jet actuators. 

These actuators modify the turbulent boundary layer by 
introducing variations of the flow field through orifices in 
the wall. Typically these operate in the out-of-plane direc-
tion. However with a correctly shaped orifice, a perturbation 
approximating to an in-plane body force can be introduced. 
One type of actuation is by means of synthetic jets.  Such 
jets use a cavity with a membrane or a piston that alternate-
ly blows and sucks air through the orifice to secure a zero 
net mass flow. Alternatively, pulsed jets can be created us-
ing a pressurized air supply and an orifice that can be peri-
odically opened and closed. 

Dahm and Diez [21,22] presented a large array of 25,600 
micro-actuators using the electro-kinetic principle to gener-
ate a flow displacement, potentially suitable for active sub-
layer control on aeronautical and hydronautical vehicles. A 
porous polymer matrix was used to enlarge the elec-
tro-kinetic effect produced by the displacement of ions in a 
micro-channel under the effect of a voltage difference. Up 
to 10 kHz actuation was demonstrated with a voltage 
around 20V. 

Breuer and Rathnasingham [23] built a feedback control 
system for the active control of the near-wall region of a 
turbulent boundary layer (Reθ=1960, where θ denotes the 
momentum thickness). They used a row of three synthetic 
jet actuators (out-of plane) and hot-film sensors located up-
stream and downstream of the actuators. The synthetic jets 
used a vibrating membrane and were designed such that a 
close packing in the spanwise direction was possible. A 30% 
reduction of the streamwise velocity fluctuations was 
achieved. 

The effects of spanwise directed (in-plane) synthetic jets 
on a turbulent flow in a rectangular channel was investigat-
ed by Iuso and Cannata [24], at a Reynolds number 
Reτ=180 and a forcing frequency of 4 Hz. Hot-wire probes 
measured the wall shear stress and the streamwise velocity. 
Turbulence attenuation up to 20% was observed. 

Jet-actuator technologies have also been developed in 
connection with applications to separation control. These 
typically have a higher jet-velocity requirement compared 
to turbulent flow. However, the technology may still be rel-
evant to turbulence control. Pimpin, Kasagi et al. [25,26], 
and Rosset et al. [27] used an electrostrictive material of 
polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) as an oscillating membrane 
combined with compliant electrodes to produce synthetic 
jets. In Pimpi’s work, the membrane electrodes were pat-
terned to enhance the deflection up to 112μm, which corre-
sponds to 5.6% of the actuator diameter. The jets had a 
maximum velocity of 0.4 m/s at 1.1 kHz at a location 4 mm 
downstream from the orifice. Micro-magneto-mechanical 
systems (MMMS) for flow control were developed by Per-
nod, Merlen at al. [28,29]. A magneto-dynamic micro-valve 

was presented, providing high-speed jets velocities in the 
range of 150 m/s with a kHz frequency range. Piezoelectric 
active diaphragms developed and tested at NASA are re-
ported by Mane, P., Mossi, et al [30]. Jet velocities of 40 
m/s were measured but at a low frequency of 100 Hz and 
for an actuator of comparably large dimensions (88mm di-
ameter). A composite diaphragm using Shape Memory Al-
loy sheet and an electromagnetic system were used by 
Liang et al. [31] to produce jet velocities of 190 m/s, but the 
frequency range was limited to 300 Hz and the model was 
big and too power demanding. Hybrid synthetic jets have 
also been investigated. They are similar to ze-
ro-time-mean-flow synthetic jets, but differ in the fact that a 
steady outflow is superposed from the nozzle, which reduc-
es the flow-suction step. Tesar [32,33] presented such an 
actuator for flow separation control which might have ap-
plications for turbulent flow control. 

3.4 Plasma actuators. 

In 1955, Kantrowitz presented the concept of plasma 
flow control. In 1983, Malik et al. controlled a boundary 
layer by a corona discharge. They found that when the flow 
velocity and the applied voltage were of 30 m/s and 15 kV, 
respectively, the drag force could be reduced by 20%. 
However, due to technical immaturity, there were very few 
researches on flow control by plasmas until the 1990s. In 
1996, University of Poitiers (France) published a new paper 
on the ability of a surface corona discharge to modify a 
low-velocity airflow over a cylinder, and this research group 
starts to study plasma actuators based on surface corona 
discharge as well as their effect on airflow over cylinder and 
flat plate.  For instance, they demonstrated that the drag of 
a flat plate could be significantly reduced for freestream 
velocity up to 25 m/s [34]. In USA, in 1998, Roth proposed 
an innovative plasma actuator based on a surface dielectric 
barrier discharge (DBD) [35]. It is composed of two elec-
trodes mounted on both sides of a dielectric material be-
tween which a high voltage is applied. This very simple 
design is still the most-used one because it enables to ignite 
and maintain a stable discharge whatever the environmental 
conditions.  The control mechanism of this surface DBD is 
the electrohydrodynamic force that is produced inside the 
discharge, resulting in an electric wind based-wall jet. Typ-
ically, single DBD can produce mean force and electric 
wind velocity up to 1 mN/W and 7 m/s, respectively. With 
multi-DBD designs, velocity up to 11 m/s has been meas-
ured and force up to 350 mN/m. If the electrodes are located 
in the spanwise direction, then the actuation can be used to 
increase or to decrease the near-wall flow velocity. Moreo-
ver, with specific geometric designs, the produced flow can 
be strongly 3D inducing transverse vorticity. In fact, all the 
types of spatial actuation can be realized with plasma actu-
ators simply because the electrohydrodynamic force de-
pends only on the electrical command and the electrode 



 , et al.   Sci China-Tech Sci   January (2012)  Vol. 55  No. 1 7 

geometry, electrodes that can be easily perfected at a labor-
atory scale with aluminium foils (Figure 5). For now about 
15 years, several hundreds of papers have demonstrated that 
plasma actuators could produce a force amplitude scaling 
with the minimal requirements for affecting wall turbulence 
characteristics, controlling boundary layer and for reducing 
drag and noise [36]. 

 

(a) Photograph of the DBD actuator 

 

(b) Imaging of the developing plasma layer 

Figure 5  Typical DBD actuator applied in turbulent boundary flow con-
trol. 

However, in most cases, plasma actuators have been used 
to delay or cancel the flow separation, but only a few stud-
ies focused on boundary layer manipulation and skin fric-
tion drag reduction. The technical benefits of plasma actua-
tors in terms of perturbation amplitude and frequency cou-
pled to a quite unexplored application support any project 

aiming at investigating in depth the capabilities of plasma 
actuators to reduce skin friction drag.  Indeed, among the 
promising applications of surface plasma actuators, the case 
of the manipulation of skin friction is one of the most en-
couraging. This type of control requires an actuator with an 
accurate control of the amplitude of its produced mechani-
cal effects and a fine adjustment of the frequency content of 
the imposed periodic conditions. The intrinsic characteris-
tics of an electro-mechanical converter as surface plasma 
actuators make them ideal candidate for open and 
closed-loop control of the skin friction over objects at low 
scale. 

It is known that the turbulent boundary layer structures 
are quite complex with quasi-streamwise vortices caused by 
the elongation of the hairpin due to convection. Thus, dif-
ferent flow control strategies by plasma discharges have 
been developed in the recent years, but always at low veloc-
ity. Some of these strategies attempt at directly interact with 
the already formed quasi-streamwise vortices. Others ap-
proaches look at stabilization of the low-speed streaks with 
closed-loop strategies. As it is shown in the literature, plas-
ma actuators can be considered as an effective way to in-
troduce an in-plane body force compared to fluidic jet actu-
ators. At Reτ = 380, Jukes and Choi [37] reached a 45% skin 
friction reduction with their plasma based actuator generat-
ing spanwise structures in the flow (Figure 6). This skin 
friction reduction was measured using hot-wire anemometry 
and the skin friction was estimated by measuring the near 
wall velocity gradient. The plasma actuator induces periodic 
co-rotating vortices in the inner region of the turbulent 
boundary layer and it is conjectured that these periodic vor-
tices interact with the quasi-streamwise vortices disrupting 
the whole turbulence regeneration cycle. However, the elec-
trical power required to generate the plasma induced flow 
oscillations was significantly greater than the net power 
saved by drag reduction. Another way of reducing skin fric-
tion drag is a control related to the delay of laminar to tur-
bulent transition. Indeed, direct attenuation of existing dis-
turbance can be achieved using plasma actuators. Such ac-
tuators can modify the velocity profile of boundary layers 
and thus directly alters its stability properties. A successful 
damping of Tollmien-Schlichting waves responsible for the 
early stage of transition has already been observed with 
surface plasma actuator [38] but the induced drag changes 
has not been addressed. However, because the growing rate 
of a laminar boundary layer is less compared to a turbulent 
boundary layer, the pressure drag of the body will be af-
fected and presumably be reduced. Another method for 
lowering the skin friction drag of a body is the active can-
cellation of the 2D Tollmien-Schlichting waves before they 
evolve to 3D behaviour responsible for the formation of 
boundary layer vortices and turbulent spots. This concept 
has been investigated by producing flow perturbations at a 
periodic frequency similar to the frequency of the Tollmi-



8 , et al.   Sci China Tech Sci   January (2012)  Vol. 55  No. 1 

en-Schlichting waves and a phase shift of 180° [39]. It was 
demonstrated that the natural and imposed waves interact 
and cancel each other leading to a laminar flow. This con-
cept has been extended to a full-scale motorized glider [40]. 
By applying plasma discharges on the pressure side of a 
natural laminar flow wing section, microphone and hot-wire 
measurements have shown that a transition delay of ap-
proximately 3% chord can be achieved. A same approach 
was developed by Lavoie et al. [41] for in lab experiments 
where surface roughness are implemented on a flat plate 
with Blasius boundary layer to produce well-defined insta-
bility waves. A spanwise array of plasma discharges was 
designed to generate streaks in the boundary layer. The 
electro-hydrodynamic force produced by the discharge is 
used to inhibit the transient growth of streaks promoted by 
the surface roughness. It was shown that plasma is a poten-
tial technology for controlling the streaks developing in a 
boundary layer but nothing related to drag reduction is 
documented. However, as indicated previously, these ex-
periments were conducted at low velocity. 

Plasma actuators can also produce out of plane forcing 
conditions. For instance, Moreau et al. [42] studied plasma 
actuators producing wall normal jet for flow control appli-
cations. In a free-stream velocity as high as 25 m.s-1, they 
produced directional jets with a velocity of about 3 m.s-1. 
Another type of plasma actuator was presented by Jacob 
and Sathanakrishnan [43] in which an annular electrode 
produces a zero-net mass flux jet. They produced jets whose 
velocities were up to 1 m.s-1 for pulsing frequencies up to 
100 Hz.  

 

 

Figure 6  Typical streamwise vortical flow induced by plasma discharges 
in series with preferential flow direction imposed by the electrical signal. 

Nowadays, although the DBD actuator structure is rel-
atively simple, its flow control mechanism is still not fully 
understood. The current knowledge regarding the capability 
of surface plasma discharges to influence boundary layer 

flows in view of significant drag reduction is not yet com-
pleted. Surface plasma discharges have demonstrated their 
capability for stabilising the streaks in the sublayer region 
and they can lead to large reduction in skin friction. How-
ever, it is recognized that the electrode spacing is a critical 
geometrical parameters to achieve effective drag reduction. 
Larger improvement can be expected for well-defined ge-
ometry in particular by using panels of DBD discharges at 
small scale. Although many researchers in various countries 
have conducted a significant amount of work, to date there 
is no consensus on the benefits of this technology. It is cer-
tain that plasma actuators are able to address some of the 
deficiency of the currently available flow control technolo-
gies. Indeed, plasma actuators present some of the desired 
attributes including light weight, low profile, no moving 
parts, energy efficiency, durability, ease of use, scalability, 
high amplitude, wide bandwidth, and rapid response. In 
2014, the AIAA Plasma dynamics and Lasers Technical 
Committee reports that: ‘Alternating current, dielectric bar-
rier discharge (AC-DBD) plasma actuators impose a force 
on the flow through electro-hydrodynamic interaction.  
They have been used primarily to control flow separation. 
Their application was initially limited to low-speed flows, 
but has recently been extended to a higher speed regime.  
In recent years, these AC-DBDs have been applied to 
boundary layer transition control, with successful in-flight 
demonstration.  Continued improvement of these actuators 
is anticipated with new electrode configurations, optimized 
dielectrics, and optimized high voltage driving waveforms.’  

4  Conclusions 

The previous review of the state of the art reveals that the 
understanding of the physics governing drag reduction 
technologies is still limited. Furthermore, the application of 
active control turbulent skin-friction drag reduction has seen 
limited success in the industrial environment. 

 
However, given the challenging targets of the “Flightpath 

2050”, now is the appropriate time to investigate the poten-
tial of flow control technologies to achieve some of the am-
bitious ACARE environmental goals for 2020: “reducing 
CO2 emissions by 50% per passenger kilometer”, “reducing 
NOx emissions by 80%” and “reducing perceived aircraft 
noise by 50%”. Reduction of CO2 and NOx emissions to 
the atmosphere is directly related to the aircraft fuel burn, 
drag and aircraft weight. Reducing drag through reduction 
of the aircraft weight will mitigate the environmental im-
pacts of the emissions of the harmful gases to the atmos-
phere. These are the goals of the three years EU-China re-
search project named DRAGY (Drag reduction via Turbu-
lent Boundary Layer Flow Control) launched in April 2016. 
Expected outcomes of this project will result in mutual ben-
efits for industry and scientific European as well as Chinese 



 , et al.   Sci China-Tech Sci   January (2012)  Vol. 55  No. 1 9 

communities, in a topic of growing concern, namely 
drag-reduction technologies. In order to achieve these goals 
the following objectives are defined: 

1. To identify the characteristics of flow perturbations 
that can be introduced into the inner and/or outer re-
gions of the boundary layer to inhibit the 
drag-generating mechanisms. 

2. To determine the potential drag reductions that can be 
achieved in representative boundary layers by target-
ing the turbulent structures in the inner and/or outer 
flow region paying particular attention to the energy 
cost and efficiency of the control device. 

3. To develop advanced simulation methods and tools to 
analyse and study turbulent boundary layers at indus-
trially relevant Reynolds numbers.   

4. To demonstrate the most promising flow control con-
cepts for turbulence manipulation and skin-friction 
drag reduction through experimental tests in a wind 
tunnel. 

5. To enable the various concepts be evaluated at real 
aircraft level, such that an overall net energy saving 
can be derived through the incorporation of new sim-
plified Low Order Models into industrial numerical 
solvers. 

4  Acknowledgements 

This work is being supported by the European Commission though the 
Research and Innovation action DRAGY (Grant Agreement 690623) and 
by the Ministry of Industry and Information Technology (MIIT) of the 
Chinese government. 

The authors acknowledge all participants in DRAGY project for their con-
tributions. In particular, special acknowledgements are dedicated to Rich-
ard Ashworth (Airbus Group Innovations), Nicolas Benard 
(CNRS-PPRIME), Jean-Paul Bonnet (CNRS-PPRIME), Eric Garnier 
(ONERA), Michael A. Leschziner (Imperial College), Shia-Hui Peng 
(Chalmers University), Ning Qin (University of Sheffield), Maurizio 
Quadrio (Politecnico di Milano), Daniel Redondo (Airbus Group Opera-
tions), Markus Ruetten (DLR) and Delille Thomas (Dassault Aviation). 

We are also grateful to D. Knoerzer, EC DG Research in Research and 
Innovation, D. Violato, INEA , Ms. Shi Jingmin , MIIT , HUA Jun , CAE 
for their interest to DRAGY and their joint cooperation to set up the 
DRAGY project. 

5  References 

1 M. Quadrio and P. Ricco, Critical assessment of turbulent drag reduction 
through spanwise wall oscillations, J. Fluid Mech. 2004, 521: 251-271 

2 P. R. Spalart and J. Douglas McLean, Drag reduction: enticing turbu-

lence, and then an industry, Phil. Trans. R. Soc. A 2011, 369: 1556–1569 
3 P.S. Bernard, J.M. Thomas and R.A. Handler, Vortex dynamics and the 

production of Reynolds stress, J. Fluid Mech. 1993, 253: 385-419 
4 A.G. Kravchenko, H. Choi, P. Moin, On the relation of near-wall 

streamwise vortices to wall skin friction in turbulent boundary layers, 
Phys. Fluids A 1993, 5: 3307-3309 

5 N. Kasagi, Y. Susuki and K. Fukagata, Control of Turbulence, Parity, 
2003. 

6 N. Kasagi, Y. Susuki  and K. Fukagata, Microelectromechanical Sys-
tems-based feedback control of turbulence for skin friction reduction, 
Annual Reviews of Fluid Mechanics, 2009, 41: 231-251 

7 P. Viswanath, Aircraft viscous drag reduction using riblets, Progress in 
Aerospace Sciences, 2002, 38: 571–600 

8 P. R. Spalart, J. D. McLean, Drag reduction: enticing turbulence, and 
then an industry, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A, 
2011, 369: 1556–1569 

9 M. J. Walsh, L. M. Weinstein, Drag and heat-transfer characteristics of 
small longitudinally ribbed surfaces, AIAA Journal, 1979, 17: 770-771 

10  D. Bechert, M. Bruse, W. Hage, J. van derHoeven, G. Hoppe, Experi-
ments on drag-reducing surfaces and their optimization with an adjusta-
ble geometry, J. Fluid Mech, 1997, 338: 59-87 

11 P. Luchini, F. Manzo, A. Pozzi, Resistance of grooved surface to parallel 
flow and cross-flow, J. Fluid Mech. 1991, 228: 87-109 

12 R. Garcia-Mayoral, J. Jimenez, Hydrodynamic stability and breakdown 
of the viscous regime over riblets, J. Fluid Mech. 2011, 678: 317-347 

13 M. Sasamori, H. Mamori, K. Iwamoto, A. Muramata, Experimental 
study on drag-reduction effect due to sinusoidal riblets in turbulent 
channel flow, Experiments in Fluids, 2014, 55:1828 

14 M. Quadrio, P. Ricco and C.Viotti, Stream-wise-travelling waves of 
spanwise wall velocity for turbu-lent drag reduction. J. Fluid Mech. 
2009, 627: 161–178 

15 M. Quadrio, P. Ricco. Critical assessment of turbulent drag reduction 
through spanwise wall oscillations. J. Fluid Mech. 2004, 521: 251-271 

16 L. Agostini, E. Touber and M A. Leschziner, Spanwise oscillatory wall 
motion in channel flow: drag-reduction mechanisms inferred from 
DNS-predicted phase-wise property variations at Reτ=1000, J. Fluid 
Mechanics, 2014, 743: 606-635 

17 E. Touber and M A.Leschziner, Near-wall streak modification by 
spanwise oscillatory motions and rela-tionship to friction-drag reduction, 
J. Fluid Mechanics, 2012, 693: 150-200 

18 L. Agostini, E. Touber and M A. Leschziner. The turbulence vorticity as 
a window to the physics of fric-tion-drag reduction by oscillatory wall 
motion. Int. J. Heat and Fluid Flow, 2015, 51: 3-15 

19 E. Hurst, Q. Yang and Y M. Chung, The effect of Reynolds number on 
turbulent drag reduction by stream-wise travelling waves, J. Fluid Mech. 
2014, 759: 28-55 

20 I. Marusic, R. Mathis and N. Hutchins, Predictive model for 
wall-bounded turbulent flow, Science, 2010, 329: 193-196 

21 W. Dahm, F. Diez, Design and fabrication of unsteady electrokinetic 
microactuator arrays for turbulent boundary layer control. J. Micromech. 
Microeng. 2004, 14: 1307-1320 

22 Dahm, F. Diez, Micro Electro Kinetic Actuator (MEKA) Arrays for Ac-
tive sublayer control of turbulent boundary layers. AIAA, 2002, 267 

23 K S. Breuer, R. Rathnasingham, Active control of turbulent boundary 
layers. J. Fluid Mech, 2003, 495: 209-233 

24 G. Iuso, M. Cannata, Spanwise directed synthetic jets for wall turbu-
lence control, AIAA, 2008, 4205 

25 A. Pimpin, Y. Suzuki and N. Kasagi, Microelectrostrictive actuator with 
metal compliant electrodes for flow control applications. 17th IEEE Int. 
Conf. MEMS. Maastricht, 2004.  

26 A. Pimpin, Y. Suzuki and N. Kasagi, Microelectrostrictive Actuator 
With Large Out-of-Plane deformation for flow-control application. 
Journal of microelectromechanical systems, 2007, 16: 753-764 

27 S. Rosset, P.  Niklaus, M.  Dubois, M., Dadras and H. Shea, Metal Ion 
Implanted Compliant Electrodes in Dielectric Electroactive Polymer 
(EAP) Membranes, Advances in Science and Technology, 2008, 61: 
18-25 

28 A. Merlen, P. Brunet, F. Zoueshtiagh, M.  Pamies, E. Garnier, Mi-
crosystems for flow control and transfer: a challenge for CFD. Proceed-



10 , et al.   Sci China Tech Sci   January (2012)  Vol. 55  No. 1 

ings of 6th ICCHMT May 18-21, Guangzhou, China, 2009. 
29 P. Pernod and O. Ducloux, MEMS magneto-mechanical microvalves 

(MMMS) for aerodynamic active flow control, Journal of Magnetism 
and Magnetic Materials 2010, 322: 1642–1646 

30 P. Mane, K. Mossi and R. Bryant, Pressure loading of Piezo Composite 
Unimorphs.  Materials Research Society Symp. Proc. 2006. 

31 Y. Liang, Y. Kuga and M. Taya, M., Design of membrane actuator based 
on ferromagnetic shape memory alloy composite for synthetic jet appli-
cations. Sensors and Actuators A: Physical, 2006, 125: 512–518 

32 V. Tesar, Mechanism of pressure recovery in jet-type actuators. Sensors 
and Actuators A: Physical, 2009, 152: 182–191 

33 V. Tesar, Z. Travnicek, J Kordik and Z. Randa, Experimental investiga-
tion of a fluidic actuator generating hybrid-synthetic jets. Sensors and 
Actuators A: Physical, 2007, 138: 213–220 

34 L. Léger, E. Moreau, G. Touchard, Electrohydrodynamic airflow control 
along a flat plate by a DC surface corona discharge - Velocity profile 
and wall pressure measurements, AIAA, 2002, 2833. 

35 J.R. Roth and D.M. Sherman, Boundary layer flow control with a One 
Atmosphere Uniform Glow Discharge Surface Plasma, AIAA, 1998, 
328 

36 N. Benard and E. Moreau, Electrical and mechanical characteristics of 
surface AC dielectric barrier discharge plasma actuators applied to air-
flow control, Experiments in Fluids, 2014, 55-1846:1-43 

37 T. Jukes and K S. Choi, Turbulent Drag Reduction by Surface Plasma 
through Spanwise Flow oscillation. 3rd AIAA Flow Control Conference. 
San Francisco, California, 2006. 

38 S. Grundmann, and C. Tropea, Experimental transition delay using 
glow-discharge plasma actuators, Experiments in Fluids, 2007, 42: 
653–657 

39 S. Grundmann, and C. Tropea, Active cancellation of artificially intro-
duced Tollmien–Schlichting waves using plasma actuators, Experiments 
in Fluids, 2008, 44: 795–806 

40 A. Duchmann, B. Simon, C. Tropea, and S. Grundmann, Dielectric Bar-
rier Discharge Plasma Actuators for In-Flight Transition Delay, AIAA 
Journal, 2014, 52: 358-367 

41 R. Hanson, K. Bade, B. Belson, P. Lavoie, A. Naguib, and C. Rowley, 
Feedback control of slowly-varying transient growth by an array of 
plasma actuators, Physics of Fluids, 2014, 26 

42 E. Moreau et al., Aerodynamic plasma actuators: A directional micro-jet 
device. Thin Solid films, 2008, 516: 6660–6667 

43 J D. Jacob and A. Santhanakrishnan, Flow control with plasma synthetic 
jet actuators. J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2007, 40 
 
 
 
 

 


	Drag reduction via Turbulent Boundary Layer Flow Control
	Adel Abbas1, Gabriel Bugeda2,3, Esteban Ferrer1,4, Song FU5, Jacques Periaux2,    Jordi Pons-Prats2, Eusebio Valero1,4, Yao ZHENG6
	1  Introduction
	2  Strategies for turbulent control
	3  State of the Art in actuation technologies for turbulent drag reduction
	3.1 Change of wall geometry
	3.2 Moving walls.
	3.3  Jet actuators.
	3.4 Plasma actuators.

	4  Conclusions
	4  Acknowledgements
	5  References



