















































 

Metals 2017, 7, 491; doi:10.3390/met7110491 www.mdpi.com/journal/metals 

Article 

Experimental Validation of an FSW Model with an 
Enhanced Friction Law: Application to a Threaded 
Cylindrical Pin Tool 
Narges Dialami 1,*, Miguel Cervera 1, Michele Chiumenti 1, Antonio Segatori 2 and  
Wojciech Osikowicz 2 

1 International Center for Numerical Methods in Engineering (CIMNE), Universidad Politécnica de Cataluña, 
Campus Norte UPC, 08034 Barcelona, Spain; miguel.Cervera@upc.edu (M.C.);  
michele@cimne.upc.edu (M.C.) 

2 Sapa AB Technology, Kanalgatan 1, 612 81 Finspang, Sweden; Antonio.Segatori@sapagroup.com (A.S.); 
Wojciech.Osikowicz@sapagroup.com (W.O.) 

* Correspondence: narges@cimne.upc.edu; Tel.: +34-93-401-6529 

Received: 6 October 2017; Accepted: 6 November 2017; Published: 10 November 2017 

Abstract: This work adopts a fast and accurate two-stage computational strategy for the analysis of 
FSW (Friction stir welding) processes using threaded cylindrical pin tools. The coupled 
thermo-mechanical problem is equipped with an enhanced friction model to include the effect of 
non-uniform pressure distribution under the pin shoulder. The overall numerical strategy is 
successfully validated by the experimental measurements provided by the industrial partner 
(Sapa). The verification of the numerical model using the experimental evidence is not only 
accomplished in terms of temperature evolution but also in terms of torque, longitudinal, 
transversal and vertical forces. 

Keywords: FSW; threaded pin; numerical model; experimental validation 
 

1. Introduction 

Friction stir welding (FSW) is a solid state joining technology in which friction and plastic 
dissipation are sources of heat generation and material softening. 

The tool pin profile has a remarkable effect on the friction between the tool and the workpiece 
and the foremost effect on the plastic deformation of the surrounding material. FSW pin tools are 
often featured with thread forms as they are beneficial for improving the tool performance and 
contribute to an effective material transportation near the weld and the generation of a defect free 
stir zone [1]. 

Pin tools with threaded features are often used to investigate the relationship between the tool 
and the microstructural properties obtained using different welding conditions. 

In [2], thread pins are used for friction stir welding of two aluminium alloys: AA7050-T7451 and 
AA6061-T651. They investigate the effect of the thread on the process in terms of in-plane reactions 
on the pin tool, torque, temperature and the quality of welds. 

In [1], heat treatable AA6061 and non-heat treatable AA5086 aluminum alloys are welded by 
using three different pin tools. It is found that FSW using threaded cylindrical pins provides better 
material flow between two alloys among others. 

In [3], the influence of the tool geometries upon the axial and translational forces, temperature 
and mechanical properties for AA7075-T6 is studied. In their experimental work, threaded tapered, 
non-threaded triangular and non-threaded cylindrical pins are considered. 

In [4], the effect of tool geometry on friction stir welding of polyethylene-polypropylene is 
investigated. Threaded cylindrical, squared, triangular and straight cylindrical pin shapes are 



Metals 2017, 7, 491  2 of 14 

 

considered. Interaction effects of welding variables, including rotational speed and traverse speed 
are studied. 

In [5], a half-threaded pin tool to enhance the material flow at the lap interface is manufactured. 
The effect of manufactured pin on the process is compared with that of full-threaded pin in terms of 
temperature, bonding and material flow. It is observed, for instance, that the peak temperature 
during the process using the half-threaded pin is lower than that using the full-threaded pin. 

In [6], Colegrove et al. use the computational fluid dynamics (CFD) code, FLUENT, to model 
the 3D metal flow in FSW using a threaded pin. It is found that the model generates an excessive 
amount of heat, leading to over-prediction of the weld temperature. 

Atharifar et al. [7] analyze the viscous and inertia loads applied to the FSW tool by varying the 
welding parameters using FLUENT. A right-handed one-way thread pin tool with a concaved, 
smooth shoulder is considered to simulate the material flow and heat transfer in the FSW of AA6061. 

Even though numerous studies, mainly experimental, of the effect of pin threads on the weld 
have been carried out, there is an urgent need for a fast and accurate numerical model for the 
analysis of the FSW process. This model should contain a suitable friction model to properly 
describe the tribological condition at the tool/workpiece interface, capable of considering real 
process behavior such as the effect of non-uniform pressure distribution under the tool. 

A 3D finite element analysis is able to deal with several process complexities such as a concave 
shoulder, tool tilt and threaded pin profiles. However, the large computational cost makes it 
inconceivable as a routinely used design tool [8]. In previous works of the authors, a robust and fast 
numerical model was developed to study FSW under different welding conditions [9–15]. A fully 
coupled thermo-mechanical model together with an enhanced friction law was addressed to provide 
a more realistic thermo-mechanical response in comparison with the existing models. The model 
took the benefits of an apropos kinematic framework combing Arbitrary Lagrangian Eulerian (ALE), 
Eulerian and Lagrangian formulations for the stir zone, the workpiece and the pin-tool, respectively. 
A two-stage speed-up strategy was incorporated to reduce the simulation time while preserving the 
accuracy of the results. 

In the present work, the model previously developed by the authors is adopted for the 
simulation of a FSW process with a cylindrical threaded pin tool. The use of an apropos kinematic 
framework permits dealing with arbitrary pin shapes as the threaded pin tool, without the necessity 
of using a re-meshing procedure due to the large deformation of the material around the threaded 
pin tool. Moreover, it facilitates the application of the boundary conditions. The enrichment of the 
model with an enhanced friction law permits to accurately predict not only the temperature field but 
also the torque and forces exerted by the tool in all the directions. This is mostly lacking in previous 
works in the FSW field. The use of a two-stage speed-up strategy is especially important when 
simulating industrial cases, as the model is 3D and a large number of elements are used in the 
discretization of the geometry. It is shown here that the framework, formulation and computational 
strategy are not only applicable to featureless pins but also to pins with features such as threads. The 
analyses are calibrated and validated through the experimental measurements performed by the 
industrial partner (Sapa) for aluminum alloy AA6063-T6. The correlations obtained by means of this 
comparison not only validate the model but also provide insight regarding the effects of the 
threaded pins upon torque, forces and temperature field. Also, the differences between threaded 
and featureless cylindrical pins of similar dimensions are studied in detail. 

The paper is structured as follows: In Section 2, the overall solution strategy applied for 
simulation of FSW process using cylindrical threaded pin tool is summarized. In Section 3, the 
numerical assessment and the calibration of the model using the experimental data are presented. 
Section 4 is devoted to the comparison of the weld obtained using threaded and featureless 
cylindrical tool pins. 

2. The Solution Strategy 

In this work, a local analysis of the FSW process is performed. This means that the domain 
surrounding the thermo-mechanically affected zone (TMAZ) and the tool are considered in the 



Metals 2017, 7, 491  3 of 14 

 

simulation. The tool rotates rigidly with a constant speed and the plate moves with the advancing 
velocity opposite to the welding direction. 

The governing equations and the boundary conditions used for the definition of the transient 
coupled thermo-mechanical problem are summarized in Table 1. The nomenclature for the variables 
and properties involved is listed in Table 2. Additional details on the formulation can be found in 
References [9,10]. 

Table 1. Balance and constitutive equations. 

Mechanical Problem

op ρ∇ ⋅ + ∇ + =s b 0  Momentum balance equation 
0∇ ⋅ =v Continuity equation 

p= +σ I s Stress split 
s= ∇ε v Kinematic equation 

2 effμ=s ε Constitutive equation 

( ) 12 meffμ μ
−

= ε  Norton-Hoff model 

Thermal Problem

( )0
1

mesh mech

dT
c T D

dt
ρ

α
 + − ⋅∇ + ∇ ⋅ = 
 

v v q  Energy balance equation 

 k T= − ∇q  Heat flux 
:mechD β= s ε  Viscoplastic dissipation 

( )conv envq h T T= −  Heat convection 
( )cond cond toolq h T T= −  Heat conduction 

Table 2. Nomenclature. 

s  Stress deviator 
p  Pressure 

0ρ  density in the reference configuration 
b body forces vector per unit of mass 
v  Velocity field 
σ  Cauchy’s stress tensor 
ε  Strain rate 
effμ  Effective viscosity 

μ  Viscosity parameter 
m Viscosity exponent 
c Specific heat 
T Temperature 

meshv  Velocity of the mesh 
k  Thermal conductivity 
β  Fraction of plastic dissipation converted into heat 

convh  Heat transfer coefficient by convection  

condh  Heat transfer coefficient by conduction  
α Speed-up factor 

envT  Environmental temperature 

toolT  Tool temperature 

A two-stage simulation strategy is adopted [14]. A coupled thermo-mechanical problem is 
solved in both stages [13,16]. 

The first stage consists of a “forced” transient analysis aiming to reach the steady-state quickly. 
This objective is achieved by increasing the thermal diffusivity in the energy balance equation. An 
acceleration parameter is used to reduce the inertia term to speed-up this transient stage and reach 
the steady-state temperature field in a decreased number of time-steps. 



Metals 2017, 7, 491  4 of 14 

 

The second stage performs a transient analysis in which the temperature and velocity field 
obtained in the first stage are considered as initial condition. 

In the first stage, an Eulerian framework is adopted for the workpiece. Therefore, no periodic 
stage due to the rotating movement of the tool is assumed. In the second stage, an apropos kinematic 
framework is adopted taking advantage of combining ALE, Eulerian and Lagrangian formulations 
[9,10]. The Lagrangian framework is used for the rotating pin, the ALE framework is considered at 
the stir zone of the work-piece (TMAZ), and the Eulerian framework is used in the remaining part of 
the work-piece. This allows the analysis of non-cylindrical pin shapes presenting the periodic 
solution due to the rotation of the tool. 

The two-stage speed-up strategy performs the entire simulation preserving the capabilities of 
the original model to predict FSW forces and torque for any types of pin shape in addition to the 
material flow visualization [14]. 

Both plastic dissipation and friction are considered as the sources of heat generation. Friction is 
modelled by a modified Norton’s friction model developed by authors in [15]. This model considers 
the effect of a non-uniform pressure distribution under the tool (see Figure 1 for a qualitative 
presentation of pressure distribution around the tool) which results in higher friction in front of the 
tool and lower friction at the rear of the tool. 

 
Figure 1. Pressure distribution considering a fully slip contact condition (reproduced from [15]). 

The modified Norton’s friction law reads: 

( ) ( )1,  ,  q qT T T Ta x T a x T
−

= Δ Δ = Δτ v v v n  (1) 

where Tτ  is the friction shear stress, 0 ≤ q ≤ 1 is the sensitivity parameter and TΔv  is the relative 

sliding velocity between the tool and the workpiece contact surfaces. T
T

Δ
=

Δ
v

n
v

 is the sliding 

direction. The non-uniform consistency parameter ( ),a x T  is defined by the following expression, 
to be considered at the tool-workpiece interface, as: 

( ) ( )max min max min0.5 tanh 6
x

a x a a a a
R

 
= + + − 

 
 (2) 

being x the position of each point located at the tool/workpiece interface, with respect to the rotation 
axis, projected along the welding direction and R the shoulder radius. Friction tractions vary from 
the maximum value at the front side of the shoulder to the minimum value at the rear side. Since the 
temperature in the working zone does not vary significantly, the maximum ( maxa ) and minimum 
( mina ) consistency parameters are assumed to be dependent on the average working temperature 
only. 



Metals 2017, 7, 491  5 of 14 

 

3. Validation of Numerical Model from Experimental Data 

In this section, the numerical simulation of the FSW process is performed for a threaded pin 
tool. The results obtained using the modified Norton’s friction model are compared with the 
experimental measurements performed by the industrial partner (Sapa). 

The workpiece geometry is shown in Figure 2 (300 × 50 × 10 mm3). The diameter of the tool 
shoulder is 18 mm. The average diameter and height of the tool pin are 7 mm and 4 mm, 
respectively. Figure 3 shows the experimental settings including the FSW robot, workpiece, tool, 
clamping system and thermocouples. The process parameters are: advancing velocity = 400 mm/min 
and tool rotation speed = 600 rpm. The material used in this test is aluminium alloy (AA6063-T6). 
The temperature-dependent thermo-mechanical properties are shown in Figure 4. 

Figure 2 shows the position of the thermocouples in a transversal section of the workpiece with 
respect to the weld line. Their distance in mm with respect to a reference axis located at top left on 
the weld line is: A1(170,11,−5), A3(175,11,−2), A5(170,5,−5), A6(170,0,−3). 

 
Figure 2. Workpiece geometry and the location of the thermocouples (in mm). 

Figure 3. Experimental setting and pin detail. 



Metals 2017, 7, 491  6 of 14 

 

 
Figure 4. Material characterization. 

The simulation considers a domain of 50 × 50 × 10 mm3. The tool advances in the x direction of 
the reference axes. It is assumed that 70% of the plastic dissipation is converted into heat [17,18]. 

Friction parameters amin and amax at the tool/workpiece interfaces (both pin and shoulder) are 
determined from the calibration of the friction model by matching the numerical results with the 
experimental data in terms of temperature evolution and process forces. 

The analysis adopts amin = 5 × 107 and amax = 109 at tool/workpiece interfaces. A vertical velocity of 
2.4 mm/s is applied on the tool in order to obtain the vertical force exerted on the tool with the 
experiments. 

The heat transfer coefficient, defining the heat loss by convection through the surrounding 
environment is: hconv = 10 W/m2·K where the environment temperature is Tenv = 20 °C. 

The heat transfer coefficient by conduction (Newton’s law) between the workpiece and the 
back-plate has been set to hcond = 2500 W/m2·K. 

The values of heat loss by convection and conduction are obtained from series of calibration 
tests. The calibrated values are in the expected range. Typical values of heat transfer coefficients 
reported in the literature range from hcond = 350 W/m2·K in Chao et al. [19] to hcond = 5000 W/m2·K in 
Khandkar et al. [20]. 

Note that radiation is an important heat loss mechanism at the Heat Affected Zone (HAZ), due 
to the high temperature field induced by the heat source. The radiation heat flux qrad can be 
calculated using Stefan-Boltzmann’s law: qrad = ( )4env4 TT −σε . The contribution of heat radiation can 
be also expressed as qrad = hrad (T − Tenv); where hrad (T) = ( )3env2envenv23 TTTTTT +++σε . 

Heat is lost through the environment by a combination of convection and radiation. In practice, 
it is difficult to discriminate the effects of both heat transfer modes. For this reason, the numerical 
model assumes a combined heat transfer law, accounting for both heat convection and radiation: 
qconv (T) = hconv (T − Tenv). In this case, qconv represents the heat flux due to the simultaneous convection 
and radiation mechanisms, and hconv is the corresponding equivalent heat transfer coefficient. 

The mesh used in the simulation consists of 70,000 nodes and 400,000 tetrahedral elements. The 
mesh resolutions at the tool and the workpiece are shown in Figure 5. A finer mesh is used in the 
vicinity of the pin-tool to capture the high temperature gradient in the TMAZ and to accurately 
define the geometry details. 

In order to boost the convergence rate of this highly non-linear and coupled thermo-mechanical 
problem, a piecewise linearized Norton-Hoff model for different temperatures and strain rate values 
is assumed [14]. 



Metals 2017, 7, 491  7 of 14 

 

 
(a) (b) (c) 

Figure 5. 3D tetrahedral mesh used: (a) the tool; (b) the workpiece (detail at the stir zone) and (c) the 
workpiece (larger view). 

The agreement between the resulting values of torques, longitudinal, transversal and vertical 
forces obtained from the numerical model and the experimental measurements is significantly 
noticeable. Thanks to the friction model proposed by the authors, the overall numerical model is able 
to predict the transversal forces in agreement with the experimental data, while the commonly used 
friction laws such as Coulomb or Norton are incapable of capturing it [15]. In this work, the effect of 
the non-uniform pressure distribution below the tool translates into a non-uniform distribution of 
plastic dissipation, temperatures and friction tractions. This non-uniformity allows for the 
development of the transversal force up to the actual value recorded in the experimental 
measurements. Both experimental and numerical outcomes predict transversal forces higher than 
longitudinal forces. 

Hence, the proposed framework for the numerical simulation of FSW process is capable of 
capturing accurately the mechanical results (Table 3). This also vouches for the robustness of our 
friction model proposed for the FSW. 

The total processing time on an Intel core i7 processor is approximately 10 h. 

Table 3. Forces and torque. 

q = 0.1; Vz = −0.0024 Numerical Model: amax = 1 × 109; amin = 5 × 107 Measurements: Sapa WT10 
Torque (N·m) 64 62 

Longitudinal force (N) 810 700 
Transversal force (N) 1300 1000 

Vertical force (N) 8200 8000 

Figure 6 illustrates the temperature evolution at the four thermocouples located in the 
workpiece. In this figure, the comparison between numerical (Num) and experimental (Exp) results 
is presented. The response of the numerical model is found to be in a good agreement with the 
experimental measurements. Both experimental and numerical outcomes predict higher maximum 
temperature in the weld line decreasing with distance from the weld line and top surface. 

In this work, the experimental data is provided at steady-state. Therefore, the transient 
simulation is performed until the (periodic) steady-state is reached. The maximum temperature 
recorded during the welding provides information indicating whether the process has attained the 
(periodic) steady-state [21,22]. Under these conditions, a comparison between the temperature fields 
obtained from the numerical simulation and the experimental measurements is performed. 



Metals 2017, 7, 491  8 of 14 

 

(A1) (A3) 

(A5) (A6) 

Figure 6. Temperature evolution in 4 thermocouples (A1,A3,A5,A6) located in the workpiece. 

Figure 7 shows the temperature field at steady-state on the workpiece surface. The temperature 
distribution reveals a lower temperature at the head of the pin than the rear side. Thus, the flow 
stress is higher where the material is hotter. Figures 8 and 9 show the velocity and plastic dissipation 
contour fills computed from the numerical model. It can be clearly seen that the numerical model is 
able to represent the non-uniform distribution of the mentioned fields due to the use of the enhanced 
friction model. This non-uniformity results in the appearance of the transversal forces exerted on the 
tool. 

 
Figure 7. Temperature contour fills. 



Metals 2017, 7, 491  9 of 14 

 

 
Figure 8. Velocity contour fills. 

 
Figure 9. Plastic dissipation contour fills. 

The temperature contour fill on the tool surface is displayed in Figure 10. Note that the 
temperature varies between 360 °C and 455 °C. This shows that the temperature dependent 
parameters of the material and friction models vary only within this range of temperature at the 
TMAZ. 



Metals 2017, 7, 491  10 of 14 

 

 
Figure 10. Temperature distribution on the tool. 

4. FSW (Friction Stir Welding) with Featureless and Threaded Cylindrical Pin 

In this section, the thermo-mechanical results obtained for a featureless cylindrical pin 
(presented in [15]) are compared with the ones presented in the previous section for a threaded 
cylindrical pin. The comparison between these two cases is carried out after validating both 
simulations using threaded and featureless pins against the experimental measurements. The 
coupled thermo-mechanical model enriched with the enhanced friction model and the two-stage 
speed-up strategy used in both cases is identical. Thanks to the apropos kinematic framework 
adopted, the model can handle arbitrary pin shapes such as threaded profiles. 

In both cases, the workpiece geometry, material properties and process parameters (advancing 
and rotating speed) are identical. The tool tilt angle is kept constant at 0° and the plunging depth of 
the pin-shoulder into the workpiece is negligible during the full welding process. The diameter and 
height of the featureless tool pin are 7 mm and 4 mm, respectively. 

The values amin = 4 × 107 and amax = 8 × 108 are used at tool/workpiece interfaces using the 
featureless tool while using threaded tool higher values of consistency parameters are used (amin = 5 × 
107 and amax = 109). The higher values of consistency parameters translate into an increase in the 
friction value which is consistent with the effect of the threads in a FSW process. 

The vertical velocity is 2.5 mm/s in the case of featureless tool pins in order to obtain the applied 
vertical loading. It is slightly higher than the value applied for the threaded case. 

The results for forces and torque using both types of tool profile are presented in Table 4. Both 
cases present similar results, with lower values of forces and torque due to the thread effect, while 
maintaining a good agreement with the experimental measurements. A similar trend is also 
observed in reference [2] where the effects of pin features on material flow and friction stir 
weldability of two different aluminum alloys are studied. It is shown there that the featureless pin 
results in higher forces and torque than the threaded pin. 

Table 4. Forces and torque (comparison between FSW process using threaded and featureless pin). 

 
Threaded Pin Featureless Pin 

Numerical Model Measurements Numerical Model Measurements
Torque (N·m) 64 62 64 64 

Longitudinal force (N) 810 700 870 500 
Transversal force (N) 1300 1000 1700 1400 

Vertical force (N) 8200 8000 8500 8200 

Figure 11 presents the temperature contours under the tool on the workpiece for both threaded 
and unthreaded tool pins. In the case of threaded pin, the difference in the temperature distribution 



Metals 2017, 7, 491  11 of 14 

 

on the retreating side and advancing side is more visible than in the unthreaded case. Hence, the 
friction model proposed is able to capture the non-uniformly distributed temperature around the 
tool. 

(a) (b) 

Figure 11. Temperature distribution under the tool. (a) Threaded pin; (b) Featureless pin. 

The distribution of the plastic dissipation under the tool shoulder on the workpiece using both 
tool pins is compared in Figure 12. The plastic dissipation is higher in front of the tool when using 
featureless pin and it is higher in the rear of the tool if threaded tool pin is considered. 

(a) (b) 

Figure 12. Plastic dissipation contours under the tool. (a) Threaded pin; (b) Featureless pin. 

Figure 13 presents the velocity streamlines of three points located on a line 5 mm away from the 
rotation axis on the advancing side of both featureless and threaded pin tool and 2 mm away from 



Metals 2017, 7, 491  12 of 14 

 

the top surface. The differences observed in the streamlines show how the pin features affect the 
material movement. As expected, the threaded pin increases the vertical movement. It is known that 
one of the threads effect on the FSW process is the increase in the vertical movement of the material 
around the pin [23]. Even without the threading, some amount of vertical material movement takes 
place. This was reported in [24] for a cylindrical unthreaded pin. The path of the two points which 
are not affected by the threaded pin movement passes around the featureless pin. Hence, separation 
of the streamlines on the advancing side around the featureless pin is observed. 

 

(a) (b) 

Figure 13. Velocity streamlines around the tool. (a) Threaded pin; (b) Featureless pin. 



Metals 2017, 7, 491  13 of 14 

 

5. Summary and Conclusions 

In this work, numerical simulations and the experimental calibration of a fast and accurate FEM 
(Finite Element Analysis) model for FSW analysis of a threaded cylindrical tool pin are presented. 
The main characteristics of the model are: 

• Coupled thermo-mechanical scheme; 
• Simulation of arbitrary pin shapes; 
• Heat generation due to both friction and plastic dissipation; 
• Piecewise linear viscoplastic constitutive model; 
• Two-stage strategy for a significantly reduction of computational time; 
• Enhanced friction model accounting for the effect of non-uniform pressure distribution. 

The results of the FSW simulation using a threaded tool pin are presented in terms of 
longitudinal, transversal and vertical forces, torque, as well as temperature distribution and 
compared with the experimental evidence. The agreement between the numerical and experimental 
results, both in terms of thermal and mechanical behaviours, is remarkable. 

A comparison between the thermo-mechanical responses in FSW using threaded and 
featureless cylindrical pins is also presented. Somewhat lower values of forces and torque are 
observed in case of threaded pin than featureless one. The non-uniform distribution of heat 
generation around the tool using the enhanced friction model is more visible in case of using a 
threaded pin. The threaded tool pin is found to increase the vertical movement of the surrounding 
material. 

It is shown that the proposed numerical model for the simulation of the FSW process is capable 
of capturing the thermo-mechanical responses with remarkable accuracy for both featureless and 
threaded pin tools. 

Acknowledgments: Financial support from European Council-H2020 MG-2015_SingleStage—A Program 
under EMUSIC Project—Efficient Manufacturing for Aerospace Components Using Additive Manufacturing, 
Net Shape HIP and Investment Casting—is gratefully acknowledged. 

Author Contributions: Narges Dialami, Miguel Cervera and Michele Chiumenti developed the numerical 
model; Antonio Segatori and Wojciech Osikowicz designed and performed the experiments; Narges Dialami 
analyzed the data. 

Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest. 

References 

1. Ilangovan, M.; Rajendra Boopathy, S.; Balasubramanian, V. Effect of tool pin profile on microstructure and 
tensile properties of friction stir welded dissimilar AA6061-AA5086 aluminium alloy joints. Def. Technol. 
2015, 11, 174–184. 

2. Reza-E-Rabby, M.; Reynolds, A.P. Effect of tool pin thread forms on friction stir weldability of different 
aluminum alloys. Procedia Eng. 2014, 90, 637–642. 

3. Papahn, H.; Bahemmat, P.; Haghpanahi, M.; Pour Aminaie, I. Effect of friction stir welding tool on 
temperature, applied forces and weld quality. IET Sci. Meas. Technol. 2015, 9, 475–484. 

4. Rezaee Hajideha, M.; Farahani, M.; Davoud Alavi, S.A.; Molla Ramezani, N. Investigation on the effects of 
tool geometry on the microstructureand the mechanical properties of dissimilar friction stir welded 
polyethylene and polypropylene sheets. J. Manuf. Process. 2017, 26, 269–279. 

5. Yu, Z.; Zhang, W.; Choo, H.; Feng, Z.L. Transient heat and material flow modeling of friction stir 
processing of magnesium alloy using threaded tool. Metall. Mater. Trans. A 2012, 43, 724–737. 

6. Colegrove, P.A.; Shercliff, H.R. 3-Dimensional CFD modelling of flow round a threaded friction stir 
welding tool profile. J. Mater. Process. Technol. 2005, 169, 320–327. 

7. Atharifar, H.; Lin, D.; Kovacevic, R. Numerical and experimental investigations on the loads carried by the 
tool during friction stir welding. J. Mater. Eng. Perform. 2009, 18, 339–350. 

8. Mishra, R.S.; Ma, Z.Y. Friction Stir Welding and Processing; ASM International: Geauga County, OH, USA, 
2007. 



Metals 2017, 7, 491  14 of 14 

 

9. Chiumenti, M.; Cervera, M.; Agelet de Saracibar, C.; Dialami, N. Numerical modeling of friction stir 
welding processes. Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Eng. 2012, 254, 353–369. 

10. Dialami, N.; Chiumenti, M.; Cervera, M.; Agelet de Saracibar, C. An apropos kinematic framework for the 
numerical modeling of friction stir welding. Comput. Struct. 2013, 117, 48–57. 

11. Dialami, N.; Chiumenti, M.; Cervera, M.; Agelet de Saracibar, C.; Ponthot, J.-P. Material Flow 
Visualization in Friction Stir Welding via Particle Tracing. Int. J. Metal Form. 2015, 8, 167–181. 

12. Dialami, N.; Cervera, M.; Chiumenti, M.; Agelet de Saracibar, C. Local-global strategy for the prediction of 
residual stresses in FSW processes. Int. J. Adv. Manuf. Technol. 2017, 88, 3099–3111. 

13. Dialami, N.; Chiumenti, M.; Cervera, M.; Agelet de Saracibar, C. Challenges in thermo-mechanical 
analysis of friction stir welding processes. Arch. Comput. Methods Eng. 2017, 24, 189–225. 

14. Dialami, N.; Chiumenti, M.; Cervera, M.; Agelet de Saracibar, C. A fast and accurate two-stage strategy to 
evaluate the effect of the pin tool profile on metal flow, torque and forces during friction stir welding. Int. 
J. Mech. Sci. 2017, 122, 215–227. 

15. Dialami, N.; Chiumenti, M.; Cervera, M.; Segatori, A.; Osikowicz, W. Enhanced friction model for friction 
stir welding (FSW) analysis: Simulation and experimental validation. Int. J. Mech. Sci. 2017, 133, 555–567. 

16. Ryzhakov, P.; Rossi, R.; Oñate, E. An algorithm for the simulation of thermally coupled low speed flow 
problems. Int. J. Numer. Methods Fluids 2011, 65, 1217–1230. 

17. Ravichandran, G.; Rosakis, A.J.; Hodowany, J.; Rosakis, P. On the conversion of plastic work into heat 
during high strain rate deformation. AIP Conf. Proc. 2002, 620, 557. 

18. Nandan, R.; DebRoy, T.; Bhadeshia, H.K.D.H. Recent advances in friction stir welding—Process, 
weldment structure and properties. Prog. Mater. Sci. 2008, 53, 980–1023. 

19. Chao, Y.J.; Qi, X.; Tang, W. Heat transfer in friction stir welding—Experimental and numerical studies. J. 
Manuf. Sci. Eng. 2003, 125, 138–145. 

20. Khandkar, M.Z.H.; Khan, J.A.; Reynolds, A.P.; Sutton, M.A. Predicting residual stresses in friction stir 
welded metals. J. Mater. Process. Technol. 2006, 174, 195–203. 

21. Serio, L.; Palumbo, D.; Galietti, U.; De Filippis, L.; Ludovico, A. Effect of friction stir process parameters on 
the mechanical and thermal behavior of 5754-H111 aluminum plates. Materials 2016, 9, 122. 

22. De Filippis, L.; Serio, L.; Palumbo, D.; De Finis, R.; Galietti, U. Optimization and characterization of the 
friction stir welded sheets of AA5754-H111: Monitoring of the quality of joints with thermographic 
techniques. Materials 2017, 10, 1165. 

23. Seidel, T.U.; Reynolds, A.P. Visualization of the material flow in AA2195 friction-stir welds using a marker 
insert technique. Metall. Mater. Trans. A 2001, 32, 2879–2884. 

24. Mishra, R.S.; De, P.S.; Kumar, N. Fundamentals of the friction stir process. In Friction Stir Welding and 
Processing; Springer: Berlin, Germany, 2014; pp. 13–58. 

© 2017 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access 
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution 
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/). 


