

















































High cycle fatigue simulation: A new stepwise load-advancing strategy 

L. G. Barbu*, S. Oller, X. Martinez and A. Barbat 

International Center for Numerical Methods in Engineering (CIMNE) 
Universidad Politécnica de Cataluña 

C1 - Campus Nord UPC, C/ Gran Capitán S/N, 08034 Barcelona, Spain 
e-mail: lgratiela@cimne.upc.edu; sergio.oller@upc.edu; x.martinez@upc.edu; alex.barbat@upc.edu 

* Corresponding author. Tel. +34934016473;  E-mail: lgratiela@cimne.upc.edu

Abstract. A stepwise load-advancing strategy for cyclic loading will be presented in this paper that yields 
convergence in reasonable computational time for highly nonlinear behaviour occurring past the S-N 
curve. The algorithm is also effective when dealing with combinations of cyclical loads. The strategy is 
coupled to a continuum damage model for mechanical fatigue analysis. A brief overview of the 
constitutive model is also presented although it is not the main focus of this work. The capabilities of the 
proposed procedure are shown in two numerical examples. The model is validated by comparison to 
experimental results. 

Key words: High cycle fatigue, Continuum damage mechanics, Load-advance strategy, Post elastic 
behaviour. 

1. INTRODUCTION

Steel fatigue has been extensively studied at microstructural level with a clear emphasis on its 
chemical structure and on the influence that the latter has on material behaviour and its failure. When 
looking at the phenomenon from the microscale, it can be seen that a large amount of the material internal 
energy is spent in a rearrangement of its internal structure to accommodate better the cyclical load, 
followed by the gliding of the interatomic planes phase.  Metal grains suffer plastic slip and non-linear 
behaviour [1], and these irreversible processes are responsible for crack initiation under cyclic loading. 

Regarding the high cycle fatigue (HCF) phenomenon, it is known that the type of fracture involved at 
macroscale level occurs with little or no plastic deformation [2]. Therefore, HCF does not introduce 
macroscopic plastic strain, but it introduces porosity [3]. These are the reasons that have led to describe 
this failure mode by means of damage models. These can be categorized into five groups: damage curve 
approach, crack growth- based approach, life curve modification approach, energy based damage theories 
and continuum damage mechanics (CDM) approaches [4]. However, in spite of the great number of 
models proposed in the HCF field, there is not yet a universally accepted one.  

In particular, the CDM approach is based on the original concepts of Kachanov [5], [6]for treating 
creep damage problems. The posterior work of Chaboche [7], [8], Chaboche and Lemaitre  [9], [10], 
Wang [11], Wang and Lou [12], Li et al. [13] and Oller et al. [14] established the CDM framework as a 
valid alternative to the fracture mechanics formulations in order to asses in a unified way both crack 
initiation and propagation. Furthermore, they enhanced the study of fatigue problems by recognizing that 
the theoretical structure of continuum mechanics, such as damage, is suitable for the study of nonlinear 
fatigue problems and that the mechanical effect known as fatigue produces a loss of material strength as a 
function of the number of cycles, load amplitude, reversion index, etc.  

Regarding fatigue life prediction, many different approaches have been proposed such as the early 
methods of stress-life approach and strain-life approach [15]. One of the most used models is based on the 
Palmgren-Miner linear damage law [16], [17]. However, such models do not recognize the effects of prior 
history of loading, or the load sequence on the subsequent life. Strain-life models, on the other hand, 
account for the local plasticity effects at stress concentrations regions [18]. Information is abundant in 
literature as there are many different crack initiation models [19], with a large number of empirical 
models proposed for the long crack growth prediction [20]. Despite the abundant information existent on 
fatigue constitutive models, no attention is given to load advancing strategies utilized in numerical 
simulations, where the main focus of this paper resides. 

NOTICE: this is the author’s version of a work that was accepted for publication in Engineering Structures. Changes 
resulting from the publishing process, such as peer review, editing, corrections, structural formatting, and other 
quality control mechanisms may not be reflected in this document. Changes may have been made to this work since it 
was submitted for publication. A definitive version was subsequently published in Engineering Structures, [VOL 97, 
(15 August 2015)] DOI# 10.1016/j.engstruct.2015.04.012



 

2 
 

The basis of the fatigue constitutive model used was initially developed by Oller et al. [14]. The 
model establishes a relationship between the residual material strength and the damage threshold 
evolution, controlled by the material internal variables and by a new state variable of fatigue that 
incorporates the influence of the cyclic load. A brief overview of the constitutive formulation for the HCF 
case is provided in order to clarify the material behaviour exhibited in the numerical examples. Several 
model assumptions are to be made. Defect concentration on the microscale occurs during the whole 
period of cyclic loading. This is reflected in the model in a continuous reduction of material strength, 
occurring even in the elastic stage. Stiffness degradation occurs only in the post critical stage, once the S-
N curve has been passed and, therefore, only in the final stage before failure.  The damage parameter has 
a phenomenological significance indicating the irreversibility of the fatigue process. 

Depending on the size of the domain chosen for the fatigue numerical simulation, computational time 
can vary considerably. Nowadays, running simulations at macroscale level (mechanical part, structural 
element) continues to be a challenge, especially if the high level of structural complexity attained at the 
microscale needs to be taken into account to some extent at other scales. This paper aims at offering a 
stepwise load-advancing strategy that allows a saving of computational time and can help push the barrier 
of what if possible in terms of numerical simulation one step further. 

The strategy can be especially effective when dealing with HCF where material lives are in the range 
of 106 – 107 cycles. If a single loading cycle is described by n loading steps, then the number of loading 
steps required to complete a HCF analysis would be in the order of 107 x n. Furthermore, if the 
mechanical piece has a complex geometry and a high level of discretization is required at finite element 
level, then at each of the 107 x n load steps a large number of constitutive operations need to be computed 
for each integration point. The above serve as a clear example of why load-advancing strategies are of the 
utmost importance in HCF simulations. 

Furthermore, increasingly more attention has been given to material behaviour in the very high cycle 
regime from an experimental point of view. The general belief that steel experiences no alteration in its 
properties after reaching its fatigue limit at 107 cycles has been invalidated [21], [22], [23]. In this 
context, this paper provides a tool for rapid automatized time-advance that allows taking numerical 
simulations beyond the limit of 107 cycles in reasonable computational time.    

2. FATIGUE DAMAGE MODEL 

A brief description of the constitutive model used in this paper is offered in this section. The 
fundamentals of a fatigue continuum damage model are presented with a clear emphasis on the model’s 
dependence on S-N curves. An exhaustive description of the formulation used can be found in Oller et al. 
[14], where the complete thermo-mechanical constitutive model for the prediction of fatigue effects in 
structures is formulated. The model is capable of taking into account the combined effect of mean stress 
and multi-axial stress states. The treatment of the highly complex processes generated by fatigue is made 
from a phenomenological point of view. 

2.1. Mechanical damage formulation 

The free Helmholtz energy is formulated in the reference configuration for elastic Green strains,
e
ijij EE =  , as [24], [25] 

)(
2

1
)1(),( 0

0 klijklijij
ECE

m
ddE −=Ψ=Ψ  (1) 

where 0m  is the material density, eijij EE = is the total strain tensor, 10 ≤≤ d is the internal damage 

variable taking values between its initial value 0 and its maximum value 1 and 0ijklC   is the original 

constitutive tensor.  
Considering the second thermodynamic law (Clausius-Duhem inequality – [26] [27] [28]), the 

mechanical dissipation can be obtained as [24]  



 

3 
 

0≥
∂
Ψ∂

−=Ξ d
d
  (2) 

The accomplishment of this dissipation condition (Equation (2) demands that the expression of the 
stress should be defined as (Coleman method; see [28])  

klijkl
ij

ij ECdE
mS 00 )1( −=

∂
Ψ∂

=  (3) 

Also, from the last expressions, the secant constitutive tensor sijklC  can be obtained as:  

0
2

0 )1()( ijkl
klijij

ijs
ijkl CdEE

m
E
S

dC −=
∂∂
Ψ∂

=
∂

∂
=  (4) 

where ijS is the stress tensor for a single material point. 

2.2. Threshold damage function oriented to fatigue analysis. Phenomenological approach 

The effects caused by applying an increasing number of loading cycles are taken into account by 
means of a proposed ),,( max RSNfred  function. This function is introduced in the above formulation in 

the expression of the damage threshold surface, ),( dSF ij
D , proposed by [28], [29] and [30]. The number 

of cycles N can then be incorporated as a new variable. This enables the classical constitutive damage 
formulation to account for fatigue phenomena by translating the accumulation of number of cycles into a 
readjustment and/or movement of the damage threshold function. 

The non-linear behaviour caused by fatigue is introduced in this procedure implicitly, by incorporating 
a fatigue state variable ),,( max RSNf red ,  that is irreversible and depends on the number of cycles, the 

maximum value of the equivalent stress in the material maxS , and on the factor of reversion of the 

equivalent stress, 
max

min

S
S

R = . This new variable affects the residual strength of the material by modifying 

the damage threshold, ),,( NdSF ij
D , either on the equivalent stress function  )( ij

D Sf  ( equation (5a)), or 

on the damage strength threshold ),( dSK ij
D (equation (5b)) [14].   

0),(
),,(

)(
),,(

),,(

max

'

'

≤−= dSK
RSNf

Sf
NdSF ij

D

RNSf

red

ij
D

ij
D

ij
D

  

 (5a) 

0),,(),()(),,(

),,(

max
''

'

≤⋅−=
  

NdSK

redij
D

ij
D

ij
D

ij
D

RSNfdSKSfNdSF  (6b) 

In the above, ),,(/ max
' RSNfff red

DD = , is the reduced equivalent stress function in the undamaged 

space, ),,(' NdSK ij
D  is the fatigue damage strength threshold, and dtdd

t

∫=
0

 the damage internal 

variable. In the following, the form in equation (5a) has been used for the damage threshold criterion.  
The evolution of the damage variable is defined as  

D

D

f
F

d
∂
∂

= µ  (7) 



 

4 
 

being µ the consistency damage factor, which is equivalent to the consistency plastic factor defined in 
[24]. Consequently, for the isotropic damage case,  

redf
d

µ =  (8) 

2.3. Function of residual strength reduction for fatigue – Wöhler curve definition 

Wöhler or “Stress-Num. of cycles” (S-N) curves (Figure 1)  are experimentally obtained by subjecting 
identical smooth specimens to cyclic harmonic stresses and establishing their life span measured in 
number of cycles. The curves depend on the level of the maximum applied stress and the ratio between 
the lowest and the highest stresses (R=Smin/Smax). In Figure 1b Slim is the endurance limit for a reversion 
factor of -1 and 0fS is the material elastic limit. In Figure 1a the instantaneous stress level is depicted, 
while in Figure 1b the cyclic stress is represented only by the maximum value it reaches in every cycle. 
Usually, S-N curves are obtained for fully reversed stress (R=Smin/Smax=-1) by rotating bending fatigue 
tests. 

 
Figure 1 a: Stress evolution at a single point; b: S-N (Wöhler’s) Curves 

S-N curves are, therefore, fatigue life estimators for a material point with a fixed maximum stress and 
a given ratio R.   If, after a number of cycles lower than the cycles to failure, the cyclic load stops, a 
change in the material’s elastic threshold is expected due to accumulation of fatigue cycles. Furthermore, 
if the number of cycles exceeds Nf, being Nf the fatigue life as resulting from Figure 2, the material will 
fail with the consequent reduction of strength and stiffness. The change in strength is quantified by the 
strength reduction function ),,( max RSNfred , while the change in stiffness is taken into account by means 
of the damage parameter. In Figure 2 Se is the endurance limit for any given reversion factor and Sth is the 
elastic threshold limit.  

 
Figure 2: Schematic representation of the evolution of the residual strength with the applied load and 

number of cycles. 



 

5 
 

In the case of a cyclic load with constant Smax and R throughout the entire life of a material, the S-N 
curve is sufficient for determining fatigue life. However, when dealing with different load interactions the 
main focus resides on the residual strength curve. The curve quantifies the loss of strength in the material 
as the number of cycles accumulates and as load characteristics change. 

All fatigue numerical simulations are based on the Wöhler curves obtained experimentally. These 
curves are described in an analytical form with the help of material parameters. Their expression, as well 
as the analytical definition of the strength reduction function, is connected to the experimental curve and, 
therefore, subjected to change if the material changes. Different analytical definitions can be found in 
[31], [32] and [33], as well as in [14].  

3. STEPWISE LOAD ADVANCING STRATEGY 

3.1. Introduction 

The stepwise load-advancing strategy proposed in this paper uses the formulation described in Oller et 
al. [14] and consists of two different phases. The first one is defined by load-advance being conducted by 
small time increments, with the consequent load variation following a cyclic path. The second phase is 
characterized by load-advance being done with large increments of number of cycles.  

Even though Oller et al. [14] described the possibility of advancing thru large increments of number 
of cycles, the process was not automatic. This implied that it could not be used in real life simulations 
where an in-depth tracking of the material’s progressive degradation was desired, or where the loading 
history was comprised of several different cyclical loads. 

This paper proposes an algorithm that automatically switches from one phase to the other, going 
repeatedly back and forth between both in accordance with the loading input and the damage increase 
rate.  

3.2. Load-tracking phase 

This phase is characterized by the load being applied in small increments. The purpose is to determine 
and save the characteristics of the cyclical load. The tags Ai referenced in the following can be seen in the 
flow chart for this phase, on the left side of Figure 3. 

Each load cycle will be divided into m small steps, a value that is user defined. At the beginning of 
each increment being conducted in this phase, both the load factor and the number of cycles will be 
updated (A1). Based on the multiaxial stress state, the equivalent stress will be computed according to the 
damage criterion chosen (von Mises, Mohr-Coulomb, Tresca, Drucker-Prager). After that, the difference 
between the equivalent stress )( ij

D Sf of current increment k and previous increment k-1 will be 

compared to the difference between the equivalent stress in k-1 with respect to k-2 (A2)(See Figure 3). 
When the sign of these two quantities is different, either a maximum or a minimum has been recorded in 
increment k-1(A3). After having detected both the maximum and the minimum equivalent stress for each 
integration point, the reversion factor is computed, R=Smin/Smax. After each new cycle i+1 is described, the 
reversion factor is compared to its value in the previous cycle i. The normalized variation of the reversion 
factor is evaluated for each integration point GP and the sum of all the variations detected is computed 
into a stabilization norm η  as shown in equation (8) (A4). 

.
1

1
toler

R
RR

GP
i
GP

i
GP

i
GP ≤

−
=∑ +

+

η  (9) 

A new value for ),,( max RSNfred is computed and the equivalent stress is then affected by it and 
compared to the damage strength threshold in the current increment (A5). The check for global 
convergence is made and, if this is achieved, then the stabilization norm is compared to a user defined 
tolerance. When this norm is below a given tolerance, it can be said that the reversion factor has a stable 
value throughout the solid (A6). A flag is then activated indicating that in the next increment the large 



 

6 
 

phase algorithm should be followed. If the value of η is not below the tolerance, several more cycles are 
then analysed applying small increments. 

This phase is necessary at the beginning of each different cyclical load in order to determine the 
parameters that define the cyclic behaviour at each Gauss point of the structure (R and Smax). Therefore, in 
case of modifying the cyclic load, a new activation is necessary.  

3.3. Large increments phase 

After the stress parameters, R and Smax, stabilize throughout the solid from one cycle to the other there 
is no need to keep applying small increments as there will be no change in the stress state unless either the 
elastic threshold is reached or the applied cyclical load changes. Therefore, the load level can be 
maintained at its maximum value and large number of cycles increments can be applied. The tags Bi 
referenced in the following can be seen in the flow chart for this phase, on the right side of Figure 3. 

In this phase the variable is not the level of the load, kept constant at its maximum value, but the 
number of cycles, which, in each increment, is updated with a new large Nc step (B1). After obtaining the 
equivalent stress, a new value for ),,( max RSNfred  is computed directly with the current number of cycles 

and the previously stored values for R and Smax (B2).The equivalent stress affected by ),,( max RSNfred  is 
then compared with the current damage strength threshold. If nonlinear behaviour occurs at at least one 
integration point a flag is activated (B3). When global convergence of the problem has been obtained in 
the current increment and the flag has been activated inside the constitutive loop, the next increment will 
be conducted with the load-tracking algorithm (B4).If convergence has been reached but the flag was not 
activated, in the next increment another large step will be applied. 

3.4. Automatic load-tracking phase activation 

The stepwise advancing strategy has the following implications: 
When applying a single cyclical load, load advance will be done by passing initially thru the load-

tracking phase until R stabilizes and η  is lower than the defined tolerance. Afterwards, the advancing 
scheme will be by number of cycles until reaching the elastic threshold. This is when the material has 
been subjected to the number of cycles indicated by the S-N curve. At this stage, the internal forces of the 
structure are modified in order to reach a new equilibrium configuration. This situation leads to a 
variation of the reversion factor and, therefore, of the stress state at integration point level.  The load-
tracking phase is automatically activated. Furthermore, it will be activated at each step where damage 
increases ( 0>d ) due to the change in internal forces. 

The algorithm can be optimized if, after evaluating the Wöhler’s Nf (marked dot in Figure 2) 
corresponding to each equivalent stress level at the beginning of the analysis, a search is made to find the 
minimum fatigue life throughout the solid. The resulting number of cycles can be used as the first step of 
the large increments phase ensuring that the entire span of number of cycles before the damage process 
initiates is done in one step (B1)(See Figure 3). The nonlinear processes occurring past the point damage 
initiates in the first Gauss point will be simulated with a user-defined Nc step in the case of displacement 
controlled simulations where the material can continue bearing the cyclical load after having reached the 
fatigue life given by the S-N curve. This is possible due to a progressive loss of stiffness that ensures that, 
for the same applied cyclical displacement and having reached the S-N curve, stress in the material 
progressively relaxes as it suffers damage until total rupture.  

In the case of applying different cyclic loads, damage can appear either due to fatigue or due to a new 
load being applied that leads to stress values that surpass the elastic threshold. In both cases the model 
will jump automatically from the large increments phase to the load-tracking phase. Even if the different 
cyclic loads applied induce stress levels below the elastic threshold, when passing from one cyclic load to 
another one of different characteristics an activation of the load-tracking is required. This is necessary 
regardless of the elastic regime due to the fact that, by applying a new load, the maximum equivalent 
stress induced and/or the reversion factor has changed and, consequently, the fatigue parameters 
calculated for the first load are no longer valid. 



 

7 
 

 
Figure 3: Flow chart for the stepwise advancing algorithm 

The flow chart presented in Figure 3 shows the operations conducted in both phases, as well as the 
conditions required to jump from load-tracking to large increments. These jumps are indicated with 
hyphenated arrows. 

The algorithm is user controlled by means of two parameters. The first one is the tolerance at which 
the reversion factor norm (defined in section 3.2.) is considered to have converged. If, for instance, a 
numerical tolerance of 10-10 is used, time advance runs the risk of being continually conducted in the 
load-tracking phase. This would lead to a dramatic increase in computational time. On the other hand, if 



 

8 
 

the tolerance is set too high the model may no longer capture changes in the cyclical load applied, leading 
to an incorrect life prediction. The tolerance used for the calculation of the numerical examples presented 
in section 4 was 10-4 and the authors recommend this value for future use of the strategy. 

The second parameter that allows the user to control the developed stepwise load advancing algorithm 
is the number of cycles chosen as time step for the large increments phase. The influence it has is in 
accordance with the level on nonlinearity of the problem. While a too low number of cycles step implies 
an increase in computational time, a too big one can lead to loss of solution convergence. A calibration 
analysis consisting of a study of the solution convergence depending on the number of cycles step is 
highly recommended.  The analysis should begin by using large steps.  Then the Nc used as a step should 
be progressively lowered until convergence is reached, as this would ensure the lowest computational 
time. 

4. NUMERICAL EXAMPLES  

The capabilities of the stepwise load-advancing strategy, together with the fatigue constitutive model 
presented, will be shown with several simulations made over a hexahedral finite element subjected to 
cyclic loads. These examples will illustrate the fatigue behaviour under a single cyclical load and under 
load interaction of two different loads. After that, the model is validated comparing the results obtained 
from the numerical simulation with the results provided by the experiment presented in Marines et al. 
[34]. 

All the examples presented in this section have been calculated with the PLCd finite element code, 
where the formulation presented here has been implemented. A more detailed description of the code and 
some of its capabilities can be obtained from [35], [36], [37] and [38]. 

4.1. Performance of the advancing strategy developed 

In order to understand the capabilities of the stepwise load advancing strategy, a test case of one linear 
hexahedral element with 8 integration points will be presented. A single element was chosen for the 
simulation due to its reduced computational cost and due to the fact that it suffices for accurately showing 
material behaviour as described by the formulation presented.    

4.1.1. Problem definition. Geometry and material. 

The element has one of its faces subjected to a cyclical displacement while the opposite face has 
boundary conditions that fix its longitudinal displacement, allowing transversal expansion and 
contraction.  

 Geometry dimensions are 10x10x10mm.  The material used has the following characteristics: Young 
modulus = 2.01 x 105 MPa ; Poisson ratio = 0.3 ; Static elastic threshold is Su = 838.9MPa and the 
material fracture energy has a value of Gt = Gc = 10 kN/m. The damage model used has exponential 
softening and a Von Mises failure surface. The S-N curve for this material was obtained using the 
analytical formulation described in [32]. The parameters required in order to correctly describe the curve 
are Su, Smax and R.   

One of the model’s particularities is the progressive loss of resistance leading to the initiation of 
damage, represented in the strength reduction curve. In order for it to be clearly differentiated from the 
Wöhler curve, a direct jump to the point where damage initiates was not done. Rather, an approximation 
of the damage initiation point was made by choosing a suitable number of cycles as the time step.  

The first numerical simulation presented exhibits a load history composed of a single cyclical load, 
while the second simulation consists in applying two different cyclical loads. 

The characteristics of the cyclical loads taken into account are: for the first one a reversion factor of 
0.3, a minimum displacement of 0.0114mm and a maximum displacement of 0.038mm; in the second 
case the first load applied is the previous one and, after 106 cycles, this load is replaced by one with a null 
reversion factor, a maximum displacement of 0.035mm and a null minimum displacement. The number of 
cycles adopted as a step for the large increments phase in the first case is 106 cycles. The second case was 
calculated with a step of 105 cycles. 



 

9 
 

4.1.2. Single cyclical load 

Table 1 shows the stresses obtained at each integration point by the imposed displacement presented 
in Figure 4, as well as the fatigue life provided by the FEM model. 

  
(normalized with threshold limit) 

 
Case 

code 
Reversi

on factor 
Max. 

Stress  PG 
Min. 

Stress PG 
Med. 

Stress PG 
Nc at which 

damage initiates 

S1 0,3 0,91 0,273 0,59 4,90E+06 
Table 1: Characterization of the tensional state induced by the single load S1 

 
Figure 4: Applied displacement for load case S1 

The stresses induced by the cyclic displacement applied lead to a fatigue life, according to the material 
Wöhler curve, of 4,9 x 106 cycles. This number of cycles marks the beginning of the nonlinear process 
and, therefore, of the energy dissipation. 

In Figure 5, the stress in the specimen, the material Wöhler curve, the residual strength variable and 
the material damage value are presented. It can be seen that, while the residual strength curve is above the 
Wohler fatigue life curve, there is no stress alteration or damage accumulation.  

The stress level shown refers to the instantaneous stress divided by the elastic threshold. It can be seen 
that at the beginning an initial load-tracking stage is necessary for recording the characteristics of the 
stress evolution: reversion factor, maximum stress value in every cycle and stress amplitude. When the 
cyclic stress characteristics do not change from one loading cycle to the other (at every Gauss point) large 
increments start to be applied, where the load is maintained at the maximum value reached in previous 
cycles and only the number of cycles variable increases. At this point the material is considered to be in 
an elastic state but the evolution of the S-N and of the residual strength curves continues to be monitored.  

Once the number of cycles applied reaches the fatigue life defined by the Wöhler curve for that level 
of maximum stress, event marked by the stress curve intersecting the Wöhler curve, it also intersects the 
residual strength curve. After this point, the stress in the material is higher than the residual strength and a 
softening process begins with the consequent increase of the damage variable. As soon as this event 
occurs at the first Gauss point a load-tracking stage is automatically activated for the entire finite element 
model. This is necessary as the onset of the degradation process leads to a change in the internal forces 
and a new equilibrium configuration is reached. When this equilibrium configuration has stabilized under 
small increments, the stress characteristics from one cycle to the other remain constant. This enables the 
application of a large increment, maintaining the load at the maximum level reached in previous stable 
cycles. However, when applying this large increment the equilibrium is lost as the structure is pushed 
further in the nonlinear zone with a consequent damage accumulation and stiffness loss. This effect can 



 

10 
 

be seen in the stress relaxation occurring at the end of each large scale increment (Figure 5 and Figure 6).  
From that point forward, after each large increment where 0>d , the load-tracking phase is 

automatically activated so that damage evolution can be monitored from cycle to cycle. If, after 
describing several cycles with small increments, the stress state throughout the solid has stabilized, a new 
large increment can be applied. This process is repeated automatically until the material reaches a state of 
complete degradation.   

 

 
Figure 5: Parameters of interest for the fatigue analysis under load S1 

 

 
Figure 6: Parameters of interest for the fatigue analysis under load S1 in the nonlinear zone 

Figure 6 zooms the end part of Figure 5 to show more clearly the material performance described.  
Load-tracking phase is represented by the vertical lines. Large increments phase is represented by the in 
between segments. Both Figure 5 and Figure 6 have a logarithmical scale along the horizontal axis. 

In Figure 7, the effects of material degradation are shown in the stress-strain curve. The vertical axe 
refers to the instantaneous stress level divided by the material elastic limit. The large increments phase 



 

11 
 

occurs only when the displacement is maintained at its maximum value and maxεε = . Therefore, it is 
represented in this figure by the vertical lines descending from the point of maximum stress. The stress 
interval represented by each jump in the stress level quantifies the stress softening caused by a single, 
large number of cycles, interval. Each of these stress-softening intervals is followed by a few unloading 
(until minimum displacement) - loading cycles. These mark the load-tracking phase where a clear change 
in material stiffness is visible.  

It can be seen that, as the material progressively suffers loss of stiffness, for the same large step there 
is less stress softening.  

 
Figure 7: Stress-Strain at integration point for load S1 

Furthermore, in order to demonstrate the good accuracy of the method, this simulation has been done 
with four different sizes for the large increments phase. Figure 8 presents the evolution of the damage 
internal variable as resulting from equation (6) with the number of cycles in all four cases. It can be seen 
that, even though the simulation is done by using different steps in the large increments phase: 50.000, 
100.000, 1 x 106 and 5 x 106 cycles, the damage variable has the same evolution. 

 
Figure 8: Evolution of the damage internal variable with the number of cycles 



 

12 
 

As indicated in Section 3.4 the number of cycles used as a step in the large increments phase is a key 
parameter for the time-advancing algorithm. In Table 2 the computational time obtained for the different 
Nc steps is presented. It can be seen that, even though the simulation is made on a single linear element, 
computational time can vary considerably depending on the number of cycles chosen as time step.  

No. of cycles considered as step 50.000 100.000 1 x 106 5 x 106 
CPU time 0h: 8’:42’’ 0h: 4’: 8’’ 0h: 0’:30’’ 0h: 0’:10’’ 

Table 2: Computational time for case S1 depending on the number of cycles chosen as step 

A comparison was made between the computational time required when using the proposed load-
advancing strategy and the computational time needed if in the nonlinear stage  only load-tracking were 
to be used. As it can be seen from Table 2, the CPU time needed in the case of a step of 1 x 106 cycles 
was 30 seconds for a total analysis of 53.5 x 106 cycles, out of which 4.9 x 106 cycles consisted of elastic 
behaviour. When advancing only by load-tracking after the 4.9 x 106 elastic cycles, in 10 hours of 
computational time only 84.000 cycles were computed, with a correspondant damage level at the end of 
the 84.000 cycles of  0.018. Taking into account this rate of advance, if the entire analysis of  53.5 x 106 
cycles were to be conducted under load-tracking, a computational time of 265 days would be needed. 
This study was carried out on only one linear element. In real-life simulations,  the dimensions of the 
problem are much larger and load history is more complex.It  is of the upmost importance having a time-
saving advancing strategy, and this is the topic where this paper aims at making its contribution. 

4.1.3. Load history with two different cyclical loads 

In Table 3 the stresses generated at integration point level by the imposed maximum and minimum 
displacements are included. These are displayed for the two cyclical loads applied, S1 and S2, as well as 
the fatigue life resulting from the FEM model if only one of the loads, be it S1 or S2, were to be applied 
until fracture. Table 3 also includes the number of cycles at which damage starts when applying both S1 
and S2.  

  
(normalized with threshold limit) 

 
Case code 

Reversion 
factor 

Max. 
Stress  PG 

Min. 
Stress PG 

Med. 
Stress PG 

Nc at which 
damage initiates 

S1 0,3 0,91 0,273 0,59 4,90E+06 

S2 0 0,839 0 0,42 3,46E+06 

S1+S2   3,62E+06 
Table 3: Characterization of loads S1 and S2 

The simulation of the load combination was made by first imposing the S1 load during 106 cycles, 
followed by load S2 being applied from 106 cycles to 108 cycles. By applying first load S1, followed by 
load S2, the resulting life for the material is 3,62 x 106 cycles, less than if only load S1 were applied, but 
more than if only S2 were applied. This shows that the formulation is capable of taking into account the 
effect of a cyclical load even if it is applied for a number of cycles that does not lead to failure. This is 
achieved by quantifying the strength reduction caused by each event in the load history and by 
dynamically describing the S-N curve according to changes in load characteristics. 

In Figure 9 it can be seen how the slope of both curves, residual strength and S-N curve, changes as a 
different load starts being applied. This is possible due to the load-tracking phase being automatically 
activated once a change in the load is detected, as can be seen from the vertical line dividing the two 
stress levels exhibited. The intermediate load-tracking phase appears as a straight line due to the fact that 
a logarithmical scale has been used for the horizontal axis.  The characteristics of the new load are 
consequently determined, maximum stress level and reversion factor, and with these parameters the 
curves readjust themselves. 



 

13 
 

 
Figure 9: Parameters of interest for the fatigue analysis under loads S1+S2 

Figure 10 shows the stress – strain curve where the stiffness reduction can be seen at each automatic 
unloading. The vertical axis refers to the instantaneous stress divided by the elastic limit. The trigger for 
the load-tracking stage is 0>d in an increment i. When this happens, the load factor for increment i+1 
will be correspondent to the load-tracking phase and unloading will have begun. Each cycle will be 
described by small increments until the stress state is stable again from one cycle to the other.  The curve 
is in accordance with Figure 9, showing that the material is in the elastic state while load S1 is applied 
and the equivalent stress is taken to its maximum value: 0.91 of the elastic limit. Load S2 is then applied 
and takes the material to its fatigue life as indicated by the dynamically updated Wöhler curve. All the 
stiffness reduction occurs after this point.  As seen in the previous case, a higher stiffness reduction can 
be seen in the first stages of the nonlinear process. Each one of the vertical segments depicting stress 
relaxation corresponds to a large increments phase that occurs only when 0035.02max ==

Sεε  .  The 
inclined lines mark the posterior load-tracking phase with material loading-unloading. 

 
Figure 10: Stress-Strain at integration point for loads S1+S2 



 

14 
 

4.2. Validation of the formulation proposed  

4.2.1. Problem definition. Geometry and material. 

The experiment undertaken by Marines et al.[34] has been chosen to validate the stepwise load 
advancing strategy presented in this work, together with the continuum damage model for fatigue 
described in section 2. In Table 4, the material characteristics given by the aforementioned authors are 
presented along with the shape and dimensions of the fatigue specimen adopted in the experiment. The 
experimental results obtained with a loading frequency of 20 kHz and a reversion factor R = -1 have been 
taken into account for the comparison with numerical results. 

Ed 10kHz 

(GPa) 

Ed 20kHz 

(GPa) 

σy 0.2% 

(MPa) 

UTS 

(MPa) 

A 

(%) 

ρ  

(kg/m3) 

208.3 211.5 608 878 20 7850 

Table 4: Material properties of HSLA steel, D38MSV5S 

 

Figure 11: Shape and dimension of ultrasonic fatigue specimen as given by Marines et al.[34] 

4.2.2. Finite element model 

The fatigue specimen presented in Figure 11 has been reproduced by means of a finite element model. 
Due to the symmetrical nature of the geometry and loading and boundary conditions only half of the 
specimen has been modelled in order to minimize computational time. 

The semi-cylindrical volume has been meshed with linear hexahedral elements as shown in Figure 12. 
The mesh has 2666 nodes and 1920 elements. Each finite element is described with eight integration 
points.  



 

15 
 

 
Figure 12: Finite element mesh of linear hexahedral elements 

The boundary conditions applied are shown in Figure 13. The specimen is restrained at one end and 
subjected to a cyclical displacement at the other end. The entire base is defined with a symmetry 
condition. 

 

Figure 13: Boundary and loading conditions for the analysed geometry 

The analytical formulation for the S-N curve used by the numerical model was the one presented in 
[32]. The parameters used for the adjustment of the curve to the experimental one proposed by Marines et 
al. [34] are Su= 608Mpa, Slim=325Mpa, α = β =1.3; a correction factor of 1.23 was applied when 
calculating the auxiliary term AUX=1/1.26+R/3.3. 

4.2.3. Results obtained from the experimental tests 

In Figure 14, the results obtained by Marines et al. [34] are presented. As expected, a scatter of test 
results can be seen both for 20 kHz resonating material and for the 30 kHz one. Since the material 
characteristics taken into account for the numerical analysis are that of the 20 kHz one, simulations have 
been run only with the maximum stress levels exhibited for this particular testing frequency. The 
experimental results showed that, even though the geometry and loading conditions are axisymmetric, the 
failure mode is not symmetric [34]. 



 

16 
 

 
Figure 14: Fatigue S-N curve of HSLA steel D38MSV5S with R = -1, 20 kHz and 30kHz [34] 

4.2.4. Validation of the results obtained with the numerical simulation 

The expression for the S-N curve proposed in Figure 14 by Marines et al. [34] has been compared to 
the numerical results obtained from the described finite element model. The comparison can be seen in 
Figure 15. Since the model has a deterministic nature, no scatter can be seen in numerical results.  The 
numerical data depicted in Figure 15 is in accordance with Table 5 where the information on the exact 
characteristics of each simulation case is given. 

Case 
code 

Reversi
on factor 

Max. 
Stress  GP 
(MPa) 

Nc at which 
damage initiates 

BA1 -1 435 0,17 · 106 

BA2 -1 400 1, 50 · 106 

BA3 -1 380 5, 30 · 106 

BA4 -1 360 20, 03 · 106 

BA5 -1 350 39, 50 · 106 

BA6 -1 340 78 ,50 · 106 

BA7 -1 330 160, 00 · 106 

BA8 -1 320 1E9 (run-out) 
Table 5: Fatigue life as resulting from the numerical simulation. Same stress levels and reversion factor as 

[34]. (20 kHz) 



 

17 
 

 

Figure 15: S-N curve for HSLA steel D38MSV5S. Experimental vs. numerical. 

Some observations are to be made, however, in order to better understand the results presented in 
Figure 15. The points signalled as results obtained with the proposed formulation, mark the start of the 
stiffness reduction. In a force controlled test, when the force level is taken to the following maximum 
after the fatigue life depicted in Figure 15, abrupt failure occurs. However, as the numerical model has 
been defined with displacement controlled boundary conditions, when the next maximum displacement is 
reached after arriving at the fatigue life given in Table 5, a reduction of the stress level occurs and the 
material can continue to be cyclically loaded. If an unloading would be made at this point a stiffness 
reduction in proportion to the stress relaxation would be observed. For a better understanding of this 
effect a detailed description of the fatigue behaviour is shown in the next section for one of the cases ran 
for the validation. 

Summarizing, the fatigue life charted in Figure 15 represents the number of cycles up until which the 
maximum stress induced by the applied cyclical displacement remains unaltered. Once this point is 
surpassed, stress relaxation occurs along with damage accumulation, stiffness reduction and a subsequent 
change in internal forces. If the test is force controlled, the specimen fractures abruptly. If the test is 
displacement controlled, the material is taken to complete fracture more progressively. 

4.2.5. Analysis of the performance of the material model. In-depth analysis of stiffness 
reduction at integration point 

In this section an in-depth analysis of the material’s behaviour is made for a maximum induced stress 
level of 350 MPa. The results are similar for all the other simulations ran.  

The experimental tests have shown that fracture initiates on the surface of the specimen. This is due to 
defects present in the microstructure that lead to void nucleation and microcrack initiation and 
propagation. Fracture initiation is not symmetric and, furthermore, in the last stages of the nonlinear 
process, due to microstructural imperfections and defects, fracture propagation leads to non-symmetrical 
behaviour.  

In the numerical simulation, fracture initiation is not symmetrical, but a large part of the propagation 
process occurs under symmetry to the y-y axis. However, in the last stages, before complete rupture (third 
image in Figure 18), due to numerical round off the solution loses symmetry.   

A monitoring of model parameters has been made at the first integration point that shows complete 
degradation. In Figure 16 are depicted: the evolution of the residual strength, Wöhler fatigue life, 
equivalent stress and damage internal variable with a logarithmical scale along the horizontal axis. It can 



 

18 
 

be seen that the stress state suffers no alteration until it intersects the S-N curve.  
 

 

Figure 16: Parameters of interest for the fatigue analysis of D38MSV5S specimen at the first integration 
point that fractures completely 

Figure 17 shows a zoom on the evolution of the variables in the non-linear zone (past the intersection 
with the S-N curve). Here the succession between the large increments phase and the load-tracking phase 
can be better seen. Also, it can be observed how 90% of the degradation is concentrated in the last two 
large steps with nearly 80% in the last one. For this case, 5 x 105 cycles has been adopted as step for the 
large increments phase. Therefore, although the specimen is subjected to approximately 5.35 x 107 cycles 
until it fractures completely, 80% of the stiffness reduction occurs in the last 500000 cycles, deeming the 
fracture a brittle type one. 

 

Figure 17: Zoom on fatigue parameters of interest in the nonlinear zone (post S-N curve).Dots indicate 
the analysis steps at which damage evolution is presented in Figure 18. 



 

19 
 

Figure 18 shows a view of the specimen from above and a view of the cross section at different 
number of cycles (analysis steps). Each one of the steps represented is marked in Figure 17 
chronologically with a black dot. 

The images show the damage evolution in the specimen, both on surface and in depth, as the number 
of cycles increases. Damage initiates on the surface of the specimen in the area with the smallest cross-
sectional diameter, as expected, after 3.95 x 107 cycles. Afterwards it propagates symmetrically until 
approximately 5.3 x 107 cycles (third image in Figure 18), when it localizes in one side of the specimen. 
This is believed to be due to a numerical round off that directs the posterior damage accumulation to the 
right side of the specimen, as can be seen in Figure 18. 

 

Figure 18: Damage evolution for a maximum induced stress of 350MPa and R =  -1 

The upper image in Figure 19 presents the deformed shape of the specimen when the last maximum 
displacement before total fracture is applied. A necking can be seen in the central region although the 
specimen is not yet completely fractured. From that point in the analysis, the applied displacement is 
taken from its maximum value to its minimum one, when the specimen is subjected to compression. That 
eventually causes the rupture into two parts (lower image in Figure 19).  



 

20 
 

 

Figure 19: Deformed shape (x 200) at the last maximum stress before rupture and at the last minimum 
stress, when rupture occurs 

5. CONCLUSIONS  

This paper has presented a fatigue formulation that takes into account the effects caused by the 
accumulation of number of cycles of loading by an alteration in the strength and in the stiffness of the 
material. First, material strength is reduced until it reaches the induced maximum stress level. From that 
point on, energy dissipation is done by means of stiffness reduction.  

The cyclical load is taken into consideration by means of two parameters: maximum stress generated 
by the applied load and stress reversion factor. Both parameters have a direct influence on the onset of 
damage and on the strength reduction. This allows a quantification of the effects induced by different 
cyclical loads and discrimination between different load-applying orders.  

In order to take full advantage of this formulation a stepwise load advancing strategy has been 
proposed. Its aim is to save computational time and improve convergence in a number of cases, such as 
load combinations and nonlinear material behaviour.  

The procedure divides the load in two different loading processes: load tracking and large increments 
phases. The jump between the two loading schemes is made automatically, depending on the mechanical 
response of the structure. The algorithm is user controlled by means of the stabilization tolerance and by 
the number of cycles considered as large step.  

The capabilities of the formulation have been shown in a test case of a single cyclical load and in one 
with a load history comprised on two different loads. Validation of the proposed model has been done by 
reproducing the experimental results obtained by Marines et al. [34].These tests show that, with the 
strategy proposed, it is possible to perform fatigue simulations taking into account material nonlinearities 
and load variations straightforward, as the advancing strategy takes care automatically of the procedure 
required at each step (load-tracking or large increments)  in order to obtain the most accurate result with 
the lowest computational cost.  

Acknowledgements 

This work has been supported by the Research Fund for Coal and Steel through the ULCF project 
(RFSR-CT-2011-00029), by the European Research Council under the Advanced Grant: ERC-2012-AdG 
320815 COMP-DES-MAT "Advanced tools for computational design of engineering materials", by the 
research collaboration agreement established between Abengoa Research and CIMNE and by the Spanish 
Government program FPU: AP2010-5593.  

REFERENCES 

[1] Kanvinde, M. and Deierlein, G.G. Cyclic void growth model to assess ductile fracture initiation in 
structural steels due to Ultra Low Cycle Fatigue,  J Engng Mech 2007;133(6):701–12.  



 

21 
 

[2] Barbu, L.G., Oller, S., Martínez, X. and Barbat, A.H.  Stepwise advancing strategy for the 
simulation of fatigue problems. Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on Computational 
Plasticity - Fundamentals and Applications, COMPLAS 2013: 1153-64. 

[3] Schijve, J. Fatigue of Structures and Materials, 2nd ed.  Berlin: Springer-Verlag;  2009. 
[4] Fatemi, A. and Yang, L. Cumulative fatigue damage and life prediction theories: a survey of the 

state of the art for homogeneous materials, Int J Fat 1998; 20:9-34.  
[5] Kachanov, L. M. Time to the rupture process under creep conditions, Izv. Akad. Nauk. SSR Otd. 

Tech. Nauk. 1958; 8:26-31. 
[6] Kachanov, L. M.  Introduction to Continuum Damage Mechanics, Martinus Nijhoff, The 

Netherlands; 1986. 
[7] Chaboche, J.L. Fracture mechanics and damage mechanics: complementarity of approaches, In 

Numerical Methods in Fracture Mechanics, Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference 
1987: 309-24. 

[8] Chaboche, J.L. A differential law for nonlinear cumulative fatigue damage, In Materials and 
Building Research, Annales de l’ITBTP 1974;  39:117-24. 

[9] Lemaitre, J. and Chaboche J. L. Mechanics of Solid Materials , Cambridge University Press, U.K.; 
1990. 

[10] Lemaitre, J. and Chaboche J. L. Aspect phenomenologique de la rupture par endommagement, J 
Mech App 1978; 2(3):317-65. 

[11] Wang, J. A continuum damage mechanics model for low-cycle fatigue failure of metals, Engng 
Fract Mech 1992; 41(3):437-41. 

[12] Wang, T. and Lou, Z. A continuum damage model for weld heat affected zone under low-cycle 
fatigue loading, Engng Fract Mech 1990; 37(4): 825-9. 

[13] Li, C., Qian, Z. and Li, G. The fatigue damage criterion and evolution equation containing material 
microparameters, Engng Fract Mech 1989; 34(2):435-43.  

[14] Oller, S., Salomón, O. and Oñate, E. A continuum mechanics model for mechanical fatigue analysis, 
Comput Mat Sci 2005; 32:175-95. 

[15] Holman, R. K. , Liaw, P. K., Methodologies for predicting fatigue life, JOM: the journal of the 
Minerals, Metals & Materials Society 1997; 49(7):46-52.  

[16]  Palmgren, A.,Die Lebensdauer von Kugellagern (The service life of ball bearings), Zeitschrift des 
Vereines Deutscher lngenieure 1924; 68(14):339-41. 

[17] Miner, M. Cumulative fatigue damage, J Appl Mech 1945; 12:159-64 
[18] Vasudevan,A.K, Sadananda, K, Glinka, G. Critical parameters for fatigue damage Int J Fat 2001; 

23(1): 39–53 
[19] Halford, G.R. Cumulative fatigue damage modeling—crack nucleation and early growth, Int J Fat 

1997; 19(1):S253-60 
[20] Hoeppner, D. W., Krupp, W. Prediction of component life by application of fatigue crack growth 

knowledge, Engng Fract Mech 1974; 6:47-70. 
[21] Marines, I., Bin, X. and Bathias, C. An understanding of very high cycle fatigue of metals, Int J Fat 

2003; 25:1101-7. 
[22] Bathias, C. and Ni, J. Determination of fatigue limit between 105 and 109 cycles using an ultrasonic 

fatigue device, ASTM 1993; 1211:141–52. 
[23] Bathias, C. There is no infinite fatigue life in metallic materials Fat Fract Eng Mat Struct 1999; 

22:559–65. 
[24] Lubliner, J. Plasticity Theory, Macmillan Publishing, U.S.A.; 1990. 
[25] Luccioni, B., Oller, S. and Danesi, R.  Coupled plastic-damage model, Comp Meth App Mech Eng 

1996; 129:81-90. 
[26]  Malvern, L. Introduction to the Mechanics of Continuous Medium, Prentice Hall, U.S.A.; 1969. 
[27]  Lubliner, J. On thermodyamics foundations of non-linear solid mechanics,  Int J Non-Lin Mech 

1972; 7: 237-54.  



 

22 
 

[28]  Maugin, G. The Thermomechanics of Plasticity and Fracture, Cambridge University Press, U.K.; 
1992. 

[29]  Simo, J. and Ju, J.  Strain and stress based continuum damage models – I Formulation, Int J Solids 
Struct 1987; 23: 821-40. 

[30] Oliver, J., Cervera, M., Oller, S., and Lubliner, J. Isotropic damage models and smeared crack 
analysis of concrete, In Second international conference on computer aided analysis and design of 
concrete structures 1990; 2:945-58. 

[31] Salomón, O., Oller, S. and Oñate, E.  Fatigue Analysis of Materials and Structures Using a 
Continuum Damage Model, Int J Forming Processes 2002; 5: 493-503. 

[32] Suero, A.  and Oller, S.  Tratamiento del Fenómeno de Fatiga Mediante la Mecánica de Medios 
Continuos, Monografía CIMNE Nº 45, Barcelona, Spain ;1998. 

[33] Oller, S., Oñate, E., Canet, J. Miquel and Botello, S. A plastic damage constitutive model for 
composite materials, Int J Solids Struct 1996; 33:2501-18. 

[34] Marines, I., Galván, D. and Bathias, C. Fatigue life assessment of high-strength, low alloy steel at 
high frequency, Arabian J Sci Eng 2008; 33(1B): 237:47. 

[35] Martinez, X., Oller, S., Rastellini, F. and Barbat, A. A numerical procedure simulating RC structures 
reinforced with FRP using the serial/parallel mixing theory, Comp & Struct 2008; 86(15-16):1604-
18. 

[36] Martinez, X., Oller, S., Barbu, L.G. and Barbat, A.H.  Analysis of ultra low cycle fatigue problems 
with the Barcelona plastic damage model, Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on 
Computational Plasticity - Fundamentals and Applications, COMPLAS 2013; 352-63. 

[37] Martinez, X., Oller, S., Barbu, L., Barbat, A. and De Jesus, A.M.P. Analysis of ultra-low cycle 
fatigue problems with the Barcelona plastic damage model and a new isotropic hardening law, Int. J. 
Fat. 2015; 73:132-42. 

[38] Barbu, L.G., Oller, S., Martínez, X. and Barbat, A.H Coupled plastic damage model for low and 
ultra-low cycle seismic fatigue. 11th. World Congress on Computational Mechanics 2014; 2955-66, 
ISBN 978-84-942844-7-2. 
 


	1. INTRODUCTION
	2. FATIGUE DAMAGE MODEL
	2.1. Mechanical damage formulation
	2.2. Threshold damage function oriented to fatigue analysis. Phenomenological approach
	2.3. Function of residual strength reduction for fatigue – Wöhler curve definition

	3. STEPWISE LOAD ADVANCING STRATEGY
	3.1. Introduction
	3.2. Load-tracking phase
	3.3. Large increments phase
	3.4. Automatic load-tracking phase activation

	4. NUMERICAL EXAMPLES
	4.1. Performance of the advancing strategy developed
	4.1.1. Problem definition. Geometry and material.
	4.1.2. Single cyclical load
	4.1.3. Load history with two different cyclical loads

	4.2. Validation of the formulation proposed
	4.2.1. Problem definition. Geometry and material.
	4.2.2. Finite element model
	4.2.3. Results obtained from the experimental tests
	4.2.4. Validation of the results obtained with the numerical simulation
	4.2.5. Analysis of the performance of the material model. In-depth analysis of stiffness reduction at integration point


	5. CONCLUSIONS
	Acknowledgements
	REFERENCES



