













































Your Paper's Title Starts Here:


 

3D numerical models of FSW processes with non-cylindrical pin  

P. Bussetta
1, a

, N. Dialami
2,b

, M. Chiumenti
2,c

,  

C. Agelet de Saracibar
2,d

, M. Cervera
2,e

, and J.-P. Ponthot
1,f

 
1
University of Liege, Department of Aerospace & Mechanical Engineering, 

Non Linear Computational Mechanics, Building B52/3, 

Chemin des Chevreuils, 1; B-4000 Liege, Belgium 

2
International Centre for Numerical Methods in Engineering (CIMNE) 

Universidad Politécnica de Cataluña 

Campus Norte UPC, 08034 Barcelona, Spain 

a
p.bussetta@ulg.ac.be, 

b
narges@cimne.upc.edu, 

c
michele@cimne.upc.edu, 

d
agelet@cimne.upc.edu, 

e
miguel.cervera@upc.edu, 

f
jp.ponthot@ulg.ac.be 

Keywords: Friction Stir Welding (FSW), Finite Element Method, Remeshing, Arbitrary Lagrangian 
Eulerian (ALE) formalism 

 

Abstract. Friction Stir Welding (FSW) process is a relatively recent welding process (patented in 

1991). FSW is a solid-state joining process during which materials to be joined are not melted. 

During the FSW process, the behaviour of the material is at the interface between solid mechanics 

and fluid mechanics. In this paper, a 3D numerical model of the FSW process with a non-cylindrical 

tool based on a solid formulation is compared to another one based on a fluid formulation. Both 

models use advanced numerical techniques such as the Arbitrary Lagrangian Eulerian (ALE) 

formulation, remeshing or the Orthogonal Sub-Grid Scale method (OSS). It is shown that these two 

formulations essentially deliver the same results. 

 

Introduction 

Friction Stir Welding (FSW) is a relatively recent welding process, which was developed at the 

Welding Institute (UK) and patented in 1991 [1]. FSW is a solid-state joining process. It means that 

during welding the materials to be joined are not melted. The joining is constituted by mechanical 

intermixing of the two materials. A rotating non-consumable tool is inserted between the two work-

pieces and displaced along the welding direction (see Fig. 1). The tool is composed of two parts: a 

pin and a shoulder. The pin is introduced into the welded joint to mix deeply the two materials 

together. The aim of the shoulder is to contain the material around the pin. The part of the welding 

joint where the velocity of the tool and the advancing velocity add up is named the advancing side. 

The other part, where the two velocities are in opposite directions, is called the retreating side. The 

friction between the rotating tool and the work-pieces as well as the plastic deformation in the 

neighbourhood of the tool increase the temperature in the welded zone and thus soften the materials. 

But, during the process, the temperature is always smaller than the melting temperature of the 

materials. So, the heat-affected zone is smaller and the quality of the welding is higher than in more 

classical welding processes. 

 

 



 

 
Figure 1. Scheme of the FSW process 

 

In spite of the important number of applications of FSW, the phenomena happening during welding 

are still not very well understood. Therefore, the investigations on this process and especially 

regarding numerical simulations are still very active [2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8]. The mechanical intermixing 

induces very high strains in the material in the neighbourhood of the tool. Using a classical 

Lagrangian formulation as is generally the case in solid mechanics would thus inevitably lead to 

mesh distorsions. Consequently, classical numerical simulation techniques have to be extended in 

order to track the correct material deformations. One of the possiblilities is to use the Arbitrary 

Lagrangian Eulerian (ALE) formulation [3, 9, 10, 11]. This formulation is used to keep the mesh 

motion under control regardless of the real material displacements. The ALE formulation is also 

used to maintain a good mesh quality during the computation. 

This paper presents and compares two different 3D numerical models of the FSW process. The first 

model is based on a solid approach written in terms of nodal positions and nodal temperatures. The 

second model of FSW process is based on a fluid approach written in terms of the velocity, the 

pressure and the temperature fields. Both models use advanced numerical techniques such as 

remeshing and the ALE formulation. A 2D numerical model of the FSW process for each approach 

has already been presented in [6]. 

3D Numerical modelling of FSW process 

To model this welding process, the displacement of the tool is split into an advancing movement 

(actually assigned to the work-pieces but, in the opposite direction) and a rotation (imposed to the 

tool). In other words, the centre of the pin is fixed and a constant velocity is imposed to the plates 

(see Fig. 2). 

 
Figure 2. Scheme of the FSW model. A rotation is imposed to the pin (blue arrow) while the advancing velocity of the 

pin is replaced by a velocity imposed to the plates in the opposite direction (red arrows). 

 



 

The tool is described by a classical Lagrangian mesh. Then, in relation with the distance from the 

rotation axis of the tool, three zones of the plates are identified. In the closest zone around the pin, 

the material is submitted to extremely high strains. This region is a part of the thermo-mechanically 

affected zone (TMAZ). In the model, this region is limited by the value of the distance from the 

rotation axis of the tool equal to the value of the radius of the shoulder. Due to high deformations, 

the use of a Lagrangian formalism would lead very quickly to mesh entanglement. Thus, in this 

region, the ALE formulation is employed. On top of this, the ALE formulation allows the model to 

take into account non-circular pin shapes. In this zone, the mesh has the same rotational speed as the 

tool (red region in Fig. 3). 

 

 
Figure 3. The different zones of the model: ALE formulation is used on the red region (1), the transition zone 

corresponds to the white region (2), and the Eulerian formulation is applied on the grey region (3) 

 

In the furthest zone from the tool, the grey zone in Fig. 3, the Eulerian formulation is used. Thus in 

this region, the mesh is fixed. The ring connecting region 1 and region 3 is a transition zone (white 

region numbered 2 in Fig. 3). In such a model, the quality of the mesh does not change during the 

simulation except in the transition zone. So, to overcome this problem, two different numerical 

techniques are proposed (see section The transition zone). 

 

Thermomechanical formulation. The numerical models presented here are based on the finite 

element method. In this paper, two numerical formulations are compared. The first one is based on a 

solid mechanics approach. It is written in terms of nodal positions and temperatures. The second 

one is based on a fluid mechanics approach. The equilibrium is written as a function of nodal 

velocities, pressures and temperatures. 

 

Solid approach. In the solid approach, the finite elements used are linear quadrilaterals. The 

position and temperature fields are computed at each node of the elements. The stresses and the 

internal variables are computed at each quadrature point of the element (4 Gauss points). To 

overcome the locking phenomenon, the pressure is considered constant over the element and 

computed only at a central quadrature point. The thermomechanical equations are split into a 

mechanical part and a thermal part. At each time step, the mechanical equations are first solved 

using a constant temperature field. This temperature field is the one obtained at the latest increment. 

Then, the thermal equations are solved on the frozen resulting geometrical configuration that has 

just been obtained. 

 

Fluid approach. The fluid approach is based on a stabilized mixed linear temperature-velocity-

pressure finite element formulation. This formulation is stabilized adopting the Orthogonal Sub-

Grid Scale method (OSS) [12, 13, 14] to solve both the pressure instability induced by the 

incompressibility constraint and the instabilities coming from the convective term. A triangular 

mesh is used for the domain discretization. The velocity, the pressure and temperature fields are 

computed at each node of the element. The deviatoric stresses and the other internal variables are 



 

computed at each quadrature point of the element. Finally, the coupled thermo-mechanical problem 

is solved by means of a staggered time-marching scheme where the thermal and mechanical sub-

problems are solved sequentially, within the framework of the classical fractional step methods [15, 

16]. This approach is exposed in more detail in [2, 3, 12, 14]. 

 

Numerical simulation strategy. 

 

Arbitrary Lagrangian Eulerian formulation. In region 1 and region 3 in Fig. 3 the ALE 

formulation is used. Indeed, the Eulerian formulation (used in the region 3) is a particular case of 

the ALE formulation. In the ALE formalism, unlike in the Lagrangian case which is commonly used 

in Solid Mechanics, the mesh no longer follows the material motion [2, 3, 9, 10, 11]. Consequently, 

a new grid coordinate system  is defined and the conservation laws able to describe the FSW 

process are rewritten in terms of the new coordinates : 

Mass:  

  
                                        

 (1) 

 

Momentum: 

  

                                                                                          (2) 

 

Energy: 

                                                                                      (3) 

 

where  and  are the mass density and the specific heat capacity,  is the Cauchy stress tensor,  is 

the specific body forces,  is the temperature,  is the plastic dissipation rate per unit of 

volume. The heat flux, , is defined according to the isotropic Fourier's law as: 

                                                                                                                                    (4) 

 

The convective velocity  is the difference between the material velocity  and the mesh 

velocity . Both the stress tensor, , and the strain rate tensor, , are split into volumetric and 

deviatoric parts: 

                                                                                                                                   (5) 

                                                                                                                         (6) 

 

where  and  are the pressure and the stress deviator, respectively. Similarly,  and 

 are the volumetric and the deviatoric parts of the strain-rate tensor, respectively.  

The thermal boundary conditions are defined in terms of the heat flux that flows through the 

boundaries by heat convection and radiation. They are expressed by Newton and radiation laws, 

respectively, as: 

                                                                                                                (7) 



 

                                                                                                                   (8) 

 

where  is the heat transfer coefficient by convection,  is the Stefan-Boltzmann constant and  

is the emissivity factor. Finally,  is the surrounding environment temperature. 

The ALE formulations used in the two approaches are different. 

 

Solid approach. The ALE formulation used in the solid approach is described in more details in 

[9, 10, 11]. To simplify the solution procedure and remain competitive against Lagrangian models, 

the system of ALE equations (Eq. 1 to Eq. 3) is solved using an operator-split procedure. First, for 

each time step, the classical Lagrangian thermomechanically coupled formalism is used. During this 

Lagrangian step the mesh sticks to the material ( , ) until an equilibrated Lagrangian 

configuration is iteratively obtained. So, the weak form of the governing equations which are solved 

during this first step is defined over the current integration domain  and its boundary  (see Eq. 9 

and Eq.  10). Let us assume that the boundary  can be split into  and , being 

 such that tractions are prescribed on  while displacements are specified on 

, respectively. In a similar way, boundary  can be also split into  and  such that 

, where fluxes (on ) and temperatures (on ) are prescribed for the heat 

transfer analysis. 

             
                   (9) 

     (10) 

 

where  and  are the test functions of the displacement and temperature fields.  is prescribed 

tractions on the boundary domain . 

The second step, also called the Eulerian step, is divided into two substeps. First the nodes of the 

mesh are relocated to a more suitable position, thus defining a new mesh with the same topology 

and the mesh velocity . In the case of region 1 and region 3 the position of the relocated nodes is 

known because the mesh velocity of these regions is imposed. Then, the unknowns and the internal 

variables are transferred from the old mesh to the new one [11]. 

 

Fluid approach. The ALE formulation used in the fluid model is not based on an operator-split 

like in the formulation presented for the solid approach. In this fully coupled formulation [2, 3], the 

equilibrium state is computed at each time increment without remeshing and remapping steps. The 

system of equations solved includes the convective terms due to the velocity of the mesh relative to 

the material. In the TMAZ, region 1 in Fig. 3, the velocity of the mesh is imposed and the velocity 

and the pressure of the material are directly computed. In the case of the Eulerian formulation 

(region 3 in Fig. 3), the mesh does not move during the computation. The following assumptions are 

considered for the numerical simulation of the FSW process (more detail can be found in [2, 3]): 

 The flow is assumed to be incompressible as the volumetric changes including thermal 

deformation are found to be negligible, . 

 Therefore, the deviatoric part of total strain rate tensor, , is computed as the symmetric part 

of the velocity gradient as: .  

 Due to the very high viscosity of the material, the material flow is characterized by very low 

values of Reynolds number (Re<<1). This is the reason why, in the balance of momentum 

equation, the inertia term can be neglected. 

 

The governing equations which are used to describe the thermo-mechanical problem able to 

describe the FSW process are: the mass conservation (Eq. 1), the balance of momentum equation 



 

(Eq. 2) and the balance of energy equation (Eq. 3). Taking into account the previous assumptions, 

these governing equations can be rewritten: 

Mass:  

                        
                                        

           (11) 

 

Momentum: 

  

                                                                                                                 (12) 

 

Energy: 

                                                                                    (13) 

 

The weak form of these equations is defined over the integration domain  and its boundary  (see 

Eq. 14, Eq. 15 and Eq. 16). Let us assume that the boundary  can be split into  and , being 

 such that tractions are prescribed on  while velocities are specified on , 

respectively. In a similar way, boundary  can be also split into  and  such that 

, where fluxes (on ) and temperatures (on ) are prescribed for the heat 

transfer analysis. 

         
                                                                                                        (14) 

                                                                            (15) 

               

                       (16) 

 

where ,  and  are the test functions of the velocity, pressure and temperature fields, 

respectively while the mechanical and the thermal work are defined as: 

                              
                                                      (17) 

                                                             (18) 

 

where  is prescribed tractions on the boundary domain . 

 

The transition zone.  

 

Solid approach. In the solid approach, the transition zone is a ring with a finite thickness (region 

2 in Fig. 3). In this region, the evolution of the rotational speed of the mesh, which differs from the 

material velocity, is linearly interpolated between the ALE region and the Eulerian zone. As the 

mesh distortion grows with time, a remeshing operation is periodically required. For one full 

rotation of the pin, the remeshing process is applied 30 times. The time interval between two 

successive remeshings is thus constant.  



 

The remeshing operation can be divided into two steps. First, a better-suited mesh, called the new 

mesh, is created. In the case of the transition zone, the relatively simple geometry of this region 

allows an easy generation of the new quadrangular mesh. Then, to carry on the computation over 

this mesh, the state variables from the mesh before remeshing, called the old mesh, has to be 

transferred to the new one. Each field used to define the equilibrium state is transferred 

independently from the other ones. The data transfer method used in this paper is called the Finite 

Volume Transfer Method (FVTM) with linear reconstruction of the fields. In [17], this transfer 

method is presented in more details and the comparison with some of the remapping algorithms 

most commonly used in the literature brings to light the advantages of this method. 

 

Fluid approach. In the fluid model the transition zone (region 2 in Fig. 3) is limited to a circle 

(zero thickness). Each node of the mesh on this circle is duplicated. One node is linked to the ALE 

region (numbered 1) and the other one to the Eulerian region (numbered 3). The coupling between 

both regions is performed using a specific node-to-node link approach. At every mesh movement 

step, for a given node of the ALE region, the corresponding node of the Eulerian one is found and a 

link between the two nodes is created. Afterwards, the boundary conditions and the properties of the 

nodes of the region 3 are copied to the corresponding nodes of the region 1 within the link. The time 

step can be conveniently chosen such that the two interface meshes (ALE and Eulerian) are always 

compatible. In this case the ALE mesh would slide precisely from one Eulerian interface node to the 

next one at each time step. 

 

Thermomechanical constitutive model. In both models, the constitutive model of the tool is 

thermo-rigid. So, no mechanical fields are computed over this material. However, from the point of 

view of the thermal equations, the tool has a classical thermal behaviour as far as heat conduction is 

concerned. In addition, the material behaviour of the plates is modelled as thermo-visco-plastic 

using a Norton-Hoff constitutive model:  

        

                                                                               (19) 

 

where  and  are the rate sensitivity and viscosity parameters respectively. Both are temperature 

dependent. 

In the FSW process, the heat is mostly generated by the mechanical dissipation, which is computed 

as a function of the plastic strain rate and the deviatoric stresses as: 

                                                                                                                          (20) 

 

where  0.9 is the fraction of the total plastic energy converted into heat. 

 

Solid approach. In the solid model, the value of the variation of the pressure ( ) is computed 

thanks to the variation of the volume ( ) and the bulk modulus ( ): . In addition, with 

the solid approach, it is possible to replace the Norton-Hoff constitutive model with a thermo-

elasto-visco-plastic one, see e.g. [18]. With this kind of constitutive model, it is possible to compute 

the residual stresses. 

 

Fluid approach. In the fluid model, the material is assumed to be incompressible and this 

constraint is incorporated into the equations to be solved. 

 

 

 



 

Thermomechanical contact.  

 

Solid approach. In the solid model, a perfect sticking thermomechanical contact is considered 

between the tool and the work-piece. It means that the temperature field and the displacement field 

are continuous through the interface between the tool and the work-piece. 

 

Fluid approach. The heat flux is also produced by the friction between pin and the work-piece. 

This heat flux can be expressed using the Norton's friction model. The heat generated by friction is 

split into a part absorbed by the pin (noted ) and another one absorbed by the work-piece (noted 

): 

                                                                            (21) 

                                                                            (22) 

 

where the amount of heat absorbed by the pin, , and by the work-piece, , depends on the 

thermal diffusivity, , of the two materials in contact as: 

 
                                                                                                                      (23) 

 
                                                                                                                      (24) 

 

The tangential component of the traction vector at the contact interface, , is defined as: 

                                                                                                                 (25) 

 

where  is the (temperature dependent) material consistency,  is the strain rate 

sensitivity and  is the tangential unit vector, defined in terms of the relative tangential 

velocity at the contact interface, . 

Comparison of numerical results 

In this paper, the numerical results of the solid approach are compared with the already validated 

model based on the fluid approach (see [2, 3, 7, 8]). In this example, the section of the pin is an 

equilateral triangle (Fig. 4 and Fig. 5). The dimensions of the tool are presented in Fig. 4. The width 

of the two plates is 50 mm, the thickness is 4.7 mm and the simulated length is 100 mm. The rotation 

axis of the tool is located at the centre of the simulated region (see Fig. 5). 

 

 

 
Figure 4. Scheme of the tool 

 

 



 

 

 
Figure 5. Scheme of the model with the initial position of the control point and the control line 

 

 

The most important parameters of the considered FSW process are the rotation speed (40 RPM) and 

the welding speed (400 mm min
-1

). 

The thermo-mechanical properties of the plates are the following: 

 density: 2 700 kg m
-3

 

 bulk modulus: 69 GPa (used only with the solid approach) 

 thermo-mechanical Norton-Hoff law with   = 100 MPa,  = 0.12, 

 heat conductivity: 120 W m
-1

 K
-1

 

 thermal expansion coefficient: 10
-6

 K
-1

 

 heat capacity: 875 J kg
-1

 K
-1

 

The thermo-mechanical properties of the tool are the following: 

 density: 7 800 kg m
-3

; 

 heat conductivity: 43 W m
-1

 K
-1

; 

 heat capacity: 460 J kg
-1

 K
-1

. 

During all the computation, the room temperature is considered constant at 20°C. The thermal 

boundary conditions of this problem are the following (heat transfer is neglected along the external 

perimeter of the two plates): 

 Conduction on the lower side of both plates (approximation of the thermal behaviour of the 

backing plate), exchange coefficient: 4 500 W m
-2

 K
-1

; 

 Convection and radiation on the free upper side of both plates (except the part in contact 

with the tool), convection coefficient: 10 W m
-2

 K
-1

, emissivity coefficient: 0.2. 

The total time of the simulation is 15 seconds which corresponds to 10 revolutions for the pin. 

 

 

Fig. 6 shows the evolution of the pressure and the evolution of the temperature computed by the two 

models at the control point defined in Fig. 5. This Point has the same rotational speed as the tool 

(this point moves according to the mesh). Fig. 7 presents the temperature profile along the control 

line. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 

 

 

 

 

 
Figure 6. Evolution of the pressure and the temperature computed by the two models at the control point (rotating with 

the tool). The initial position of the point is defined in Fig. 5. 

 

 

 

 

 
Figure 7. Evolution of the temperature computed by the two models along the control line at the end of the simulation 

(i.e. after 15 s). The position of this line is defined in Fig. 5. 

 

 

 

After a transient phase which depends on the numerical strategy adopted for each approach, the 

results of both models are very similar (see Fig. 6). The frequency of the pressure and the 

temperature at the control point are controlled by the rotational speed of the pin. In addition, the 

temperature field is a good indicator of the mechanical intermixing of the material. The small 

differences between the values of the temperature fields along the control line (Fig. 7) shows that 

the two models essentially deliver the same results. 

 

 

 

 

 



 

Conclusion 

 

The phenomena happening during the Friction Stir Welding (FSW) process are at the interface 

between solid mechanics and fluid mechanics. In this paper, two different formulations are 

presented to simulate the FSW process numerically. One model is based on a solid approach which 

computes the position and the temperature fields and another one is based on a fluid approach 

written in terms of velocity, pressure and temperature fields. Both models use advanced numerical 

techniques such as the Arbitrary Lagrangian Eulerian formalism or remeshing operations or an 

advanced stabilization algorithm. These advanced numerical techniques allow the simulation of the 

FSW process with non-circular tool shapes. The aim of the paper was to compare two 

computational models based respectively on a solid and a fluid approach for the solution of FSW 

process. Based on the authors' point of view, being able to simulate a process using a solid model 

and at the same time a fluid model, is numerically very interesting and represents a further 

verification of the implementation in both approaches. The presented example (with a triangular 

pin) shows that the two formulations essentially deliver the same results. More investigations are 

still needed to understand the small differences between the two models. While the fluid model is 

more efficient from a computational point of view, the model based on the solid approach has the 

advantage that it can be used to compute the residual stresses (the thermo-visco-plastic constitutive 

model can be replaced with a thermo-elasto-visco-plastic one). 

  

Acknowledgements 

The Belgian authors wish to acknowledge the Walloon Region for its financial support to the 

STIRHETAL project (WINNOMAT program, convention number 0716690) and to the FSW-PME 

project (Programme de recherche collective 2013 – convention number 1217826) in the context of 

which this work was performed. This research has been funded by the Interuniversity Attraction 

Poles Programme (IAP 7/21) initiated by the Belgian Science Policy Office 

 

 

References 

[1] W.M. Thomas, E.D. Nicholas, J.C. Needham, M.G. Murch, P. Temple-Smith, and C.J. Dawes. 

Friction stir butt welding. GB Patent No. 9125978.8, International Patent No. PCT/GB92/02203, 

1991. 

[2] N. Dialami, M. Chiumenti, M. Cervera, and C. Agelet de Saracibar. An apropos kinematic 

framework for the numerical modelling of friction stir welding. Computers and Structures, 117:48-

57, 2013. doi: 10.1016/j.compstruc.2012.12.006. 

[3] M. Chiumenti, M. Cervera, C. Agelet de Saracibar, and N. Dialami. Numerical modeling of 

friction stir welding processes. Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering, 

254:353-369, 2013. doi: 10.1016/j.cma.2012.09.013. 

[4] M. Assidi, L. Fourment, S. Guerdoux, and T. Nelson. Friction model for friction stir welding 

process simulation: Calibrations from welding experiments. International Journal of Machine Tools 

and Manufacture, 50(2):143-155, 2010. doi: 10.1016/j.ijmachtools.2009.11.008. 

[5] N. Dialami, M. Chiumenti, M. Cervera, C. Agelet de Saracibar and J. P. Ponthot. Material flow 

visualization in Friction Stir Welding via particle tracing. International Journal of Material Forming, 

2013. doi: 10.1007/s12289-013-1157-4 



 

[6] P. Bussetta, N. Dialami, R. Boman, M. Chiumenti, C. Agelet de Saracibar, M. Cervera and J.-P. 

Ponthot. Comparison of a fluid and a solid approach for the numerical simulation of Friction Stir 

Welding with a non-cylindrical pin. Steel Research International, 85:968-979, 2014. doi: 

10.1002/srin.201300182. 

[7] D. Santiago, G. Lombera, S. Urquiza, C. Agelet de Saracibar, and M. Chiumenti. Modelado 

termo-mecánico del proceso de friction stir welding utilizando la geometría real de la herramienta. 

Revista Internacional de Métodos Numéricos para Cálculo y Diseño en Ingeniería, 26:293-303, 

2010. 

[8] C. Agelet de Saracibar, M. Chiumenti, M. Cervera, N. Dialami, and A. Seret. Computational 

modeling and sub-grid scale stabilization of incompressibility and convection in the numerical 

simulation of friction stir welding processes. Archives of Computational Methods in Engineering, 

21(1), 2014. 

[9] J. Donea, A. Huerta, J.-P. Ponthot, and A. Rodríguez-Ferran. Encyclopedia of Computational 

Mechanics, chapter Arbitrary Lagrangian-Eulerian Methods. John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, 2004. doi: 

10.1002/0470091355.ecm009. 

[10] R. Boman and J.-P. Ponthot. Efficient ALE mesh management for 3D quasi-eulerian problems. 

International Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering, 92:857-890, 2012. doi: 

10.1002/nme.4361. 

[11] R. Boman and J.-P. Ponthot. Enhanced ALE data transfer strategy for explicit and implicit 

thermomechanical simulations of high-speed processes. International Journal of Impact 

Engineering, 53:62-73, 2013. doi: 10.1016/j.ijimpeng.2012.08.007. 

[12] C. Agelet de Saracibar, M. Chiumenti, Q. Valverde, and M. Cervera. On the orthogonal subgrid 

scale pressure stabilization of finite deformation J2 plasticity. Computer Methods in Applied 

Mechanics and Engineering, 195:1224-1251, 2006. doi:10.1016/j.cma.2005.04.007. 

[13] M. Cervera, M. Chiumenti, Q. Valverde, and C. Agelet de Saracibar. Mixed linear/linear 

simplicial elements for incompressible elasticity and plasticity. Computer Methods in Applied 

Mechanics and Engineering, 192:5249-5263, 2003. 

[14] M. Chiumenti, Q. Valverde, C. Agelet de Saracibar, and M. Cervera. A stabilized formulation 

for incompressible plasticity using linear triangles and tetrahedra. International Journal of Plasticity, 

20:1487-1504, 2004. doi: 10.1016/j.ijplas.2003.11.009. 

[15]C. Agelet de Saracibar, M. Cervera, and M. Chiumenti. On the formulation of coupled 

thermoplastic problems with phase-change. International Journal of Plasticity, 15:1-34, 1999. 

[16]M. Cervera, C. Agelet de Saracibar, and M. Chiumenti. Thermo-mechanical analysis of 

industrial solidification processes. International Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering, 

46:1575-1591, 1999. 

[17] P. Bussetta, R. Boman and J.-P. Ponthot. Efficient 3D data transfer operators based on 

numerical integration. Submitted to International Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering. 

[18] J.P. Ponthot. Unified stress update algorithms for the numerical simulation of large deformation 

elasto-plastic and elasto-viscoplastic processes. International Journal of Plasticity, 18:91-126, 2002. 

doi: 10.1016/S0749-6419(00)00097-8. 


