












































Microsoft Word - paraplane_aiaa_v6.docx


Simulation of Ram-Air Parachute Systems with the Panel 
Method and Staggered Fluid-Structure Coupling 

Enrique Ortega1, Roberto Flores1 and Jordi Pons-Prats2 

CIMNE – Centre Internacional de Metodes Numerics en Enginyeria 
Gran Capità s/n, 08034 Barcelona, Spain 

I. Introduction 

HE use of numerical simulation for the analysis of parachute systems has grown considerably over the last two 

decades. This trend has not been driven just by the desire to reduce experimental testing costs. Numerical simulation 

also provides insight into the physics of the problem and detailed sets of flow and structural variables, which can be 

difficult to measure directly in test models. Complementing experimental testing, simulation enables more extensive 

and detailed studies during the early development cycle. This allows evaluation of the system’s performance and 

reliability, as well as identification of potential problems and preemptive corrections. All these features, together 

with increasing computer power, promote the growing use of computer simulation in parachute design.  

 The first numerical tools for the analysis of parachutes date back to the early nineties. In these works, the air is 

modeled by potential flow and panel methods while Finite Element (FE) techniques are used for the structure. Since 

the discretization of the surrounding flow is not required in panel methods, the solution procedure is drastically 

simplified. This methodology has been applied to rigid and non-rigid ram-air configurations [1-4], and proved 

effective to assist in design practice, particularly with attached flow surrounding the canopy. Additional 

enhancements aim to improve the scope of the aerodynamic model, for example the use of empirical approximations 

and viscous corrections to account for the suspension lines and the real aerodynamics of canopy sections and 

payloads [2, 5-7]. Extensions to deal with detached flows have also been proposed. They usually solve the 

Lagrangian form of the Navier Stokes’ momentum equation written in vorticity variables. Since only the regions of 

concentrated vorticity must be resolved, the parachute wake is discretized by means of point vortices while the 

attached (inviscid) flow areas remain mesh-free. This addresses the issue of flow separation while retaining the 

advantages of panel methods; see for instance [8]. Methods using potential flow aerodynamics, with different 

degrees of complexity and range of applications, have reached a satisfactory balance between accuracy and 

                                                           
1 PostDoc Researcher, Edifici C1, Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya - Campus Nord, Gran Capità s/n 08034 Barcelona, Spain. 
2 Coordinator CIMNE Aerospace Group, Edifici C3, Parc Mediterrani de la Tecnología UPC, Esteve Terrades 5, 08860 Castelldefels, Spain. 

T 



computational cost in many practical parachute problems; recent applications can be found in [9-11]. A step forward 

in fidelity and scope has been achieved with methods involving the solution of the Navier-Stokes equations with full 

discretization of the surrounding flow. These approaches have emerged mainly in the context of the deforming-

spatial-domain/stabilized space-time (DSD/SST) methodology [12, 13], a framework which provides a general 

solution method for problems involving moving boundaries and interfaces. Some of the first applications, 

specifically for ram-air parachutes, can be found in [14, 15]. Later, numerous special techniques have been 

developed to face increasingly challenging problems. A detailed review of all these methods, applications and 

achievements is presented in [16], and some of the latest developments can be found in [17-19]. The literature 

exemplifies the capabilities of DSD/SST based techniques to deal with complex problems, such as those involved in 

the design of spacecraft parachutes. There are still other approaches using full discretization of the surrounding 

fluid. For example, a coupled Euler-Lagrange model with fabric porosity [20], a Navier-Stokes large-eddy 

simulation of a disk-gap-band decelerator [21], a front tracking approach for drogue parachutes [22], and 

applications of software packages such as LS-DYNA® to ram-air parachutes [23-26]. 

The simulation of parachutes is an active research line at the International Center for Numerical Methods in 

Engineering (CIMNE) and several tools have been developed at the request of CIMSA Ingeniería de Sistemas, a 

Spanish parachute manufacturer (see [27]). The developments focus mainly on the simulation of ram-air parachute 

systems and emphasize the cost effectiveness of the solution methodology. The objective is to obtain fast design 

tools, able to produce data suitable for preliminary analysis of parachute systems with minimal computational 

resources. The tools must also be accessible for parachute designers with a basic knowledge of computational 

mechanics. To meet these constraints, a low fidelity (potential) flow solver has been adopted in conjunction with 

staggered fluid-structure interaction coupling. The computer program developed, named PARACHUTES [28, 29], 

includes unsteady aerodynamic and structural calculation modules. The aerodynamics is solved with a low-order 

panel method and a finite element technique is used for the structure. The latter allows modeling the suspension 

lines, fabric and suspended payloads of a typical parachute system by means of cable, membrane and solid (3D) 

linear elements. The aerodynamic model is enhanced by empirical approximations to account for the drag of 

suspension lines, canopy and suspended payloads. The solution methodology is described in [10]. 

 In this work, the steady flight of a ram-air parachute-payload configuration is analyzed with PARACHUTES and 

the results are compared with experimental data. The objective is twofold: to study the performance of the 



methodology and assess its capabilities for the analysis of practical engineering problems. The numerical and 

experimental studies presented belong to the PARAPLANE project [30, 31] (Development of a new steerable 

parachute system for rescue of small and medium size airplanes), financed through the European Comission’s 

Seventh Framework Programme. 

 The work is organized as follows. An overview of the analysis methodology is given in Section II. Section III 

deals with the reference experimental data used to evaluate the numerical simulations. The computational model 

employed is described in Section IV. The results obtained for the test cases are discussed in Section V and the main 

conclusions are outlined in Section VI. 

II. Overview of the numerical methodology 

The methodology implemented in PARACHUTES is reviewed below; see [10] and [32] for further details.  

A. Structural modeling 

The structural solution uses a large-displacement small-strain FE formulation with explicit time integration. This 

approach is quite accurate (only small tensile strains are expected) and allows an efficient coding. The solver models 

membranes, cables and solid bodies using linear elements. Since cables and membranes lack bending stiffness and 

buckle under compressive loads, a wrinkling model is used to correct the elemental stresses. Structural components 

with negligible deformation can be modeled as rigid bodies. This greatly reduces the computational cost with no 

effect on the structure dynamics (only 6 degrees of freedom are retained for each rigid block). The time integration 

is performed with an explicit second-order scheme, which despite the inherent time increment limitations, provides a 

robust and fast solution for highly non-linear problems. Note that the complete dynamics of the deformable 

parachute payload system subject to inertial, aerodynamic and gravity forces is obtained because the trajectories of 

all the grid points are integrated in time. A numerical dissipation model with Rayleigh damping and bulk viscosity is 

used to control local high-frequency modes that are not well resolved by the staggered coupling adopted. While 

simple and inexpensive, this model requires damping coefficients that can have a spurious effect on the results 

(particularly the mass-proportional damping). Some guidelines for tuning these parameters are given in [10, 29]. The 

code also automatically compares the energy lost by numerical damping to the work of the physical forces, so that 

adverse effects on the solution can be readily detected and corrected. This makes the choice of suitable damping 

coefficients easier. It should be noted that the dissipation forces are computed using velocities relative to the 



parachute center of mass, which minimizes the effect of numerical damping on rigid-body motions. The structural 

solver has other interesting features, such as cable length manipulation to simulate the deflection of control lines and 

maneuvers. Once the required time-deformation values are provided, the solver automatically interpolates them to 

guarantee smooth variations (quintic splines are used). 

B. Aerodynamic modeling 

Potential flow aerodynamics was considered cost-effective in this work because no extensive detached flow is 

expected under nominal operation of gliding parachutes. Hence, the flow solution is obtained with an unsteady panel 

method using low-order doublets and sources. The constant strength panels lower the complexity and computational 

cost, while the addition of sources improves the accuracy compared to a doublet-only method [33]. Furthermore, the 

required discretization is simpler because exact matching between panels is not required. In order to model the 

wake, a time-steeping technique is used. The wake panels are shed from specified lines along the body and move 

following the local velocity (freestream and induced components) to account for wake rollup. The doublicity of the 

panels shed into the wake is determined by enforcing the Kutta condition at the shedding lines; thus, the problem has 

no additional unknowns. With the time-steeping method the wake is naturally developed in a simple and inexpensive 

manner compared to other approaches, e.g. using wake relaxation (see [34]).   

The wind loads acting on the suspension and control lines are obtained in a simplified manner, considering the 

cable elements as slender cylinders with specified drag coefficients. The wind forces are calculated in each element 

by 0.5ρdC | |  (per unit length), where , d and Cd denote the air density, cable diameter and cylinder drag 

coefficient (based on the diameter); and vi is the transverse wind velocity (i.e. normal to the cable axis). These forces 

are calculated by the structural solver, meaning they are updated at each structural time increment. This method 

yields a reasonable approximation of the natural damping due to wind loads and does not require any additional 

numerical damping. This improves the accuracy of the solution and relieves the user from defining dissipation 

coefficients for the cables. The software also allows using aerodynamic force functions for the wind loads acting on 

suspended bodies. The functions can be obtained by fitting experimental data for a range of attitudes. Given the 

aerodynamic performance of typical payloads (cargo containers), only the drag forces are accounted for in this work. 

The experimental drag coefficient obtained from [35] is parameterized in terms of the body normal projected area 

(in the direction of the incident velocity) and the resulting force is included in the structural computation. The 

simplified approach used in PARACHUTES for the wind loads on the payload and suspension lines enhances the 



modeling capabilities with almost no additional cost. The solver also accounts for apparent mass effects due to 

inertia of the air surrounding the parachute (which can affect transient behavior and stability). The additional mass is 

calculated with the model of Lissaman and Brown [36] and distributed across the structure nodes.  

C. Coupling procedure 

A 2-way staggered scheme is used to couple the aerodynamic and structural solvers, with one fluid solve and one 

structure solve per time step. Since the mesh is the same, no interpolation of results is required during the 

simulation. This allows obtaining both the transient and steady-state response of the structure in a very efficient way. 

In typical calculations, the stability limit of the structural solver is small (explicit approach), thus, several structural 

time increments are performed per aerodynamic step. Although this could affect the high-frequency response, it is 

not a serious limitation because these modes usually have low amplitude, and affect only small parts of the structure. 

On the contrary, the low frequency modes, which govern the overall response of the structure and are of major 

interest to the designer, are well resolved by the coupling scheme adopted. 

D. Computational requirements 

The program PARACHUTES is written in FORTRAN 90-95 language. The code has been especially designed 

for modularity (simple addition of new features) and low computational requirements (CPU-time and memory 

storage). Most of the expensive operations (e.g. the computation of the aerodynamic influence coefficients) have 

been parallelized using OPENMP directives. Although the methodology has been tailored for running on modest 

hardware platforms, it can also profit from higher performance hardware, particularly when large problems are 

undertaken. Typical simulation costs are given in Section V.   

III. Reference experimental data 

A considerable part of the software development and validation tasks presented here has been carried out in the 

context of PARAPLANE [30], an European research project aimed at developing a Steerable Aircraft parachute 

Rescue System (SARS) for small and medium airplanes up to 625 kg. The system is built-in the aircraft to be 

activated in case of emergency. Once deployed, an autonomous guidance unit (AGU) computes a path to a safe 

landing area and takes command of the parachute. 

In PARAPLANE two test campaigns were conducted to determine the in-flight performance of the ram-air 

parachutes selected for the SARS system. The drop-tests took place at the Coolidge “Jamieson Tank” drop zone, 



near MESA airport in Arizona (USA). The parachutes investigated were the CIMSA models P1 and P2. The P1 is a 

900 ft2 rectangular parachute for payloads up to 600 kg. The P2 has a smaller size and payload, and is equipped with 

slat control devices for larger brake deflection. This model was designed during the project to meet the requirements 

of the rescue system. The drop-units tested (Fig. 1) consisted of the parachute, the ACRIDS (Aerial Cargo RIDer 

System) guidance unit, and a dummy payload. During the tests, the drop altitude was set to 10,000 ft MSL and the 

airdrops were driven by gravity. Right after the deployment, pre-planned maneuvers were executed by remote 

control at high altitude to obtain data for aerodynamic characterization. Next, the autonomous control was engaged 

to test the automatic landing capability. Fully autonomous flights were also carried out satisfactorily. 

 

Fig. 1. PARAPLANE drop-unit (left). In-flight view of the system equipped with the P1 parachute (right). 

This paper focuses on the study of the parachute steady descent velocity and glide ratio for different deflections 

of the steering lines. The reference experimental values used were obtained from GPS data, time-averaging the 

values taken during the steady part of the flight (approximately at constant sink of rate). The test data were corrected 

to standard sea-level conditions (with no compensation for wind or other weather effects). Reliable uncertainty 

estimates for the experimental data were not available to the authors during the preparation of this work. 

IV. Numerical test model 

The parachute model CIMSA P1 is used in this work because a higher amount of reliable test data was available. 

The model discretization and problem setup employed in the simulations are described below. 



A. Model discretization 

The computational model was constructed from the original layout of canopy fabric panels and suspension lines, 

and a simplified representation of the AGU and the payload is used (they are assumed rigid and its aerodynamics is 

obtained from empirical data). A view of the model is given in Fig. 2. This is the undeformed configuration used to 

start the simulations. Since the deployment and inflation phases are not calculated, the simulated and experimental 

results are not comparable until the system approaches cruise conditions. 

 

Fig. 2. Undeformed model configuration (CIMSA P1 parachute, AGU and payload). 

The computational model is discretized using linear 2-node cables, 3-node membranes and 4-node tetrahedral 

elements. The cable elements are used for the suspension lines and canopy seams and reinforcement tapes, while 

membrane elements model the canopy fabric. Solid tetrahedral elements are used for the AGU and the payload. 

Since the deformation of these two components is not relevant to the test cases studied, they are simulated as rigid 

bodies to reduce the computational cost (only 12 degrees of freedom are retained). Only the elements belonging to 

the external surface of the canopy (those exposed to the wind) are processed by the aerodynamic solver. The wind 

forces acting on the rest of elements are modeled using empirical correlations (see Section II-B). The canopy is 

originally meshed with quadrilateral aerodynamic panels (which behave better than the triangular), and these 

elements are then automatically split into 3-node triangles when solving the structure. The discrete model has 19324 

nodes and 30896 elements (8811 cables, 10842 triangles, 10281 quadrilaterals and 962 tetrahedra). 



The mechanical properties of the materials used for the canopy and suspension lines are those of the real 

parachute provided by the manufacturer. Since the AGU and the payload are considered rigid, uniform densities 

matching the actual mass of the component are assumed. 

B. Problem setup and parameters calibration 

In order to obtain the steady descent characteristics of the parachute system, the simulations are started with the 

undeformed model and continue until the equilibrium flight configuration is reached. The model is released with an 

initial velocity with the atmosphere at rest. Due to the unsteadiness of the problem, the steady flight condition is 

determined in an approximated manner (total system acceleration below a given threshold). Some amount of under-

relaxation is applied when updating the aerodynamic forces to reach the equilibrium condition faster. In the test 

cases involving pulls on the steering lines, these are input as a series of time vs. deformation (% shrink) values. 

Among the parameters needed for the structural computation, the numerical dissipation coefficients require 

special attention. Remember that numerical damping is only necessary for the canopy membrane elements as the 

wind loads introduce a natural damping mechanism on the suspension lines. The damping coefficients applied to the 

different materials have been set to the minimum necessary for stability, avoiding negative effects on the structure 

dynamics. To this end, the dissipation forces are calculated using velocities relative to the system’s center of mass 

and the magnitude of the net viscous forces introduced is always checked a posteriori. Some additional damping is 

also applied during the initial steps to accelerate the convergence to cruise conditions Since the deployment and 

inflation stages are not modeled, the problem initial conditions may be unrealistic (initial velocity and attitude are 

often incorrect). This approach works well because the canopy undeformed geometry (obtained from the 

manufacturing patterns) is not too far off from its flight configuration. In other cases, pre-calculated deformed 

geometries may be necessary to start the simulations; suitable methods are reviewed in [16].  

The aerodynamic solver only processes the external canopy surfaces, but the lateral stabilizers are removed from 

the aerodynamic model because preliminary tests have shown no significant effects. This reduces the possibility of 

wake-canopy panels intersection and the computational cost. The flow inside the canopy cells is not resolved by the 

program, and only a constant stagnation pressure is applied inside the canopy to keep it pressurized (as discussed 

later, this assumption can introduce some error in the canopy axial force). Although the air intakes must be meshed 

to obtain the closed shape required by the flow solver, these panels must not interfere with the structural behavior 

(both aerodynamic and structural models share the same mesh). To this end, no aerodynamic load is applied on 



intake panels and they are assigned a very small thickness and Young’s modulus. This makes the mass and load 

bearing capability of the inlet panels negligible compared to the rest of canopy, thus approximating an open inlet. 

As described in Section II-B, empirical drag coefficients are used to calculate the wind loads on the suspension 

lines. These values are obtained from experiments for slender cylinders in transverse flow. For the present test cases 

the expected Reynolds numbers vary between 2000 and 5000 (based on the cable diameters); thus, the drag 

coefficient to be applied is Cd  1[37]. However, since the suspension lines in the wake of other cables are subject to 

lower dynamic pressures and drag forces, this value should be reduced. The final value applied is Cd=0.8, and it is 

adjusted using experimental data from similar configurations. Regarding the parachute canopy, some drag is also 

added to achieve a more realistic behavior. This is carried out by prescribing a constant (fictitious) drag coefficient 

for the line elements modeling the canopy reinforcements and seams. Since these elements are processed similarly to 

the suspension lines, this is a way of introducing the canopy viscous drag without making changes in the code. The 

fictitious drag coefficient applied to the canopy reinforcements is Cd=0.6. This value has been determined by 

matching the total drag of the canopy and the suspension lines to the zero-lift drag of the system. The latter was 

provided by the manufacturer, but typical parachute drag-breakdowns or information about the flight path slope 

(with no control deflection) can be also used if specific data is not available, see [38]. The aerodynamic drag of the 

payload and the AGU are also calculated using empirical force functions (only drag forces are considered). These 

are obtained in terms of the projected frontal area of the bodies by fitting the data given in [35]. Additional details 

on the calibration of the model parameters are provided in Section V-C. 

V. Test cases 

The steady descent flight of the system is studied here with and without deflection of the steering lines. The test 

case with no deflection is presented first, and the same configuration is then solved for symmetrical control lines 

deflections ranging between 15 and 80% of the full servo stroke (130 cm). The results are compared with test 

measurements to assess the capabilities of the solution technique. It is important to note that the discrete model, 

material properties and numerical parameters are the same for all the test cases presented. The adjustment was 

performed only once for the steady flight configuration without control lines deflection, with the same settings used 

for the different maneuvers simulated.   

A. Case 1: free-flight without steering line deflection 



The simulation of the equilibrium descent of the system without pulling the steering lines is started by releasing 

the model with no initial velocity and no wind (standard sea-level conditions are used). The equilibrium condition is 

reached 30 seconds after release. Fig. 3 shows the time history of the total horizontal (HH) and vertical (VV) 

accelerations of the system center-of-mass. The evolution of the horizontal (HFV) and descent (DFV) flight 

velocities and the glide-slope angle (measured from the horizontal) is presented in Fig. 4. 

 

Fig. 3. Calculated time evolution of the vertical (VV) and horizontal (HH) accelerations of the system. 

 

Fig. 4. Calculated time evolution of the horizontal (HFV) and descent (DFV) flight velocities and glide-slope. 

The steady flight velocities are compared with experimental values in Table 1. The difference in the prediction 

of the glide-slope is about 14%, which is satisfactory in view of the complexity of the problem. The descent velocity 

shows a larger discrepancy, especially the vertical component. The possible causes are discussed below. 

 



  PARACHUTES  TEST  DIFFERENCE (%) 

Horizontal flight velocity (HFV m/s)  12.5  14.5  ‐14% 

Descent flight velocity (DFV m/s)  4.1  5.6  ‐27% 

Glide slope (deg)  18.2  21.1  ‐14% 

Table 1. Comparison of numerical and experimental results. 

The global lift and drag coefficients derived from the experimental data are CL=0.4 and CD=0.15 respectively. 

Regarding lift, the simulation yields CL=0.53. An increase of lift is expected because the potential solver does not 

account for viscous effects such as boundary layer thickening and detachment, which tend to reduce the lift for the 

same attitude and flight conditions. In addition, there were some uncertainties in the model geometry due to detailed 

data not being disclosed. This affected in particular the length of the suspension lines which controls the rigging 

angle of the canopy and, in turn, the equilibrium angle of attack. This can have a large impact in the global lift 

coefficient and no experimental measurement of the canopy incidence was available for cross-check. The excess of 

CL is largely responsible for the lower steady flight velocity observed in the simulation. Concerning the drag 

coefficient, the value obtained is CD=0.17, slightly higher than the experimental result. The difference can be due to 

factors such as the higher lift developed by the model (causing additional induced drag), the contribution of the 

canopy internal pressure (which produces a net force as explained below), and uncertainties in the estimation of the 

viscous drag (recall that only the parasitic drag was adjusted in this example). Since the last two factors are 

presumably the most relevant, additional experimental data and improved drag models (e.g. accounting for 

interference between structural elements and flow separation) could help to enhance the numerical results. It is 

important to note that since the canopy structurally behaves as an open body, the internal pressure generates a net 

force oriented mainly in the chord direction (due to the air inlets). This contribution to the drag force is 

overestimated in the simulation because the real average inflation pressure should be below the stagnation value 

(there is internal flow between cells and across the fabric). The excess drag also contributed to a reduced flight 

velocity (but to a lesser degree than the error in lift). As the relative excess of lift is larger than the drag increase in 

the computations, the net result is a predicted flight path angle shallower than the experimental value. Note that the 

error in drag can also change the equilibrium angle of attack of the canopy (by moving it rearwards) and, thus, the 

global lift. Altogether, taking into account the existing uncertainties in the flight test data (for which no reliable 

estimates are available), the model geometry and the materials characterization, the results are deemed satisfactory. 

Fig. 5 shows some views of the calculated steady flight configuration.  



 

Fig. 5. Views of the calculated parachute-payload system in steady flight. 

Regarding computational requirements, the CPU-time required to simulate one second in this example was about 

34 minutes and the memory storage needed 1 Gb. The simulation was performed on two-CPU board featuring Intel 

Xeon E5645 processors @ 2.4 GHz (12 Mb L2 cache) running on 6 cores. Although the computational cost can vary 

depending on the problem setup, this example shows that many useful structural and flow data can be obtained with 

this methodology in reasonable times and modest hardware resources. 

B. Case 2: symmetrical deflection of the steering lines 

The steady descent of the parachute system is now investigated for symmetrical deflection of the steering lines. 

The model and problem setting are maintained, but in this case the undeformed configuration (Fig. 2) is released 

with the steady flight speed calculated in the previous case. The desired line deflection is applied immediately after 

the release, and the simulation continues until the equilibrium flight configuration is reached. The cases studied 

involve deflections of 15, 30, 60 and 80% of the full servo stroke (130 cm). 

The equilibrium flight velocities calculated for the various deflections of control lines are shown in Fig 6 (left) 

along with the test values. The experimental trend is well captured by the numerical solution and the agreement 

observed for deflections of 30, 60 and 80% is satisfactory. As in the previous case, the magnitude of the calculated 

velocities is generally lower. It can be also noted that the numerical results show no significant variations for 

deflections below 30%. This may be due to some slack of the control lines having been removed from the 

experimental setup during assembly. In any case, notice that very small changes are also observed in the test data 



measured for the same range of deflection (particularly the descent velocity). Although the results are not shown 

here, it was found that simulations with larger control deflections (100% and higher) produced highly inaccurate 

results. In such cases, the large curvature of the canopy near the trailing edge causes extensive detached flow and a 

loss of command effectiveness, viscous phenomena that cannot be reproduced in an inviscid solution. Concerning 

the glide slope, only slight variations are observed in both experimental and numerical results. As in the previous 

case, the predicted glide angle is about 10% lower than the measured value. 

 

Fig 6. Calculated and experimental results for symmetrical deflection of the steering lines. Left: steady 
horizontal (HFV) and descent (DFV) flight velocities. Right: glide slope (the solid lines indicate the trend of 
the experimental data). 

A comparison of equilibrium lift and drag coefficients is presented in Fig 7. Again, no significant variation is 

observed for deflections below 30%. For larger deflections, the computed lift closely follows the experimental trend. 

The differences observed for the drag are small up to a 60% deflection, but the experimental trend is not reproduced 

beyond that point (the calculated drag becomes almost constant). Note that the parasitic separation drag, which plays 

an increasingly important role at larger deflections, is not reproduced with the current methodology. 

Finally, snapshots of the computed steady flight configurations are shown in Fig. 8 and Fig. 9. The curvature of 

the canopy near the trailing edge becomes sharper with increasing control line deflection (at the same time, the point 

at which the kink on the surface develops tends to move backwards). This abrupt change in geometry causes a 

massive flow separation in the real flow, but the model cannot reproduce it due to its inviscid character. Hence, the 

maximum deflection was limited to 80% of full the servo stroke (i.e. 104 cm).  

 



 

Fig 7. Calculated and experimental aerodynamic force coefficients for symmetrical deflection of the steering 
lines (the solid lines indicate the trend of the experimental data). 

It is interesting to note that the simulations revealed a small tendency of the system to yaw (without rolling) to 

the right. Although the side displacement is almost negligible for small deflections, the effect becomes more evident 

for larger deflections. Some small asymmetry in the model cannot be discarded, but it is also possible that the flow 

unsteadiness (caused by the canopy deformation) could induce a yaw movement not counteracted by the parachute 

in a natural manner, leading to a small directional instability. Based on these results, the action of the parachute 

lateral stabilizers should be re-examined (these were not simulated in the present study, see Section IV-A). 

 

Fig. 8. Lateral view of the steady system configuration calculated for symmetrical deflection of the steering 
lines. From left to right: 30, 60 and 80% line deflection. 



 

Fig. 9. Plan view of the steady system configuration calculated for symmetrical deflection of the steering lines. 
From left to right: 30, 60 and 80% line deflection. 

C. Remarks on the choice of model parameters    

Since the geometry, mechanical properties and mass distribution of the system are taken from the real parachute, 

the only free parameters in the model are the coefficients of parasitic drag (suspension lines and canopy) and 

damping (canopy fabric). To determine suitable drag coefficients, the cable drag is first chosen based on 

experimental data (see section IV-B). Next, the parasitic canopy drag is adjusted until the total zero-lift drag of the 

parachute provided by the manufacturer is matched. The effects of drag distribution between the cables and canopy 

have been not investigated because they would require experimental data not available to the authors. Concerning 

canopy damping, it is important to stress that it is added to suppress local spurious oscillations and to make the 

simulation proceed smoothly. In this work, several numerical experiments were performed following [10, 29] to 

determine the minimum values required. It was verified that the resulting net damping forces and moments (this 

information is provided by the simulation code) are at least two orders of magnitude smaller than the inertial, 

aerodynamic and elastic forces. Hence, the expected effect on the global response of the system (e.g. trajectory) is 

small. Given that PARACHUTES was designed as a low fidelity tool optimized for speed, the compromises made 

are considered acceptable.  

As mentioned before, the damping and drag coefficients were adjusted only once for the steady flight condition 

without control lines deflection, and the values retained for all the cases involving maneuvers. In fact, the deflection 

in the analyses was limited to 80% because the drag coefficients adjusted for smooth flow conditions cannot reflect 

the increase in parasitic drag due to extensive flow separation (the potential solution also lacks reliability in such 



cases). The results presented are thus representative of the accuracy that can be achieved over most of the flight 

envelope using a single reference condition to calibrate the model parameters. 

VI. Conclusion 

A cost-effective low-fidelity method for the simulation of ram-air parachute-payload systems has been 

presented. It is based on a panel potential flow solver and staggered fluid-structure interaction coupling. The test 

cases presented analyze the descent of a parachute-payload configuration with and without deflection of the steering 

lines. Placing the focus on the validation of steady descent velocities and glide ratios, the simulations showed 

satisfactory results for the range of conditions investigated. 

The study also revealed the need to improve some aspects of the methodology, in particular those related to the 

estimation of the viscous drag contributions. In this regard, improved semi-empirical models accounting for 

separation drag effects could help to enhance the modeling with little additional cost. Improved estimates are also 

needed for a better representation of the canopy internal flow (which affects the total drag), and the permeability of 

the fabric can be simulated with simple code modifications using transpiration velocities. Overall, the results 

obtained are very encouraging and show that useful data for the practical analysis of parachutes can be obtained with 

simplified models and affordable computational costs. 

Acknowledgments 

The authors would like to acknowledge the financial support provided by the PARAPLANE project under the 

European Comission’s Seventh Framework Programme (contract number SME-2012-1-315105). Special thanks to 

CIMSA Ingeniería en Sistemas and the PARAPLANE consortium for providing the models, test data and many 

useful inputs during the development of this work. 

References 

1. Chatzikonstantinou, T., Numerical analysis of three-dimensional non rigid wings. AIAA paper 89-0907, Aerodynamic 
Decelerator Systems Technology Conference, 10 th, Cocoa Beach, FL, 1989. 

2. Ross, J.C., Computational Aerodynamics in the Design and Analysis of Ram-Air-Inflated Wings. AIAA Paper 1991-
1548, 1993: p. 10-13. 

3. Chatzikonstantinou, T., Recent advances in the numerical analysis of ram air wings - The three dimensional simulation 
code 'PARA3D'". 12th Aerodynamic Decelerator Systems Technology Conference, 1993. 

4. Chatzikonstantinou, T., Problems in ram air wing modeling and their solution in the three dimensional simulation code 
'PARA3D'. 15th Aerodynamic Decelerator Systems Technology Conference, Aerodynamic Decelerator Systems 
Technology Conferences, paper AIAA-99-1716, 1999. 



5. Mittal, S., Saxena, P., and Singh, A., Computation of two-dimensional flows past ram-air parachutes. International 
journal for numerical methods in fluids, 2001. 35(6): p. 643-667. 

6. Balaji, R., Mittal, S., and Rai, A.K., Effect of leading edge cut on the aerodynamics of ram‐air parachutes. 
International Journal for Numerical Methods in Fluids, 2005. 47(1): p. 1-17. 

7. Mohammadi, M.A. and Johari, H., Computation of Flow over a High Performance Parafoil. 20th AIAA Aerodynamic 
Decelerator Systems Technology Conference and Seminar, paper AIAA 2009-2979, 2009. 

8. Strickland, J.H., Homicz, G.F., Porter, V.L., and Gossler, A.A., VIPAR version 1.0. SANDIA report SAND2002-2174, 
2002. 

9. Altmann, H., Numerical simulation of parafoil aerodynamics and dynamic behaviour. In 20th AIAA Aerodynamic 
Decelerator Systems Technology Conference and Seminar, Seattle, WA, USA, paper AIAA 2009-2947, 2009. 

10. Flores, R., Ortega, E., Onate, E., Simple and efficient numerical tools for the analysis of parachutes. Engineering 
Computations, 2014. 31(5). 

11. Altmann, H., Fluid-Structure Interaction Analysis of Ram-Air Parafoil Wings. 23rd AIAA Aerodynamic Decelerator 
Systems Technology Conference, paper AIAA 2015-2184 2015. 

12. Tezduyar, T.E., Behr, M., Mittal, S., and Liou, J., A new strategy for finite element computations involving moving 
boundaries and interfaces-the deforming-spatial-domain/space-time procedure: II. Computation of free-surface flows, 
two-liquid flows, and flows with drifting cylinders. Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering, 1992. 
94(3): p. 353-371. 

13. Tezduyar, T.E., Behr, M., and Liou, J., A new strategy for fnite element computations involving moving boundaries and 
interfaces: the deforming-spatial-domain/space time procedure: I. The concept and the preliminary numerical tests. 
Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering, 1992. 94(3): p. 339-351. 

14. Kalro, V., Aliabadi, S.,Garrard, W., Tezduyar, T., Mittal, S., Stein, K., Parallel finite element simulation of large ram-
air parachutes.  International Journal for Numerical Methods in Fluids, 1997. 24(12): p. 1353-1369. 

15. Kalro, V., Tezduyar, T., A parallel 3D computational method for fluid–structure interactions in parachute systems. 
Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering, 2000. 190(3-4): p. 321-332. 

16. Takizawa, K. and Tezduyar, T., Computational methods for parachute fluid-structure interactions. Archives in 
Computational Methods in Engineering, 2012. 19: p. 125-169. 

17. Takizawa, K., Matthew Fritze, M., Montes, D., Spielman, T., and Tezduyar, T., Fluid-structure interaction modeling of 
ringsail parachutes with disreefing and modified geometric porosity. Computational Mechanics, 2012. 50(6): p. 835-
854. 

18. Takizawa, K., Tezduyar, T., Boswell, C., Tsutsui, Y., and K., M., Special methods for aerodynamic-moment 
calculations from parachute FSI modeling. Computational Mechanics, 2015. 55(6): p. 1059-1069. 

19. Takizawa, K., Tezduyar, T., and Kolesar, R., FSI modeling of the Orion spacecraft drogue parachutes. Computational 
Mechanics, 2015. 55(6): p. 1167-1179. 

20. Aquelet, N. and Tutt, B., A new fluid structure coupling application to parachute modelling. European Journal of 
Computational Mechanics/Revue Européenne de Mécanique Numérique, 2007. 16(3-4): p. 521-536. 

21. Karagiozis, K., Kamakoti R., Cirak, F., and Pantano, C., A computational study of supersonic disk-gap-band 
parachutes using Large-Eddy Simulation coupled to a structural membrane. Journal of Fluids and Structures, 2011. 27: 
p. 175-192. 

22. Kim, J.-D., Li, Y., and Li, X., Simulation of parachute FSI using the front tracking method. Journal of Fluids and 
Structures, 2013. 37: p. 100-119. 

23. Ibos, C., Lacroix, C., Goy, A., and Bordenave, P., Fluid-structure simulation of a 3D ram air parachute with SINPA 
software. 15th Aerodynamic Decelerator Systems Technology Conference, paper AIAA-99-1713, 1999. 

24. Oye, I.J., Development of Aerodynamic Analysis Software Tools within the FASTWing CL Project. 20th AIAA 
Aerodynamic Decelerator Systems Technology Conference and Seminar, Seattle, WA, USA paper AIAA 2009-2931, 
2009. 

25. Tutt, B., Richard, C., Roland, S., and Noetscher, G., Development of parachute simulation techniques in LS-DYNA, in 
11th International LS-DYNA Users conference 2010: Detroit. 

26. Y. Coquet Y., Bordenave, P., Capmas, G., and Espinosa, C., Improvements in Fluid Structure Interaction Simulations 
of Parachutes Using LS-Dyna®. 21st AIAA Aerodynamic Decelerator Systems Technology Conference and Seminar, 
Dublin, Ireland, paper AIAA 2011-2590, 2011. 

27. CIMSA Ingeniería en Sistemas. Web page: http://www.cimsa.com/ (August 2015). 
28. Ortega, E. and Flores, R., PARACHUTES. A computer program for calculating ram-air parachutes. Theory document. 

CIMNE publication, 2015. 
29. De la Torre, D., Ortega, E., and Flores, R., PARACHUTES. A computer program for calculating ram-air parachutes. 

User's manual. CIMNE publication, 2015. 
30. PARAPLANE. Web page: http://www.cimne.com/paraplane, CIMNE 2015. 
31. PARAPLANE. Development of a New Steerable Parachute System for Rescue of Small and Medium Size Airplanes. 

REF. 315105-. Seventh Framework Program, European Comission, 01/12/2012 - 30/06/2015. 
32. Flores, R., Ortega, E., Valles, J., Oñate, E. A simulation tool for parachute/payload systems. in 11th World Congress on 

Computational Mechanics (WCCM XI). 2014. Barcelona, Spain. 



33. Ashby, D.L., Potential flow theory and operation guide for the panel code PMARC_14. NASA TM-1999-209582, 
1999. 

34. Maskew, B., Program VSAERO theory document. A computer program for calculating nonlinear aerodynamic 
characteristics of arbitrary configurations. NASA Report 4023, 1987. 

35. Cicolani, L., Kanning, G., A comprehensive estimate of the static aerodynamic forces and moments of the 8- by 8- by 
20-Foot cargo container. NASA Technical Memorandum 89433, 1987. 

36. Lissaman, P., Brown, G., Apparent mass effects on parafoil dynamics. AIAA Paper 1993-1236, 1993: p. 10-13. 
37. Hoerner, S.F., Fluid-dynamic drag: practical information on aerodynamic drag and hydrodynamic resistance1965: 

Midland Park, NJ: Hoerner Fluid Dynamics. 
38. Lingard, J., Precision aerial delivery/ram-air parachute design. 13th AIAA ADS Conference and Seminar, Clearwater 

Beach, 1995. 
 
 


