















































 

1 
 

Outlook on Ecological Improved Composites for Aviation Interior and Secondary 
Structures 

 
Jens Bachmann* (1), Xiaosu YI* (2), Hugh Gong (3), Xavier Martinez(4,5), Gabriel Bugeda(4,6), Sergio 

Oller(4,6), Konstantinos Tserpes(7), Eric Ramon(8), Christophe Paris(9), Zhengping FANG(10), Yan LI (11), 
Yanfeng LIU(12), Xiaoqing LIU(13), Guijun XIAN(14), Jianfeng TONG(15), Jiahu WEI(16), Xufeng ZHANG(17), 

Jin ZHU(18) 

 
(1) DLR – Deutsches Zentrum für Luft- und Raumfahrt e.V. (German Aerospace Centre),Institute of 

Composite Structures and Adaptive Systems - Department of Multifunctional Materials, Lilienthalplatz 7, 
38108 Braunschweig, Germany, Email: jens.bachmann@dlr.de 

(2) AVIC Composite Corporation Ltd.(ACC) / Beijing Institute of Aeronautical Materials (BIAM), Shuanghe Str. 
ShunYi District, 101300 Beijing, China, Email: yi_xiaosu@sina.cn 

(3) School of Materials, University of Manchester, Oxford Rd, Manchester, M13 9PL, UK, Email: 
hugh.gong@manchester.ac.uk 

(4) Centre Internacional de Mètodes Numèrics a l'Enginyeria (CIMNE). Gran Capità, s/n, 08034, Barcelona, 
Spain, Email: x.martinez@upc.edu 

(5) Department of Nautical Science and Engineering - UPC. Pla de Palau 18, 08003 Barcelona, Spain, Email: 
bugeda@cimne.upc.edu 

(6) Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering - UPC. Jordi Girona, 1-3. 08034 Barcelona, Email: 
sergio.oller@upc.edu 

(7) Laboratory of Technology & Strength of Materials Department of Mechanical Engineering & Aeronautics, 
University of Patras, Patras, 26500, Greece, Email: kitserpes@upatras.gr 

(8) LEITAT Technological Center, C/ de la Innovació, 2 · 08225 Terrassa, Barcelona, Email: 
eramon@leitat.org 

(9) Airbus Group Innovations, Composite Materials Technologies, 12 Rue Pasteur - 92150 SURESNES, 
France, Email: christophe.c.paris@airbus.com 

(10) Zhejiang University ，866 Yuhangtang Road，Hangzhou, Zhejiang Province 310058, Email: 
zpfang@zju.edu.cn 

(11) Tongji University, 1239 Siping Road, 200092 Shanghai, China, Email: liyan@tongji.edu.cn 
(12) Beijing Institute of Aeronautical Materials, Wen Quan Town Haidian District, Beijing, China, Email: 

canpul@gmail.cn 
(13) Ningbo Institute of Materials and Engineering, CAS, 1219 West Zhongguan Street, 315000 Ningbo, 

China, Email: liuxq@nimte.ac.cn 
(14) Harbin Institute of Technology, 92 West Da Zhi Street, 150001 Harbin, China, Email: gjxian@hit.edu.cn 

(15) Aeronautical Industry Park Building 101 2nd Floor, No.66 Shuanghe Street Beijing China, Email: 
broadtjf@sina.com 

(16) Beijing Institute of Aeronautical Materials, Wen Quan Town Haidian District, Beijing, China, Email: 
weijiahu1981@163.com 

(17) Aeronautical Industry Park Building 101 2nd Floor, No.66 Shuanghe Street Beijing China, Email: 
010xufeng@sina.com 

(18) Ningbo Institute of Materials and Engineering, CAS, 1219 West Zhongguan Street, 315000 Ningbo, 
China, Email: jzhu@nimte.ac.cn 

 
(*) Coordinators of the ECO-COMPASS project (www.eco-compass.eu) 

 
KEYWORDS: Aviation, Eco-Composite, Bio-Fibre, 
Bio-Resin, Interior, Secondary Structure, 
Sandwich, Hybrid, Recycling. 
 
ABSTRACT: 
 
Today, mainly man-made materials like carbon and 
glass fibres are used to produce composite parts in 
aviation. Renewable materials like natural fibres or 
bio-sourced resin systems have not found their 
way into aviation, yet. The project ECO-COMPASS 

aims to evaluate the potential applications of 
ecological improved composite materials in the 
aviation sector in an international collaboration of 
Chinese and European partners.  Natural fibres 
like flax and ramie will be used for different types of 
reinforcements and sandwich cores. Furthermore 
the bio-based epoxy resins to substitute bisphenol-
A based epoxy resins in secondary structures are 
under investigation. Adapted material protection 
technologies to reduce environmental influence 
and to improve fire resistance are needed to fulfil 

mailto:yi_xiaosu@sina.cn


 

2 
 

the demanding safety requirements in aviation. 
Modelling and simulation of chosen eco-
composites aims for an optimized use of materials 
while a Life Cycle Assessment aims to prove the 
ecological advantages compared to synthetic 
state-of-the-art materials. In this paper, the status 
of different ecological improved materials will be 
presented with an outlook for potential application 
in interior and secondary structures. 
 
1. BACKGROUND 
 
Lightweight structures made from composite 
materials have gained in importance due to their 
excellent mechanical properties combined with 
relatively low weight. Fibre Reinforced Polymers 
(FRP) enable the construction of lighter and more 
efficient aircrafts resulting in the reduction of fuel 
consumption and increased payloads. High 
performance composites like carbon-fibre 
reinforced plastics (CFRP) are used in primary 
structures of modern aircrafts like Airbus A350 
(Fig. 1) and Boeing 787 Dreamliner. They replace 
more and more the classic materials such as 
aluminium or titanium. Furthermore glass fibre 
reinforced plastics (GFRP) sandwich with phenolic 
resins as matrix system find their application in the 
interior due to their low weight to stiffness ratio.  
 
But all these composite materials currently used in 
aviation have one thing in common: they are man-
made and especially the carbon fibres are very 
energy intensive in the production. Renewable 
materials like bio-fibres and bio-resins are under 
investigation for a long time for their use in 
composites but they have not been introduced into 
a modern aircraft in noticeable amounts yet. 
 
As safety is of primary importance in aviation, the 
lack of experience and confidence in the long-term 
performance and mechanical properties of 
composites made of renewable materials is still an 
obstacle for their usage. It is therefore at the 
moment out of scope to substitute high 
performance and safety-relevant composites like 
CFRP in primary structural parts of the aircraft, for 
example the fuselage frame and the outer wing 
box, with bio-sourced materials. On the other side, 
secondary structures and interior composites 
which are not stressed on such high levels offer 
possible areas of application. Examples for 
secondary structural parts are fairings and the 
landing gear doors. In the interior, cabin ceiling 
panels, sidewalls and floor panels are aims for the 
substitution of glass fibres and phenolic resins with 
ecological improved developments. 
 

 
Figure 1: Materials used in an airframe of a 

modern aircraft, the Airbus A350 [1] 
 
2. THE ECO-COMPASS PROJECT 
 
Since long time the European Union enables the 
research for aeronautical materials to increase the 
environmental performance of aircrafts with 
projects like Clean Sky in Horizon 2020 and 
precursor framework programs. In the GRAIN 
project (GReener Aeronautics International 
Networking), Chinese and European partners 
identified together possible research areas of 
mutual interest, such as composites made from 
renewable materials and function-integrated 
carbon fibre structural composites. The time is now 
right for promoting the introduction of ecological 
favourable materials into the aviation sector with 
the help of the ECO-COMPASS EU-China project. 
  
ECO-COMPASS stands for “Ecological and 
Multifunctional Composites for Application in 
Aircraft Interior and Secondary Structures”. It is a 
Horizon2020 research and innovation action (RIA) 
project with overall 19 partners from Europe (8) 
and China (11). The Chinese partners receive 
funding from the Chinese Ministry of Industry and 
Information Technology (MIIT).  Main objective of 
the project ECO-COMPASS is to develop and 
assess ecological improved and multifunctional 
composites for application in the aviation sector. 
Therefore it will bundle the knowledge of research 
from participants in China and Europe to develop 
ecological improved materials for their application 
in aviation structures with a better ecological 
balance than materials currently used.  
 
The application of renewable materials especially 
in both aircraft secondary structures and interior is 
a very ambitious objective due to the stringent 
requirements. However, the impact of the results 
could reach much further than aerospace industry 
with its challenging requirements to ensure the 



 

3 
 

safety of the passengers. Ecological composites 
that are improved regarding their mechanical, 
multifunctional and ageing properties are also very 
interesting for other transportation industries like 
automotive, train and marine. Furthermore other 
sectors like wind energy and recreational 
equipment could profit from the results. 
 
Ecological improved does not necessary mean that 
only bio-based materials will be evaluated. 
Recycled materials and technologies to enhance 
the multifunctional aspects of composites have to 

be investigated, too (Fig. 2). For example a 
material protection technology that is needed in 
case of using bio-based fibres like flax or ramie for 
interior applications is a adapted fire protection. 
These and other technologies could be combined 
and will be evaluated for their use in the aerospace 
industry not only on technical readiness level (TRL) 
but also on environmental impacts compared to 
selected state of the art parts with an 
accompanying Life Cycle Assessment (LCA). 
 

 
Figure 2:Simplified circular flow diagram for ECO-COMPASS tasks. 

 
 
3. APPLICATION SCENARIOS FOR ECO-

COMPOSITES IN AVIATION 
 
It must be distinguished between the identified 
applications: secondary structures and interior. The 
requirements of those applications differ 
considerable and therefore different ways to meet 
these requirements are planned in ECO-
COMPASS. The focus for interior materials (Fig. 3) 
will be on the fire properties (flammability, heat 
release, smoke and toxicity) and multifunctional 
benefits that can be achieved by the use of natural 
fibres, e.g. acoustic damping. On the other side, 
the secondary structures have higher requirements 
regarding the mechanical properties of the 
composite. The influence of environmental impacts 
like moisture, ultraviolet radiation and lightning 
strike will be taken into account in ECO-
COMPASS. Apart from secondary structures the 
Chinese partners will evaluate an approach to 
enhance the conductivity of composites by 
interlayers. This will also be applicable for high 
performance CFRP used in primary structures. 

 

 
Figure 3: Examples for interior sandwich parts 

 
Pure bio-composites made of bio-fibres (e.g. flax, 
ramie) and bio-resin (e.g. epoxy) will be evaluated 
in parallel with a new approach that aims to 
combine valuable recycled carbon fibres and bio-
fibres in a hybrid non-woven. Together with natural 
fibre semi-finished products developed in China 
(woven, unidirectional reinforcements), this will 
enable the aircraft engineer to select the right 
material for the desired application. Fibre 
treatments to enhance the mechanical properties 
and processability of natural fibres will be proposed 



 

4 
 

from partners in Europe (e.g. plasma treatment) 
and China (e.g. nano-cellulose) with the aim to 
improve the fibre-matrix adhesion which is crucial 
for best properties of FRP. Furthermore novel 
hybrid material solutions for sandwich cores will be 
evaluated. 
 
In parallel to the work on ecological reinforcement 
fibres the development of bio-sourced resins as 
substitutions for the currently used bisphenol-A 
based epoxies and phenolic resins will be carried 
out. On the Chinese side, three different and 
promising bio-epoxy variants will be optimized and 
evaluated for this task. As epoxy resin will be 
mainly interesting for load-carrying applications the 
European partners will in parallel evaluate the 
market situation on bio-based resins to replace the 
phenolic resin that is used in the cabin 
environment today. 
As the use of biological materials brings new 
challenges like moisture sensitivity and fungal 
attack, special attention will be paid to adapted 
protection technologies. Solutions to mitigate these 
environmental influences will be identified and 
tested, e.g. special coatings that do not influence 
the mechanical behaviour of the composites. 
Furthermore fibre treatments (sizing) and resin 
additives like effective nano-particles to enhance 
these crucial properties will be assessed. It will be 
of high importance in the project that these 
protection technologies should only be applied if 
they are necessary to fulfil their desired function as 
every further material and treatment potentially 
increases the ecological footprint, cost and weight. 
Therefore a evaluation of the environmental impact 
will be carried out not only by technical means but 
also regarding their ecological impact with the help 
of a Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) according to 
ISO14040. 
 
In order to reduce the effort of certification tests, a 
numerical simulation of the developed composites 
will be of high value to assess the improvements 
and challenges of the proposed materials. It is well 
known that the use of the Finite Element Method 
(FEM) allows for a significant reduction of the 
required certification tests of structural elements, 
components or full scale structures. Even though 
this project is not accounting for high responsibility 
load bearing components but mainly for secondary 
structures and interior parts, the use of numerical 
tools will assist the mechanical characterization of 
new materials stage and consequently the 
associated cost. Structural, thermal as well as 
electromagnetic numerical analysis will be 
performed and validated by the Chinese and 
European partners. Finally, when all numerical 

analyses are validated and offer good agreement 
with experimental results they will be used for the 
design optimization of new eco-composites. 
 
A compromise between the required materials 
properties, cost and ecological impact has to be 
found for every application in a specific way. This 
means any eco-material may be used on its own 
and does not necessarily need to be combined 
with the other eco-materials but with state of the art 
materials already used to achieve a positive effect. 
A possible scenario is the use of bio-resins with 
standard man-made reinforcement fibres in 
applications where higher mechanical properties 
are of importance or the environmental influence 
impedes the use of bio-sourced fibres. 
 
4. OUTLOOK FOR ECO-MATERIALS  
 
Current state-of-the-art materials in aircraft cabins 
are very stiff and lightweight sandwich panels used 
for instance in the ceilings, linings and hat racks. 
These sandwich panels contain a core made of 
aramid fibres and phenolic resin. Glass fibres are 
used in combination with the phenolic resin as 
prepreg-reinforcement for the top-layers of the 
sandwich (Fig. 3). These very light and stiff panels 
are manufactured in a heated press. No ecological 
satisfactory end of life treatment is available for 
such sandwich panels because of the usage of 
phenolics and glass/aramid fibres. [2, 3]   
 
The secondary structural parts require materials 
with higher mechanical properties. Because of 
weight and mechanical requirements, continuous 
carbon fibres are mainly used for such parts. To 
protect the electromagnetic interference and 
particularly the lightning strike, electrical 
conductive structural composites are desired to 
use in the critical zones of aircraft. The state-of-
the-art carbon composites cannot satisfy the 
requirements. This is a big technological challenge 
for the polymer matrix composites [4,5,6,7,8,9,10]. 
 
4.1 REINFORCEMENT FIBRES 
 
A multitude of bio-fibres is available on the world 
market. In Europe, flax and hemp fibres are the 
most common bast-fibres used to reinforce 
composites. Ramie fibres that are grown in China 
are another suitable candidate. A drawback of 
natural fibre reinforced plastics (NFRP) is their lack 
of strength compared to glass and carbon fibre 
reinforced plastics (GFRP, CFRP). In theory, 
natural fibres can reach very high values for tensile 
strength of up to 1000MPa but due to 
imperfections (kink bands) and incompatibilities to 



 

5 
 

certain resin systems their potential cannot be fully 
used [2; 10]. The poor interfacial bonding 
properties between hydrophilic natural fibres and 
hydrophobic polymers lead to low mechanical 
properties of NFRP. Therefore, improving the 
interfacial strength and toughness is necessary in 
order to improve facilitate their full potential. On the 
other side, the low density of bio-fibres leads to 
good specific stiffness values comparable to GFRP 
with further advantages on acoustic and thermal 
damping due to their hollow structure, the lumen 
(Fig. 4) [11].  
 

 
Figure 4: Cross section of a ramie fibre [] 

 
Based on previous successful research 
experiences on using chemicals and CNTs to 
improve the interfacial properties of NFRP, the 
application of nano-natural cellulose to modify the 
interfacial and interlaminar properties of the 
composites will be investigated [12]. In a Chinese 
study, zirconia nanoparticles (ZrO2) were designed 
and grafted onto flax fibres by hydrogen bonds as 
seen in Fig. 5 [13]. The results are an increased 
tensile strength of the grafted flax fibres while the 
tensile modulus is not affected. Another positive 
effect of ZrO2 grafted fibres is the reduced grow of 
fungal colonies on flax fibre reinforced epoxy 
composites. 
 

 
Figure 5: Nano particle aggregation  

on a flax fibre [13] 
 

Another topic of ECO-COMPASS is the evaluation 
of recycled carbon fibres (rCF). New carbon fibres 
are very expensive due to their energy intensive 
production process. It is therefore of high 
importance to reuse these valuable fibres in order 
to save energy, raw materials and cost. Pyrolysis 
of CFRP is a process that has made it into 
industrial use recently to regain carbon fibres from 
composite waste. These recycled carbon fibres 
(rCF) are available in milled and chopped form. 
The restricted length and the removel of the fibre 
sizing are their main drawbacks compared to virgin 
carbon fibres (vCF) [14; 15]. It is therefore at the 
moment not possible to give these “downcycled” 
fibres the same function as virgin carbon fibres.  
 

 
Figure 6: Combination of flax fibres and recycled 

carbon fibres in a hybrid non-woven  
 
In parallel to classic reinforcment types used in 
aviation, the combination of renewable bio-fibres 
and recycled carbon fibres in a hybrid non-woven 
will be evaluated as an alternative way to find 
applications for a rising amount of recycled carbon 
fibres (Fig. 6). Recycled carbon fibres have short 
and variable length which makes it very difficult to 
convert them into continuous yarns for traditional 
woven reinforcements. Non-woven processes are 
capable of combining different types of fibres of 
variable length in a single web structure for 
composite production. Nonwoven processes are 
also less expensive and more eco efficient 
compared to classic woven fabrics from bio-fibres 
due to their simpler production process [3]. 
Renewable bio-fibres such as flax and PLA have 
been successfully combined to produce bio-
degradable nonwoven composites [16,17,18]. The 
combination of recycled carbon fibres with bio-
fibres could enable the designer to optimize 
multifunctional eco-efficient composites by using 
their inherent advantages.  
 
4.2 BIO-BASED POLYMERIC RESINS 
 
Today, thermosets are the most important polymer 
family used in the aviation industry [19], due to 
their versatility, high performance and the wide 
span of applications they comprise. Mainly 
phenolic and epoxy resins are used for the interior 
panels and secondary structures of aircraft [20; 
21]. However, their petrochemical base and the 
difficulty of thermosets to be recycled, forces the 



 

6 
 

industry to seek for feasible alternatives that can 
reduce the ecological footprint associated to their 
production [21].  
 

 
Fig. 7: Chemical structures of rosin-based curing 

agents MMP and MPA and petroleum-based 
curing agents CHDB and BTCA. [24] 

 
In ECO-COMPASS, promising bio-based resins 
will be assessed for their use in aerospace 
applications. Thermosetting epoxies from rosin, 
itaconic and gallic acid (Fig. 7) have been 
identified as candidates from China, due to their 
aliphatic-cyclic structure which can outperform 
existing solutions in terms of mechanical properties 
and chemical resistance [22,23,24]. Other bio-
based resins show very promising fire properties 
comparable to phenolic resins. As example, figure 
8 shows the results of flammability tests with glass 
and bio-fibre reinforced composites. Several at 
least partly bio-based resins (epoxy (EP), furfuyl 
alcohol based resin (FUR) and linseed acrylate 
resin (ACR)) have been compared to phenolic 
resin (PF) as reference. The furfuryl alcohol based 
resin shows results in the range of the phenolic 
reference when it is reinforced with glass fibres. 
Furthermore the need for flame retardants in case 
of using bio-sourced fibres is clearly visible as 
none of the specimens reinforced with flax fibres 
passed the test with the threshold of a maximal 
burn length of 152mm [2]. 
 

Fig. 8: Burn length of glass and bio-fibre reinforced 
composites [2] 

 
The incorporation of additives within the resins will 
be analysed to enhance the performance of neat 
resins and subsequent composite manufacturing. 

With this purpose, application of carbon based 
additives such as graphene, graphene oxide [25] 
or CNT [26], as well as silicon carbide 
nanoparticles (nanotubes or nanowhiskers) could 
be highly efficient in terms of thermal conductivity 
enhancement [27,28,29], along with electric 
conductivity [30] and enhancement of mechanical 
properties [31; 32]. Furthermore, specific coupling 
agents will be employed in order to enhance the 
compatibility with additives and fibres. On the other 
hand, fire resistance properties will be enhanced 
by means of nanotechnology and innovative 
halogen-free phosphorous based reactive fire 
retardant additives, covalently linked to the neat 
resin [33].  
 
4.3 COMPOSITE MANUFACTURING 
 
The final composite material properties are related 
to the control of the processing parameters during 
the manufacturing. The choices of the appropriate 
pressure, temperature and curing time are matter 
of importance to obtain low porosity contents and 
an important extend of cure.  
As different bio based materials will be considered 
in the ECO COMPASS project, a physico chemical 
characterization campaign will be done to identify 
the polymerization kinetics and the rheological 
behaviour of the materials to be transformed. 
These tests, which will also be carried out on 
formulations with fillers for multifunctionnal 
properties enhancement, will allow the 
identification of the most suitable process windows 
to guarantee the best compromise between high 
material properties, and limited curing cycle time. 
As bio based materials are usually very sensitive to 
the environnement and show bigger deviation 
standards on properties than “non bio based” 
materials, such definition of the curing cycles 
parameters are critically important to maximize the 
process reliability and to increase the repeatability 
of the final properties of the materials 
manufactured.  
Then, composite laminates and sandwich 
composites will be manufactured by autoclave and 
hot press. Thanks to resin and fiber formulations 
with fillers, an enhancement of the material 
performances is targeted, such as structural and 
mechanical properties, structural damping, 
fire/smoke/toxicity and hygrothermal ageing 
properties. Samples lay ups and dimensions will be 
chosen according to aeronautical specifications 
and standards, and material health will be 
preliminary controled by ultrasonic testing before 
characterization. 
Material protection will also be evaluated to 
improve the durability of the material manufactured 



 

7 
 

regarding environmental attacks and Fire Smoke 
and Toxicity properties, but will require a study of 
the compatibility of the material with these 
solutions. For the different applications (secondary 
structures and interior parts), a special attention 
will be paid to the total weight increase induced by 
the material protections, which will be parameter 
for the choice of the coating. Of course, synergies 
between the different requirements will be looked 
for between the different solutions evaluated.  
 
4.4 MODELLING & SIMULATION  
 
The objective of ECO-COMPASS research is to 
design, improve and optimize the eco-composites 
to be used in an efficient way in (semi-)structural 
parts. The mechanical-numerical proposal for such 
purpose consists of an investigation addressed to 
obtain good mechanical properties, durable, and 
resistant eco-composites based on rational 
analysis that provides by the adaptation of 
generalized mixing theory and/or multiple scale 
homogenization theory [34; 35; 36], derived from 
the formulations for the classical composite 
material, and all these mechanical formulations 
within a framework provided by the genetic 
algorithms optimization [37; 38]. So, the proposed 
procedure promises a detailed behaviour study of 
the whole composite, starting from each one’s 
simple component behaviour. It seeks to obtain 
sustainable materials which are also mechanically 
and thermally efficient.  
Multiscale procedures are based in analysing a 
material model (micro-model), assuming a periodic 
distribution of the material within the structure. This 
analysis provides the material response, which can 
be used in a structural model (macro-model) to 
obtain the global performance of the structure. 
There are several approaches in which a 
multiscale procedure can be defined. The 
generalized theory of mixtures or serial/parallel 
mixing theory [34, 39] proposes a 
phenomenological homogenization in which the 
composite performance is obtained from the 
constitutive models of its components and some 
closing equations that define how these 
components interact among them. This formulation 
is capable of accounting for complex failure 
procedures such as delaminations, with an 
affordable computational cost [40; 41]. 
 
The other multiscale approach that will be used 
consists in obtaining the composite performance 
from the analysis of a numerical model of a 
representative volume element (RVE). The 
boundary conditions to be applied at the RVE 
come from the macro-model and the response 

obtained from the RVE is transferred to the 
structural model. An example on how a multiscale 
analysis works is shown in Fig. 9, in which are 
plotted the stresses obtained in the macro and 
micro scales for a clamped beam made with a 
pultrusion composite. As it is shown by Otero et al 
in [42] the main drawback of this approach is its 
computational cost. For this reason, ECO-
COMPASS project will look into two different 
strategies to reduce it. One consist on defining a 
comparison parameter capable to predict if a given 
material point might have reached its threshold 
stress-strain state. His approach has been 
formulated in [43] and has shown an excellent 
performance. The second approach consists in 
analysing the failure of RVE under different stress-
strain states to create a material database defining 
failure threshold and its evolution. This approach 
requires an initial computational effort to define the 
database but, afterwards, the structural simulation 
can be conducted quite easily. 
 

 
Fig. 9: Stresses in the macro and micro models of 

a clamped pultruded composite beam [40] 
 
All formulations developed to analyse composite 
structures require, also of accurate material 
models to characterize the constituent materials. 
The working group involved in ECO-COMPASS 
will use advanced constitutive models for the 
materials [44; 45], together with specific 
formulations to account for large anisotropy 
behaviour [46], or plastic mechanical damage and 
moisture content [47]. The optimal material design 
[37; 38] in terms of the structure and its uses 
depending on the climatic conditions of the place 
also will be considered through thermal treatment 
of conduction and diffusion. 
 
The use of virtual design and optimization models 
that will be developed in ECO-COMPASS will 
reduce the development time and cost of 
multifunctional eco-composites by reducing the 
number of manufacturing trials and experiments. 
Investigation is carried out on the understanding of 
material parameters and processing factors 
affecting the mechanical, thermal and electrical 



 

8 
 

properties of bio-polymer nanocomposites as well 
as the electromagnetic shielding properties and 
lightning strike behavior of eco-composites using 
numerical [48; 49; 50; 51] and/or analytical models. 
The material parameters considered are the 
nanofiller dimensions, the nanofiller configuration, 
the properties of the nanofiller/matrix interphase 
and the properties of the bio-polymer and fibers. 
The processing factors considered are the 
nanofiller volume fraction and the formation of 
agglomerates of nanofillers. The investigation is 
conducted by means of representative unit cells 

(RUCs) of nanofiller agglomerates developed using 
the DIGIMAT software. The RUCs are solved 
numerically using the finite element method and 
analytically using the Mori-Tanaka method. At the 
same time, homogenization of the RUCs is applied 
through the use of periodic boundary conditions. 
The models will receive input from microscopy 
images (SEM, AFM, etc) and will be validated 
against mechanical, thermal, electrical, EMI and 
lightning strike tests. 
 
 

 
Fig. 10: Examples of materials and technologies under investigation in ECO-COMPASS 

5. CONCLUSIONS  
 
Lightweight structures made from composite 
materials have excellent mechanical properties 
combined  with relatively low weight. These high-
performance composites used today in aviation are 
mainly based on man-made components like 
carbon fibres. Bio-sourced materials like flax fibres 
offer very promising characteristics but have not 
found their way into aviation, yet. The project ECO-
COMPASS aims to bundle the knowledge of 
research in China and Europe to develop 
ecological improved composites for the use in 
aircraft secondary structures and interior. 
Therefore bio-based/recycled reinforcements, 
resins and sandwich cores will be assessed and 
optimized for their application in aviation. To 
withstand the special stresses in aviation 
environment, protection technologies to mitigate 
the risks of fire, lightning and moisture uptake will 

be investigated while an adapted modelling and 
simulation will enable the optimization of the 
composite design. Electrical conductive 
composites for electromagnetic interference 
shielding and lightning strike protection will be 
investigated as well to improve the overall 
properties of high-performence composites. A 
cradle to grave Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) will 
be carried in parallel to compare the eco-
composites with state-of-the-art materials. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
 
This project has received funding from the 
European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and 
innovation programme under grant agreement No 
690638. 
 
REFERENCES 
 



 

9 
 

1. Airbus technical magazine, June 2013 
2. Bachmann, J. and Fischer, H. (2013). Bioharze 

und flammgeschützte Naturfasern: Nachhaltige 
Materialien für das Flugzeuginterieur? 2. AVK-
Fachtagung „Flammschutz bei Composites-
Anwendungen“. 10. Dez. 2013, Frankfurt 
(Main), Germany. 

3. Bachmann, J. and Michelis, B. (2001). 
Verbesserung der Brandeigenschaften von 
NFK im Hinblick auf den Luftfahrt-
Kabineneinsatz. Hanser Industrietag: 
Naturfaserverstärkte und andere innovative 
Verbundstoffe, 28. - 29.06.2011, Köln,  
Germany 

4. Chen C.Z., Li Y.* and Yu T. (2014), 
Interlaminar toughening in flax fiber-reinforced 
composites interleaved with carbon nanotube 
buckypaper, Journal of Reinforced Plastics 
and Composites, 33(20), 1859-1868 

5. Li Y., Chen C.Z., Xu J., Zhang C.Z., Yuan B.Y. 
and Huang B.Y. (2015). Improved mechanical 
properties of carbon nanotubes coated flax 
fiber reinforced composites, Journal of 
Materials Science, 50(3), 1117-1128. 

6. Shen X., Jia J.J, Chen C.Z., Li Y.* and Kim 
J.K., (2014). Enhancement of mechanical 
properties of natural fiber composites via 
carbon nanotube addition, Journal of Material 
Science, 49(8), 3225-3233. 

7. Yu T., Ren J., Li S.M., Yuan H., Li Y. (2010). 
Effect of fiber surface-treatments on the 
properties of poly(lactic acid)/ramie 
composites. Composites Part A, 41, 499-505. 

8. Li Y., Hu C.J., Yu Y.H. (2008), Interfacial 
Studies of Sisal Fiber Reinforced High Density 
Polyethylene (HDPE) Composites, Composites 
Part A., 39, 570-578, 2008. 

9. Li Y. & Mai Y.W. (2006), Interfacial 
Characteristics between Sisal Fiber and 
Polymeric Matrices, Journal of Adhesion, 82, 
527-554. 

10. Li Y., Mai Y.W. and Ye L. (2005). Effects of 
Fiber Surface Treatment on the Fracture-
Mechanical Properties of Sisal-Fiber 
Composites, Composite Interfaces, 12(1), 141-
163 

11. Bos, H.L. (2004). The Potential of Flax Fibres 
as Reinforcement for Composite Materials, 
Doctoral thesis, TU Eindhoven. 

12. Xian, G. (2015). Surface grafting of flax fibres 
with hydrous zirconia nanoparticles and the 
effects on the tensile and bonding properties. 
Journal of Composite Materials. 0(0) 1–9. 

13. Wang, H., Xian, G. and Li, H. (2015). Grafting 
of nano-TiO2 onto flax fibers and the 
enhancement of the mechanical properties of 
the flax fiber and flax fiber/epoxy composite. 

Composites Part A: Applied Science and 
Manufacturing, p. 172-180. 

14. Pimenta, S., & Pinto, S.T. (2011). “Recycling 
carbon fibre reinforced polymers for structural 
applications: Technology review and market 
outlook”. Waste Management 31, pp. 378-392 

15. Fischer, H. & Schmid, H.G. (2013).  
„Qualitätskontrolle für rezyklierte 
Carbonfasern“ (German, engl.: „Quality control 
for recycled carbon fibres“). Kunststoffe 
11/2013, pp. 88-91 

16. S. Alimuzzaman; R. H. Gong; M. Akonda. 3D 
Nonwoven Flax Fiber Reinforced Polylactic 
Acid Biocomposites. Polymer Composites, Vol. 
35 (2014), 1244-1252. 

17. S. Alimuzzaman; R. H. Gong; M. Akonda. 
Biodegradability of Nonwoven Flax Fiber 
Reinforced Polylactic Acid Biocomposites. 
Polymer Composites. Vol. 35 (2014), 1244-
1252. 

18. S. Alimuzzaman, R. H. Gong and M. Akonda. 
Nonwoven Polylactic Acid and Flax 
Biocomposites. Polymer Composites. Vol. 34 
(2013), 1611–1619. 

19. Cerruti, P., Avella, M., Errico, M.E.,  
Malinconico, M. and Corvino, R. “New life for 
aircraft waste”. Plastics Reasearch Online. 

20. “Composites: materials of the future; Part 10: 
Composites in aeronautics”. Available at: 
http://www.pluscomposites.eu/sites/default/file
s/Technical-articles-chapter10-EN.pdf 

21. Pickering, S.J. (2006). “Recycling technologies 
for thermoset composite materials—current 
status” Composites: Part A Vol. 37, pp. 1206–
1215. 

22. Auvergene, R. et al (2014) “Biobased 
Thermosetting Epoxy: Present and Future” 
Chemical Reviews, Vol. 114 Iss. 2, pp 1082–
1115. 

23. Liu, Q.Y. et al (2012). “Preparation of a bio-
based epoxy with comparable properties to 
those of petroleum-based counterparts”. 
eXPRESS Polymer Letters, Vol.6, N.4 pp. 
293–298. 

24. Li, C. et al (2013). “Synthesis, Characterization 
of a Rosin-based Epoxy Monomer and its 
Comparison with a Petroleum-based 
Counterpart” Journal of Macromolecular 
Science, Part A: Pure and Applied Chemistry, 
Vol. 50, Iss 3,pp. 321-329. 

25. Tang, L. et al (2013). “The effect of 
graphenedispersion on the mechanical 
properties of graphene/epoxy composites”, 
Carbon, Vol. 60, pp. 16–27. 

26. Sánchez, M. et al (2013). “Effect of the 
carbonnanotube functionalization on flexural 
properties of multiscale carbon fiber/epoxy 

http://www.pluscomposites.eu/sites/default/files/Technical-articles-chapter10-EN.pdf
http://www.pluscomposites.eu/sites/default/files/Technical-articles-chapter10-EN.pdf


 

10 
 

composites manufactured by VARIM” 
Composites Part B: Engineering, Vol. 45, Iss. 
1, pp. 1613–1619. 

27. Yang, S. et al (2010). “Effect of functionalized 
carbon nanotubes on the thermal conductivity 
of epoxy composites”, Carbon, Vol. 48, Iss. 3, 
pp. 592–603. 

28. Mohammadrez, N. et al (2015). “Fabrication 
and characterization of silicon carbide/epoxy 
nanocomposite using silicon carbide 
nanowhisker and nanoparticle reinforcements”, 
Journal of composite materials. 

29. Kavitha, N. et al (2012) “Investigation of impact 
behavior of epoxy reinforced with nanometer- 
and micrometer-sized silicon carbide particles” 
Journal of Composite Materials. 

30. Choi, E.S. et al. (2013). “Enhancement of  
thermal and electrical properties of carbon 
nanotube polymer composites by magnetic 
field processing” Journal of Applied Physics 
Vol. 94, Vol. 9 

31. Wang X. et al. (2013). “Ultrastrong, Stiff and 
Multifunctional Carbon Nanotube Composites” 
Materials Research Letters, Vol. 1, Iss. 1, pp. 
19-25. 

32. Li, W. et al (2013). “Carbon nanotube–
graphene nanoplatelet hybrids as high-
performance multifunctional reinforcements in 
epoxy composites” Composites Science and 
Technology, Vol. 74, pp. 221–227. 

33. Albdiry, M.T. et al (2013). “A critical review on 
the manufacturing processes in relation to the 
properties of nanoclay/polymer composites” 
Journal of Composite Materials, Vol. 47 , Iss. 
9, pp. 1093-1115. 

34. Rastellini, F., Oller, S., Salomón, O. and 
Oñate, E. (2008). Composite material non-
linear modelling for long fibre-reinforced 
laminates.Continuum basis, Computational 
aspects and validations. Computers and 
Structures Vol. 86, pp. 879-896. 

35. Oller, S. (2014). Numerical simulation of 
mechanical behavior of composite materials. 
Springer 2015. 

36. Otero, F., Oller, S. and Martinez, X. Multiscale 
computational homogenization: Review and 
proposal of a new enhanced-first-order 
method. Archives of Computational Methods in 
Engineering (2016), 1–27. 

37. Lee, D.S., Morillo, G., Bugeda, G., Oller, S., 
Onate, E. (2012). Multilayered composite 
structure design optimisation using 
distributed/parallel multi-objective evolutionary 
algorithms. Composite Structures, Volume 94, 
Issue 3, February 2012, Pages 1087-1096. 

38. Lee, D.S., Morillo, G., Bugeda, G., Oller, 
S.,Onate, E. (2013). Robust design 

optimisation of advance hybrid (fiber–metal) 
composite structures, Composite Structures, 
Volume 99, 2013, Pages 181-192. ISSN: 
0263-8223 

39. Martinez, X., Oller, S. (2009). Numerical 
simulation of matrix reinforced composite 
materials subjected to compression loads. 
Archives of computational methods in 
engineering. Vol. 16, Num. 4, pp. 357-397. 

40. Martinez, X.; Oller, S.; Barbero, E. Study of 
delamination in composites by using the 
serial/parallel mixing theroy and a damage 
formulation. Chapter in Mechanical response 
of composites. Ed. Pedro Camanho et al. pp. 
119 - 140. Springer, 2008. ISBN 978-1-4020-
8583-3 

41. X. Martinez, F. Rastellini, S. Oller, F. Flores, E. 
Oñate. Computationally optimized formulation 
for the simulation of composite materials and 
delamination failures. Composites Part B: 
Engineering. Vol. 42, Num. 2, pp. 134 -144. 
2011 

42. F. Otero, S. Oller, X. Martinez, O. Salomón 
(2015). Numerical homogenization for 
composite materials analysis. Comparison with 
other micro mechanical formulations, 
Composite Structures, Vol. 122, pp. 405-416. 

43. Otero, F., Martinez, X., Oller, S., Salomón, S. 
(2015). An efficient multi-scale method for non-
linear analysis of composite structures, 
Composite Structures, Vol. 131, pp. 707-719. 

44. S. Oller, Nonlinear dynamics of structures, 
CIMNE-Springer, Barcelona, Spain, 2014 

45. X. Martinez, S. Oller, L.G. Barbu, A.H. Barbat, 
A.M.P. de Jesus, Analysis of Ultra Low Cycle 
Fatigue problems with the Barcelona plastic 
damage model and a new isotropic hardening 
law. International Journal of Fatigue. 73: 132-
142. 2015. 

46. Oller, S.,  Car, E. and Lubliner, J. (2003). 
Definition of a general implicit orthotropic yield 
criterion. Computer Methods in Applied 
Mechanics and Engineering. Vol. 192, No. 7-8, 
pp. 895-912. Feb./2003. ISSN: 0045-7825. 

47. Oller, S., Oñate, E. (1996). A Hygro-Thermo-
Mechanical Constitutive Model for Multiphase 
Composite Materials. International Journal of 
Solids and Structures. Vol.33, pp. 3179-3186. 

48. Tserpes, K., Chanteli, A. (2013). Parametric 
numerical evaluation of the effective elastic 
properties of carbon nanotube-reinforced 
polymers. Composite Structures. Vol. 99, 366-
374. 

49. Chanteli, A., Tserpes, K. (2015). Finite element 
modeling of carbon nanotube agglomerates in 
polymers. Composite Structures. Vol. 132, 
1141-1148. 



 

11 
 

50. Tserpes, K., Chanteli, A., Floros, I. (2017). 
Prediction of yield strength of MWCNT/PP 
nanocomposite considering the interphase and 
agglomeration. Composite Structures. 

51. Manta, A., Tserpes, K. (2016). Numerical 
computation of electrical conductivity of carbon 
nanotube-filled polymers. Composites Part B: 
Engineering. Vol. 100, 240-246. 

 
 

 
 
 

 


