






































epja104154.dvi


Eur. Phys. J. A (2017) 53: X THE EUROPEAN
PHYSICAL JOURNAL A

epja104154
Please carefully read the Production queries at the end of the document

High-accuracy determination of the neutron flux in the new
experimental area n TOF-EAR2 at CERN

M. Sabaté-Gilarte1,2, M. Barbagallo3,a, N. Colonna3, F. Gunsing4, P. Žugec5, V. Vlachoudis1, Y.H. Chen6,
A. Stamatopoulos7, J. Lerendegui-Marco2, M.A. Cortés-Giraldo2, A. Villacorta8, C. Guerrero2, L. Damone3,
L. Audouin6, E. Berthoumieux4, L. Cosentino9, M. Diakaki4, P. Finocchiaro9, A. Musumarra9,10, T. Papaevangelou4,
M. Piscopo9, L. Tassan-Got6, O. Aberle1, J. Andrzejewski11, V. Bécares12, M. Bacak1,13, R. Baccomi14, J. Balibrea12,
S. Barros15, F. Bečvář16, C. Beinrucker17, F. Belloni3, J. Billowes18, D. Bosnar5, M. Brugger1, M. Caamaño19,
F. Calviño20, M. Calviani1, D. Cano-Ott12, R. Cardella1, A. Casanovas20, D.M. Castelluccio21,22, F. Cerutti1,
E. Chiaveri1, G. Cortés21, K. Deo19, C. Domingo-Pardo23, R. Dressler24, E. Dupont4, I. Durán19, B. Fernández-
Domı́nguez19, A. Ferrari1, P. Ferreira15, R.J.W. Frost18, V. Furman25, K. Göbel17, A.R. Garćıa12, A. Gawlik11,
I. Gheorghe26, T. Glodariu26, I.F. Gonçalves15, E. González12, A. Goverdovski27, E. Griesmayer13, H. Harada28,
T. Heftrich17, S. Heinitz24, A. Hernández-Prieto1,20, J. Heyse29, D.G. Jenkins30, E. Jericha13, F. Käppeler31,
Y. Kadi1, T. Katabuchi32, P. Kavrigin13, V. Ketlerov27, V. Khryachkov27, A. Kimura28, N. Kivel24, M. Kokkoris7,
M. Krtička16, E. Leal-Cidoncha19, C. Lederer33, H. Leeb13, M. Licata22,34, S. Lo Meo21,22, S.J. Lonsdale33, R. Losito1,
D. Macina1, J. Marganiec11, T. Mart́ınez12, C. Massimi22,34, P. Mastinu35, M. Mastromarco3, F. Matteucci14,36,
E.A. Maugeri24, E. Mendoza12, A. Mengoni21, P.M. Milazzo14, F. Mingrone22,1, M. Mirea26, S. Montesano1,
R. Nolte37, A. Oprea26, F.R. Palomo-Pinto38, C. Paradela19, N. Patronis39, A. Pavlik40, J. Perkowski11, J.I. Porras41,
J. Praena2,41, J.M. Quesada2, K. Rajeev42, T. Rauscher43,44, R. Reifarth17, A. Riego-Perez20, M.S. Robles19,
P.C. Rout42, C. Rubbia1, J.A. Ryan18, A. Saxena42, P. Schillebeeckx29, S. Schmidt17, D. Schumann24, P. Sedyshev25,
A.G. Smith18, S.V. Suryanarayana42, G. Tagliente3, J.L. Tain23, A. Tarifeño-Saldivia20,23, A. Tsinganis7, S. Valenta16,
G. Vannini22,34, V. Variale3, P. Vaz15, A. Ventura22, R. Vlastou7, A. Wallner45, S. Warren18, M. Weigand17,
C. Wolf17, P.J. Woods33, C. Weiss1,13, and T. Wright18

1 European Organization for Nuclear Research (CERN), Geneva, Switzerland
2 Departamento de F́ısica Atómica, Molecular y Nuclear, Universidad de Sevilla, Sevilla, Spain
3 Istituto Nazionale di Fisica Nucleare, Sezione di Bari, V. Orabona 4, 70125 Bari, Italy
4 CEA Irfu, Université Paris-Saclay, F-91191 Gif-sur-Yvette, France
5 Department of Physics, Faculty of Science, University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia
6 Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique/IN2P3 - IPN, Orsay, France
7 National Technical University of Athens (NTUA), Athens, Greece
8 University of Salamanca, Salamanca, Spain
9 INFN Laboratori Nazionali del Sud, Catania, Italy

10 Dipartimento di Fisica, Università di Catania, Catania, Italy
11 University of Lodz, Lodz, Poland
12 Centro de Investigaciones Energéticas Medioambientales y Tecnológicas (CIEMAT), Madrid, Spain
13 Technische Universität Wien, Wien, Austria
14 Istituto Nazionale di Fisica Nucleare, Sezione di Trieste, Trieste, Italy
15 Instituto Superior Técnico, Lisbon, Portugal
16 Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic
17 Goethe University Frankfurt, Frankfurt, Germany
18 University of Manchester, Manchester, UK
19 University of Santiago de Compostela, Santiago de Compostela, Spain
20 Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya, Barcelona, Spain
21 Agenzia nazionale per le nuove tecnologie (ENEA), Bologna, Italy
22 Istituto Nazionale di Fisica Nucleare, Sezione di Bologna, Bologna, Italy
23 Instituto de F́ısica Corpuscular, Universidad de Valencia, Valencia, Spain
24 Paul Scherrer Institut (PSI), Villingen, Switzerland
25 Joint Institute for Nuclear Research (JINR), Dubna, Russia
26 Horia Hulubei National Institute of Physics and Nuclear Engineering, Măgurele, Romania
27 Institute of Physics and Power Engineering (IPPE), Obninsk, Russia
28 Japan Atomic Energy Agency (JAEA), Tokai-mura, Japan



Page 2 of 13 Eur. Phys. J. A (2017) runline to be inserted

29 European Commission, Joint Research Centre, Geel, Retieseweg 111, B-2440 Geel, Belgium
30 University of York, York, UK
31 Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Campus North, IKP, 76021 Karlsruhe, Germany
32 Tokyo Institute of Technology, Tokyo, Japan
33 School of Physics and Astronomy, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK
34 Dipartimento di Fisica e Astronomia, Università di Bologna, Bologna, Italy
35 Istituto Nazionale di Fisica Nucleare, Sezione di Legnaro, Legnaro, Italy
36 Dipartimento di Astronomia, Università di Trieste, Trieste, Italy
37 Physikalisch-Technische Bundesanstalt (PTB), Bundesallee 100, 38116 Braunschweig, Germany
38 Depto. Ingenieŕıa Electrónica, Escuela Técnica Superior de Ingenieros, Universidad de Sevilla, Sevilla, Spain
39 University of Ioannina, Ioannina, Greece
40 University of Vienna, Faculty of Physics, Vienna, Austria
41 University of Granada, Granada, Spain
42 Bhabha Atomic Research Centre (BARC), Mumbai, India
43 Centre for Astrophysics Research, University of Hertfordshire, Hatfield, UK
44 Department of Physics, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland
45 Australian National University, Canberra, Australia

Received: 30 June 2017 / Revised: 31 August 2017
c© Società Italiana di Fisica / Springer-Verlag 2017

Communicated by T. Motobayashi

Abstract. A new high flux experimental area has recently become operational at the n TOF facility at
CERN. This new measuring station, n TOF-EAR2, is placed at the end of a vertical beam line at a
distance of approximately 20 m from the spallation target. The characterization of the neutron beam, in
terms of flux, spatial profile and resolution function, is of crucial importance for the feasibility study and
data analysis of all measurements to be performed in the new area. In this paper, the measurement of the
neutron flux, performed with different solid-state and gaseous detection systems, and using three neutron-
converting reactions considered standard in different energy regions is reported. The results of the various
measurements have been combined, yielding an evaluated neutron energy distribution in a wide energy
range, from 2 meV to 100 MeV, with an accuracy ranging from 2%, at low energy, to 6% in the high-energy
region. In addition, an absolute normalization of the n TOF-EAR2 neutron flux has been obtained by
means of an activation measurement performed with 197Au foils in the beam.

1 Introduction

The neutron time-of-flight facility n TOF1, operational
since 2001 at the European Organization for Nuclear Re-
search (CERN), is characterised by a high-intensity, high-
resolution, wide spectrum neutron beam mostly dedicated
to measurements of neutron-induced cross sections of in-
terest in nuclear technology [1,2], astrophysics [3,4] and
more recently for medical applications [5,6]. The neutron
beam is produced by spallation of a pulsed proton beam
from the CERN Proton Synchrotron accelerator (PS),
with momentum of 20GeV/c, impinging on a cylindrical
lead target surrounded by water for cooling and neutron
moderation purposes.

The neutron beam characteristics and state-of-the-art
detectors and acquisition systems make n TOF ideal for
measuring radioisotopes, in particular, actinides, as well
as for identifying and studying resonances in neutron cross
sections. For the first 13 years of operation, only one ex-
perimental area was available, located at 185m from the
spallation target along the horizontal direction. In this

area, now denoted as n TOF-EAR1 (hereafter EAR1, Ex-
perimental Area 1), the neutron beam is characterised by
a high instantaneous flux of 106 neutrons/bunch, covering
the energy range from 25meV to over 1GeV, and a neu-
tron energy resolution in a large part of the energy range
of ΔE/E from 10−3 to 10−4. A more detailed description
of the neutron beam features in EAR1 can be found in
ref. [7].

In 2014, a new experimental hall located on the ver-
tical direction at 20m distance from the spallation tar-
get, the so-called n TOF-EAR2 [8,9] (hereafter EAR2,
Experimental Area 2), was completed and became opera-
tional. The main advantage of this new measuring station
with respect to the existing one consists in a flux on av-
erage 40 times higher than in EAR1, a convenient feature
that makes it possible to perform challenging new mea-
surements. Combined with the shorter time-of-flight at a
given energy, 10 times lower than EAR1 due to the shorter
flight-path, the higher flux results in more than two or-
ders of magnitude higher signal-to-background ratio, when
considering the background related to the natural radio-

a e-mail: massimo.barbagallo@ba.infn.it
1
www.cern.ch/ntof.



Eur. Phys. J. A (2017) runline to be inserted Page 3 of 13

activity of unstable isotopes, which represents the domi-
nant component for short-lived radionuclides. These fea-
tures of the EAR2 neutron beam open the way to measure-
ments of neutron-induced reactions on very thin samples,
radioactive isotopes with short half-life or reactions of low
cross sections [10].

Following the completion of the second experimental
area, a large effort was devoted to the commissioning of
the new neutron beam, with a series of dedicated mea-
surements performed with the aim of characterizing it in
terms of flux and its energy dependence, spatial beam
profile, resolution function and background. An accurate
knowledge of all these quantities is in fact fundamental
for the envisaged vast experimental program in EAR2 on
neutron-induced reaction cross sections for fundamental
and applied nuclear physics.

In this work we report on dedicated measurements of
the neutron flux, carried out as part of the commission-
ing of the new experimental area. To determine the flux
with high accuracy in a wide energy range, from 2meV
to 100MeV, a combination of several detection systems
and neutron converting reactions, considered standards,
were used. In this way, the systematic uncertainties re-
lated to the experimental technique were minimised. The
campaign extended over two running periods, with some
measurements repeated with different samples for a higher
accuracy.

This paper is organized as follows: in sect. 2 the experi-
mental setups are described, while in sect. 3 the procedure
used in the data analysis is discussed. The final results are
presented in sect. 4.

2 The experimental setup for neutron flux
determination at n TOF

The time-of-flight technique (TOF) is used to determine
the kinetic energy of neutrons (En) from the spallation
process by the flight time between the production point
and the detection system. The neutron beam in a TOF
facility is characterised by the neutron fluence (FE) and
the neutron flux (Φ(En)) spectra that, according to the
ICRU recommendations [11], are defined as

FE =
dNE

dt · da
and Φ(En) =

dNE
dt

. (1)

dNE denotes the density distribution of neutrons reaching
the sample with energy between En and En + dEn, dt
the time element and da the cross-sectional area of an
elemental sphere.

Nevertheless, when talking about TOF facilities the
term flux is used to designate what in the ICRU report is
termed fluence rate (time-differential). Therefore, Φ(En)
will be hereafter defined as the number of neutrons reach-
ing the sample by element of energy, area and time. At
n TOF, where the spatial profile of the neutron beam is
not uniform and neutrons are delivered in bunches at very
low repetition rate (< 0.8Hz), it is more convenient to

Table 1. Neutron induced reactions used in this work to char-
acterise the neutron flux in EAR2 at n TOF, and the energy
range in which the respective cross sections are considered stan-
dard. The last reaction is important to obtain the absolute
value of the flux by means of an activation measurement.

Reaction Standard energy range
6Li(n, t) 0.0253 eV to 1 MeV
10B(n, α) 0.0253 eV to 1 MeV
235U(n, f) 0.0253 eV and 0.15–200 MeV
197Au(n, γ) 0.0253 eV and 0.2–2.5 MeV

consider the total number of neutrons in a bunch inte-
grated over the whole beam spatial profile [12]. This mag-
nitude can be only obtained experimentally from FE as a
discrete function by summing-up all the neutron-induced
reactions that have been detected for a reference sample
in sequential finite time-slots (or histogram bins) inside
the neutron spills. The knowledge of this quantity, i.e. the
total number of neutrons impinging on the sample in the
whole measurement, is fundamental for the determination
of the reaction cross section.

The neutron flux is measured by means of neutron in-
duced reactions whose cross sections are smooth, large and
accurately known in specific energy regions, and for this
reason generally adopted as standard [13,14].

In table 1 the three reactions used in this work are
listed together with the cross section used as a reference
for the activation measurement. The wide energy range
of the n TOF neutron beam makes it mandatory to use
different standards, covering the full energy range. Fur-
thermore, the combination of various detection systems
based on different working principles allows minimising
possible sources of uncertainties such as, for example, the
detection efficiency.

The following detectors have been used for the charac-
terization of the EAR2 neutron flux in two campaigns.

1) A low-mass Silicon Monitor, SiMon2 [15], similar to
the one used in the first experimental area and described
in ref. [16]. Apart from the flux measurement, it is per-
manently installed in the neutron beam to continuously
monitor the flux and to provide the fluence in any mea-
surement. It consists of a set of four silicon pad detectors
located outside the beam, surrounding a foil with a deposit
of 6LiF. The system is operated inside a vacuum chamber.
The whole setup is placed at the entrance of EAR2, at a
short distance from the last collimator. The silicon detec-
tors, from Micron Semiconductors (MSX09-300), have a
surface of 3 × 3 cm2 and a thickness of 300μm. These di-
mensions were selected as a compromise between a high
efficiency and low capacitance, to ensure a low-noise oper-
ation with standard preamplifiers. The energy resolution
of the detectors results in a perfect separation between
tritons and α-particles emitted in the 6Li(n, t)α reaction,
and a good rejection of the electronic noise and of the
gamma background. Two different samples with 6LiF de-
posit were used for the flux measurement in EAR2: the
first one, with an areal density of 420μg/cm2, was used



Page 4 of 13 Eur. Phys. J. A (2017) runline to be inserted

only for the high-energy region, as it was affected by pile-
up problems at energies below 1 eV, where both the flux
and the cross section are high. A thinner 105μg/cm2 thick
deposit was later used in order to extend the measurement
down to the meV neutron energy region.

2) A gaseous detector, based on the MicroMegas micro-
bulk technology [17–19]. This type of detectors is being
used at n TOF since many years for various purposes, due
to their high signal-to-background ratio, high radiation re-
sistance and low mass, which minimises perturbation of
the neutron beam. A Micromegas is defined by two gas
volumes: the drift volume, typically of a few millimeter
thickness, and the amplification region, 50μm, separated
by a 5μm micro-mesh layer. The neutron-converting ma-
terial is deposited on the cathode, in the drift region, de-
limited by the cathode and the mesh. In this region the
ionization from the charged products of the neutron re-
actions takes place. The secondary electrons drift through
the electric field, ∼ 1 kV/cm, to the mesh. Due to the high
electric field in the second gap, ≥ 10 kV/cm, an avalanche
multiplication of the primary electrons takes place.

Two different detector geometries were implemented.
In the first one, hereafter referred to as MGAS, electrodes
9.5 cm in diameter were used equipped with deposits of
93μg/cm2 enriched 235U and with 20 nm-thick deposit of
10B4C, on 30 and 18μm-thick aluminium backings respec-
tively. The entrance and exit windows of the aluminium
chamber which contains the setup were made of 25 μm-
thick kapton foils. The second chamber, referred to as
monMGAS, contains electrodes 6 cm in diameter and alu-
minized mylar windows; it was loaded with a 281μg/cm2-
thick deposit of 235U with an enrichment of 99.9% on a
30μm thick aluminium foil. In both cases, the chamber
was filled with a mixture of 88% Ar, 10% CF4 and 2%
iC4H10 at atmospheric pressure.

3) Finally, a set of position-sensitive Parallel Plate
Avalanche Counters (PPAC [20,21]) equipped with a
70μg/cm2 thick 235U deposit on an aluminium backing
of 0.7μm thickness were employed. The detectors are
mounted on both sides of the deposit to detect fission
fragments in coincidence, a technique that results in a
very low background from α-particles from the natural
radioactivity of the sample, and allows one to reconstruct
the neutron interaction position. Each PPAC consists of a
central anode, for timing, flanked by two position-sensitive
cathodes. Three PPACs working at low gas pressure were
developed in order to measure the flux and the beam pro-
file. The detectors were hosted in a chamber specifically
designed for operation in EAR2. The fission fragments are
identified by a coincidence window of 20 ns. More details
on the detectors and on the analysis procedure can be
found in refs. [22,23].

In fig. 1 the two adopted experimental setups are pre-
sented.

The full waveforms of detector signals were acquired
by the standard n TOF Data Acquisition System, based
on SPDevices ADQ412DC-3G cards of 2GS/s maximum
sampling rate, 12 bits resolution and 175 MBytes on-board
memory. The special features of these cards ensure the col-
lection of data for a time-of-flight corresponding to neu-

Fig. 1. Scheme of the experimental setup when micromegas
(left) and PPAC (right) were used to measure the neutron flux.
The SiMon2 chamber was always in place, located at 18.42 m
from the spallation target. The flight paths of each neutron
converter with respect to the spallation target are also indi-
cated.

tron energies well below the thermal energy. The signals
from SiMon2 and micromegas detectors are reconstructed
by means of a Pulse Shape Analysis routine described
in [24], while in the case of PPAC a dedicated routine
was used. In all cases, information was extracted on the
amplitude, area, timing and other pertinent quantities of
the signals.

Together with these detection systems, two circular
gold foils were also exposed to the beam in order to deter-
mine the absolute value of the neutron flux by activation.
The two foils, placed back-to-back and covering fully the
beam spot, were 100 μm thick.

3 Data analysis

The reaction yield represents the probability for a neutron
to undergo that reaction inside the sample. For thin tar-
gets, where the scattering in the deposit is negligible, the
theoretical yield is defined by

Y th(En) =
(
1 − e−n·σt(En)

)
·
σr(En)
σt(En)

, (2)

where n is the areal density (atoms/barn) of the target
deposit, σr and σt are, respectively, the reaction and total
cross sections for the isotope used as neutron converter.
In this work, the evaluated cross sections from the ENDF-
/B-VII.1 library [25] were used for all the samples up to
20MeV, while the IAEA reference file for the 235U(n, f)
cross section was adopted above this energy [14]. Experi-
mentally, the yield is

Y exp(En) =
C(En) − B(En)
ε(En) · Φ(En)

. (3)



Eur. Phys. J. A (2017) runline to be inserted Page 5 of 13

The experimental value inside an energy bin is the inte-
gral of the detected events (counts), divided by the bin-
width, and this value is assigned to the bin-center in the
histogram. Taking this into account, in eq. (3), C(En)
represents the total recorded number of counts per bunch
and B(En) the background contribution in the bin cen-
tered at En, while ε(En) is the efficiency for detecting the
product of the neutron interaction. This factor includes
the geometrical efficiency, the angular distribution and the
kinematic effects for a given reaction. The uncertainty of
the energy dependence of the neutron flux depends on all
quantities that are a functions of the neutron energy, En
(such as the efficiency), while the absolute value of the
flux is affected by energy-independent factors, such as the
areal density of the deposit.

The relationship between the theoretical (2) and the
experimental (3) reaction yield provides the neutron flux,
Φ(En):

Φ(En) =
C(En) − B(En)

ε(En) ·
(
1 − e−n·σt(En)

)
σr(En)
σt(En)

. (4)

It is convenient to express the neutron flux as the total
number of neutrons for a nominal proton pulse. Therefore,
in eq. (4) the background-subtracted number of counts
recorded in the whole measurement is divided by the to-
tal number of incident protons and multiplied by 7 · 1012,
a value that represents the nominal proton intensity for a
dedicated pulse delivered by the PS to the n TOF exper-
iment.

The neutron kinetic energy in the equations above is
determined from the time-of-flight according to the fol-
lowing expression:

En(T ) = mn · c2 ·

⎛
⎝ 1√

1 − (L+λ(T )
c·T )

2

− 1

⎞
⎠ , (5)

where T is the calibrated time-of-flight reconstructed from
the signal, c the speed of light and mn the neutron mass.
The time-of-flight is determined relative either from a
pick-up signal or from the signal of the so-called γ-flash,
generated in the detector by the prompt γ-rays and rela-
tivistic particles produced in the spallation process.

The quantity λ(T ) reflects the resolution function of
the n TOF neutron beam, i.e. the spread of the true neu-
tron energy for a given time-of-flight, or equivalently the
spread in time-of-flight for a given true neutron energy.
Such a spread, caused by the stochastic moderation pro-
cess neutrons undergo inside the spallation source and
moderation circuit, can be expressed as an additional ef-
fective flight path that neutrons have to travel inside the
lead target and the moderator system before entering the
beam line. This quantity is not easily accessible experi-
mentally, but can be determined as a function of the neu-
tron energy by means of Monte Carlo simulations of the
spallation process.

Studies of the resolution function for the second ex-
perimental area at n TOF have been performed with
FLUKA [26,8] and GEANT4 [27,28]. They indicate that

in the relatively wide energy range from a few eV to several
tens of keV, the average value of λ remains approximately
constant, so that a fixed value for the total effective flight
path L + λ can be used in eq. (5). On the contrary, be-
low 1 eV and above 100 keV the resolution function shows
large variations, both in terms of average value and width
of the λ distribution. If not properly included in the analy-
sis, this behaviour would affect the reconstructed neutron
energy and, as a consequence, the neutron flux. For the
first experimental area the effect of the resolution function
is relatively small at low and epithermal neutron energies,
being ΔE/E of the order of 10−3–10−4, thanks to the
long flight path of EAR1 (200m). For this reason, it was
not considered in the neutron flux determination, while
it is routinely included in resonance shape analysis, see
for example [29]. On the contrary, in EAR2 the effect of
the resolution function is much larger, reaching approxi-
mately 2% at thermal neutron energy, and has therefore to
be taken into account in the flux determination. The only
way to proceed in this respect is to convolute the theoret-
ical yield of the three reference reactions, i.e. 235U(n, f),
6Li(n, t) and 10B(n, α), with the simulated resolution func-
tion, before using it in eq. (4).

The method followed in this work is based on the re-
sampling and propagation of neutrons scored on a tally
surface just above the spallation target. More details on
the propagation procedure can be found in [8,28]. Neu-
trons on the scoring plane are recorded with their true en-
ergy and time elapsed since the start of the spallation pro-
cess (i.e., their time-of-flight inside the target-moderator
assembly). When they are transported to the experimen-
tal area, only the time-of-flight is changed according to
the geometrical distance between the scoring plane and
the sample position in EAR2. For a given reference reac-
tion, the yield is calculated on the basis of the true neu-
tron energy and corresponding reference cross section, but
assigned to an energy bin calculated on the basis of the
time-of-flight. The resulting distribution, which takes into
account the shift or spread in the reconstructed energy
related to the resolution function, can at this point be
used in eq. (4), instead of the point-wise cross sections,
to extract the neutron flux. Before, however, an accurate
value of the effective flight path to be used in the time-
to-energy conversion of the experimental data has to be
determined. This is done by comparing the simulated yield
with the experimental one: the value of the flight path is
adjusted and the simulated yield is recalculated in an it-
erative procedure until the position of the resonances in
time-of-flight perfectly matches the experimental ones. In
fig. 2, the expected yield of 235U(n, f) based on the ENDF
data library and the FLUKA-based resolution function
is compared with the final experimental yield measured
with monMGAS; the same comparison was performed for
MGAS and PPAC. For the reactions that do not have any
resonance in the range of interest, i.e. for the 10B(n, α)
and 6Li(n, t) reactions, the effective flight path is calcu-
lated by simply considering, i.e. adding or subtracting,
the geometrical distance between the position of the cor-
responding samples and the 235U sample.



Page 6 of 13 Eur. Phys. J. A (2017) runline to be inserted

Fig. 2. Experimental (green) and calculated (red) 235U(n, f)
reaction yield in the resolved resonance region as a function
of the neutron time-of-flight. The agreement between the two
yields, obtained for a proper choice of the flight path length,
demonstrates the accuracy of the time-to-energy calibration.

Fig. 3. Scatter plot of the energy deposited in a silicon detector
of the SiMon2 apparatus, versus the reconstructed neutron
energy. The red line corresponds to the cut applied to separate
tritons and α-particles from the background and the electronic
noise of the detector.

3.1 Analysis of SiMon2 with 6Li converter

The use of optimized electronics, in particular of specif-
ically designed preamplifiers, in combination with the
thin deposit results in a very good separation between
tritons and α-particles from the 6Li(n, t)α reaction, as
well as between environmental background or electronic
noise of the detector. Due to kinematic effects, the en-
ergy of the reaction products increases with the neutron
energy. Therefore, the selection of tritons and α-particles
requires a non-linear cut on the 2D plot of the energy
deposited in the silicon detector versus neutron energy.
Figure 3 shows an example of the scatter 2D plot of the
energy deposited by detected particles versus neutron en-
ergy for one of the silicon detectors, where the solid red
line represents the 2-dimensional condition used in the
analysis.

The efficiency of SiMon2 was estimated by means of
GEANT4 simulations, on the basis of the geometrical de-

Fig. 4. (Top panel) SiMon2 efficiency for the detection of prod-
ucts from the 6Li(n, t)α reaction. (Bottom panel) Efficiency
for detecting the products of the 10B(n, α)7Li reaction in the
MGAS detector.

Fig. 5. Spectrum of the signal area for the 235U(n, f) reaction
measured with the monMGAS. The two bumps correspond to
the light and heavy fission fragments. The α-particles from
the natural radioactivity of the sample are eliminated by the
electronic threshold indicated by the red line.

tails described in ref. [15]. As shown in the top panel of
fig. 4, the efficiency is constant below 1 keV (∼ 9%) while
at higher energies the forward peaked angular distribution
of tritons causes an increase of the efficiency. The intrinsic
uncertainty in the angular distribution of the products of
the 6Li(n, t)α reaction results in a relatively large uncer-
tainty, of the order of 9%, on the efficiency and hence of
the extracted neutron flux above 10 keV.

3.2 Flux determination with 235U converter

In order to determine the flux from the 235U(n, f) reac-
tion, three complementary detection systems were used:
MGAS, monMGAS and PPAC. The high Q-value of the
neutron induced fission reaction on 235U results in a good
discrimination of the fission fragments from the electronic
noise and the background, due to the α-activity of the ura-
nium sample. For the monMGAS, the separation is shown
in fig. 5, where the typical double-bump distribution is



Eur. Phys. J. A (2017) runline to be inserted Page 7 of 13

Fig. 6. Spectrum of the signal area from the 10B(n, α) reaction
measured with the MGAS detector. The peaks corresponding
to the α-particles and to 7Li are well above the electronic noise,
which is suppressed by the electronic threshold indicated by the
red line. The energy resolution of the detector does not allow
to separate the two final states of the reaction.

also visible. An energy-independent cut on the signal am-
plitude is sufficient to reject the background and select
the fission fragments. The threshold is chosen to ensure
maximum efficiency.

Due to the presence of a strong prompt signal, the so-
called γ-flash, mostly induced by prompt γ-rays produced
in the spallation target [7,8], the maximum energy that
can be reached with the micromegas detectors is of a few
MeV. On the contrary, PPACs are rather insensitive to
γ-rays. Considering also that PPAC signals are very fast,
the recovery time of the detector to the γ-flash is almost
immediate (a few ns). These features bestow the system
the possibility of extending the range of the measured flux
up to 100MeV neutron energy.

According to Monte Carlo simulations of the setup, the
efficiency for micromegas detectors is close to 95% in the
energy range up to a few MeV, while for the PPAC the
efficiency is ∼ 60% up to a few MeV, and changes above
this value due to corrections for the angular anisotropy of
the fragment emission [22].

As mentioned before, the calibration of the neutron
energy, from the time-of-flight, is based on the analysis of
the resonances in the 235U(n, f) cross section.

3.3 Analysis of MGAS with 10B target

The 10B(n, α)7Li reaction was measured with the MGAS.
The energy resolution of the detector turned out to be
not sufficient for separating the two exit channels of the
reaction, i.e. the ground state (6%) and the first excited
stated (94%), whose decay to the ground state is accompa-
nied by the emission of a 478 keV γ-ray. Nevertheless, both
reaction products are well separated from the electronic
noise and the background, as indicated by the red line
in fig. 6. As in the case of SiMon2, an energy-dependent
cut has been applied on the deposited energy to select the
α-particles and the 7Li ions above 1 keV.

The efficiency of the detector was estimated by means
of Monte Carlo simulations of the energy loss in the sample
and in the gas volume. The angular distribution of both
products, reported in ref. [30], as well as the effect of the
bleed-through of 7Li below the threshold were taken into
account in the efficiency calculation. As shown in the bot-
tom panel of fig. 4, the efficiency remains constant, ∼ 98%,
up to few keV when the backward/forward anisotropy in
the angular distribution starts to play an important role.

3.4 Dead time and other corrections

The dead time is the minimum time between two consec-
utive events that can be identified and separately recon-
structed. Since the net effect of the dead time is a reduc-
tion in the number of recorded events, a correction has to
be applied in order to compensate for the loss of counts. At
n TOF, the use of flash ADCs for data acquisition, com-
bined with a powerful pulse shape analysis procedure (see
ref. [24]) are reducing the effect of the dead time to a few
percent, provided that the sample thickness is properly
chosen. The minimum time difference that allows identi-
fying two consecutive signals is between 150 ns and 350 ns,
depending on the detection system. Nevertheless, consid-
ering the high count-rate and the need of reaching a high
accuracy on the measured flux, a correction is necessary.
To this end, consecutive events within a time window τ
were discarded; then the resulting histogram was subse-
quently corrected for this fixed dead time τ , assuming the
non-paralyzable model [31] for neutron time-of-flight mea-
surements. According to this model, when the counting
losses are small, the number of corrected events, Cr(T ) as
a function of time-of-flight T , is related to the measured
one, Cm(T ), by means of

Cr(T ) =
Cm(T )

1 −
∑T

t=T−τ
Cm(t)

n

, (6)

where n is the number of neutron pulses or bunches and
the sum runs of the preceding (fractional) bins covering a
time τ .

Due to the high instantaneous flux at EAR2, a cor-
rection on the dead time must be included in the case of
SiMon2 and for both micromegas, although the sample
mass were selected in order to minimise this effect. Only
the PPACs are fast enough (τ < 10 ns) to have negligible
dead-time corrections in the energy range covered with
these detectors. Figure 7 shows the value of the dead-time
correction for these detectors as a function of the neutron
time-of-flight. At the thermal peak (≈ 6ms), the correc-
tion is close to 1% while above 200 keV (3μs) the correc-
tions increase up to 10%. The uncertainty on the dead
time correction is treated as an energy-dependent effect.
It has been estimated by calculating the dead-time cor-
rection for artificially increased time separations between
two pile-up signals.

Other corrections that have to be considered in the ex-
traction of the flux are related to the attenuation of the



Page 8 of 13 Eur. Phys. J. A (2017) runline to be inserted

Fig. 7. Dead time correction factor for MGAS, monMGAS and
SiMon2 detectors. The count rate of the detector is multiplied
by this factor in order to get the real number of events produced
in the sample.

neutron beam in the various windows, electrodes and de-
posits placed upstream of the sample under analysis, as
well as the self-shielding effect in the respective deposit.
The neutron beam attenuation, estimated by means of
Monte Carlo simulations, is small, typically less than 2%
at thermal energy if only the windows and electrodes are
in the beam. However, it becomes higher, although never
exceeding a few percent, when thick 6Li or 10B deposits
are in the beam, due to the high (n, tot) cross sections
of these isotopes. Self-shielding effects were corrected by
means of the classical analytical formula, taking into ac-
count the tabulated total cross section. Apart from the
energy independent factors, like the sample mass, the un-
certainties on the transmission and self-absorption correc-
tions are included in the uncertainty due to systematic
effects associated with the Monte Carlo simulations, of at
most 2%, considering also that all cross sections involved
are convoluted, through the yield, with the response func-
tion using the method described in sect. 3.

3.5 Analysis of the activation measurement

An alternative to determine the absolute value of the neu-
tron flux at a specific energy is the double foil activation
method. It relies on the use of two identical foils made of
the same material (isotope) which presents one large and
isolated resonance; the foil thickness is selected in such a
way that the first one depletes entirely the neutron flu-
ence at the position of the resonance leaving the rest of
the spectrum untouched [32].

In the present activation measurement, two gold foils
were exposed at the same time to the neutron beam for
� 1 hour. After the activation the number of counts corre-
sponding to the 411.8 keV γ line were measured separately
in the same geometry for the two foils using a LaBr3 scin-
tillator detector. The number of 198Au nuclei produced
by activation was obtained and the neutron flux deduced
from the difference in counts, taking into account the dif-
ference in counts for each sample, the geometric efficiency

of the setup used and the time of exposure to the neutron
beam.

The 100 μm thick foils resulted in a flux-integrated ac-
tivation of the first foil by the incident neutron flux, and
activation of the second foil by the transmitted neutron
flux. From the calculated expected flux-dependent differ-
ence in activation we observed that about 80% of the dif-
ference was due to the strong 197Au(n, γ) resonance at
4.9 eV, and roughly 10% due to the lower energy neutrons
down to subthermal energies, and 10% due to higher en-
ergy neutrons.

4 Results

The comparison and combination of all measurements de-
scribed above allowed us to determine the neutron flux in
EAR2, in particular its energy dependence, from 2meV
to 100MeV. The results of all measurements are shown
in fig. 8. For convenience, the flux is expressed in units of
lethargy and per nominal pulse of 7 · 1012 protons. Since
each measurement is affected by a few percent uncertainty
on the absolute value of the flux, all measurements were
re-normalized at thermal neutron energy, where the cross
sections of all three reactions used in the measurements
are well known, therefore considered standard. It was de-
cided to take the SiMon2 measurement as the reference
because the sample mass and the efficiency, which affect
the absolute value of the flux, are best characterised in
this case.

In addition, a comparison between the absolute value
determined by the activation measurement and the results
from the SiMon2 detector has been performed, showing an
agreement within the quoted error bars of 5% (fig. 9).

The various experimental results shown in fig. 8 were
combined, after re-normalization at thermal neutron en-
ergy, in order to extract an evaluated neutron flux. The
weighted average was performed taking into account the
statistical uncertainty as the weighting factor, while uncer-
tainties due to systematic effects were treated separately
(as discussed later on). The data to be included in the
combination in different neutron energy regions were cho-
sen mostly on the basis of the underlying cross section,
i.e. whether it is considered standard in that region. In
table 2, a summary of measurements included in the eval-
uation for several energy regions is presented. The agree-
ment between the various measurements below 10 keV is
in general very good. Systematic effects of the energy de-
pendence have been estimated from the comparison of
the different measurements. As an example, the ratio be-
tween MGAS(10B) and SiMon2 shows a smooth behaviour
within the statistical uncertainties (fig. 10), with the ratio
never departing from the 2% mark in the whole energy
region of the comparison.

Above 10 keV, in principle the flux extracted from the
235U(n, f) reaction should not be considered in the anal-
ysis, as the cross section of this reaction is not consid-
ered standard from thermal up to 150 keV. Nevertheless,
in order to increase the statistical accuracy in this region,
those data have been included in the flux evaluation at



Eur. Phys. J. A (2017) runline to be inserted Page 9 of 13

Fig. 8. Results from all measurements performed for the neutron flux determination and considered in the present analysis.
The thick blue line corresponds to the evaluated flux. Each result has been normalized close to the thermal point to the value
provided by SiMon2 measurement, while the cyan dot represents the integral measurement from the flux-averaged activation
measurement.

Fig. 9. Comparison of the activation measurement (cyan dot)
with the value of the evaluated flux (red dot) at 4.9 eV. Results
are in agreement within overall uncertainties of 5%.

the expenses of a slightly higher uncertainty. In fact, as
can be noted in fig. 8, the flux based on the 235U(n, f)
reaction in the 10–30 keV neutron energy range is sys-
tematically lower than the one obtained from the other
two reactions. This effect was already observed in ref. [12]
and it is associated with an overestimation of the evalu-
ation cross section in the ENDF/B-VII.1 library which is
pending of corrections for the next coming ENDF/B-VIII
release.

At 100 keV, the SiMon2 detector starts to be limited by
the γ-flash. Therefore, above this energy the neutron flux
is evaluated on the basis of the micromegas and PPAC
results alone. A similar argument applies to the MGAS
and monMGAS detectors, which start to be affected by
the γ-flash around 5MeV. Hence, the only detector that
allows reaching 100MeV neutron energy is the PPAC (see

fig. 11), thanks to the low sensitivity to the γ-flash and
its very fast signals.

Figure 12 shows the dependence of the statistical un-
certainties with the neutron energy. Up to 5MeV it turns
to be less than 2% except at the position of the dips in the
flux; while above this energy the statistical uncertainty in-
creases up to 8.5% because only the PPAC data have been
included.

An interesting feature is observed at very low energy.
For the first time at n TOF it was in fact possible to de-
tect neutrons with an energy as low as 2meV, thanks to
the combination of a larger memory on the Flash ADC
and the shorter time-of-flight, which provides the possi-
bility to perform measurements at sub-thermal neutron
energies. The flux at those energies shows the typical solid
state effect of neutron diffraction, i.e., the Bragg scatter-
ing of neutrons in the source and the beam line materials.
Figure 13 exhibits a structure in the evaluated flux re-
lated with this effect thanks to the good energy resolution
of the neutron beam and detection systems. The Bragg-
edge transmission dips in the flux, related to the scattering
off a crystal plane, like polycrystalline metal, is visible at
around 3.7 and 5.0meV. They are due to the in-beam alu-
minum windows near the spallation target. The positions
correspond to the measured transmission of Al [33].

4.1 Uncertainties due to systematic effects

The uncertainties on several energy-dependent corrections
are uncorrelated for the detector values at a given energy,
but correlated for a particular detector over the entire en-
ergy range. We refer to them as systematic uncertainties.

The systematic uncertainties in the shape of the flux
are a combination of several energy-dependent contribu-
tions. The main ones are the uncertainty on the evaluated



Page 10 of 13 Eur. Phys. J. A (2017) runline to be inserted

Table 2. Summary of the detector used for the n TOF-EAR2 neutron flux evaluation in different energy ranges up to 100 MeV.

Energy range 25 meV < 10 keV 10 keV–100 keV 100 keV–1 MeV 1–5 MeV 100 MeV

SiMon2(6Li) yes yes yes – – –

monMGAS(235U) yes – yes yes yes –

MGAS(235U) – – yes yes – –

MGAS(10B) yes yes yes – – –

PPAC(235U) yes – yes yes yes yes

Fig. 10. Ratio of the 10B(n, α) data taken with MGAS to the
reference ones, taken with SiMon2, and based on the 6Li(n, t)
reaction. Data points are shown with their statistical uncer-
tainties. Up to 20 keV, the dispersion is in the order of 2%.

Fig. 11. Comparison of the experimental data above 100 keV:
PPAC (pink), MGAS(235U) (blue), and monMGAS(235U)
(green). The difference between the various data in this en-
ergy region is less than 8%.

cross section used to extract the flux, on the dead time
correction and on the detector efficiency, which in turn
depends on the thresholds and corrections applied in data
analysis as well as on the angular distribution of the emit-
ted products. Other sources of uncertainty are related to
the corrections for the neutron beam attenuation in the
windows and other materials in the beam, and to the neu-
tron background inside the experimental area.

The various components have been estimated for each
detector and energy region, and added in quadrature to

Fig. 12. Statistical uncertainties on the flux as a function of
the neutron energy.

Fig. 13. Evaluated neutron flux in the sub-thermal region.
The dips in the flux are caused by neutron Bragg scattering.

extract the overall systematic uncertainty for every data
set. The estimated systematic uncertainties on each data
set in different neutron energy regions are summarized in
table 3. When the evaluated flux is obtained by a combina-
tion of different results (i.e., from different detectors), the
estimated systematic uncertainty affecting each dataset
is calculated as

√
1/

∑
σ2i in the combination, providing

an a priori systematic uncertainty on the evaluated flux.
The corresponding values are reported in the last line of
table 3.

The reliability of the obtained values has been subse-
quently checked by comparing each dataset with the evalu-
ated neutron flux to verify that the differences were statis-



Eur. Phys. J. A (2017) runline to be inserted Page 11 of 13

Table 3. Summary of the uncertainties due to systematic effects for all datasets used in the EAR2 neutron flux evaluation, for
different energy regions up to 100 MeV. Although the 235U(n, f) cross section is considered standard at the thermal energy and
in the range 0.15–200 MeV, data based on this reaction have been considered also in the 10–150 keV region, in order to increase
the statistical accuracy. The last line represents the overall estimated systematic uncertainty on the energy dependence of the
evaluated flux, calculated as the average of the uncertainties of every set of data used in the evaluation:

p

P

σ2i /N with N the
number of datasets.

Energy range 25 meV < 10 keV 10–100 keV 100 keV–1 MeV 1–5 MeV > 5 MeV

SiMon2(6Li) 2.4 2.4 9.3 – – –

monMGAS(235U) 3.0 – 5.0 4.5 7.7 –

MGAS(235U) – – 4.5 3.2 – –

MGAS(10B) 3.0 3.1 3.0 – – –

PPAC(235U) 3.0 – 6.8 5.5 5.5 6.2

Uncertainty on evaluated flux (%) 1.4 2.0 2.7 2.6 4.7 6.2

tically compatible within the total uncertainties. A further
check has been performed by calculating the dispersion of
the used datasets relative to the weighted average, and
comparing it to the error on the weighted average calcu-
lated considering only the statistical errors. In all cases,
the deviations are compatible with the estimated system-
atic uncertainties. In some energy regions, however, only
one dataset is used in the neutron flux evaluation, so that
one must rely on the a priori estimate.

The uncertainties reported in table 3 refer only to the
shape of the flux. Typically, it is not mandatory to also
know with high accuracy the absolute value of the flux,
since in each measurement an independent normalization
is achieved (for example through the saturated resonance
technique in capture cross section measurements, or with
reference to 235U or 238U in fission reactions). Neverthe-
less, it may be useful to extract from the data the abso-
lute value, for example for a meaningful comparison with
Monte Carlo simulations of the spallation source.

The systematic uncertainty on the absolute value of
the flux is mainly related with the uncertainty on the
mass of the converter deposit, the absolute value of the
efficiency, rather than its energy dependence, and the de-
termination of the proton beam intensity. As mentioned
earlier, only the SiMon2 results were considered for ab-
solute normalization, as this setup was less affected by
uncertainties in the deposit mass and efficiency, estimated
to be overall of the order of 5%.

4.2 Simulations

The evaluated EAR2 neutron flux has been compared
with the results of Monte Carlo simulations of the n TOF
spallation neutron source obtained with FLUKA [26] and
GEANT4 [27]. The geometry implemented in the simula-
tions and the physics list used in GEANT4 are described
in detail in [8,28]. In both cases, neutrons produced in the
spallation target and exiting from the top are resampled
and propagated through the various elements along the
beam line, in particular the two collimators, up to the ex-
perimental area. The neutron energy is extracted from the

Fig. 14. The EAR2 evaluated neutron flux (blue) in the whole
energy range compared with the results of FLUKA (green)
and GEANT4 (red) simulations of the spallation process, and
subsequent resampling and propagation of emitted neutrons to
the experimental area.

Fig. 15. Comparison between the evaluated neutron flux in
EAR2 (blue) and in EAR1 (red). The increase at the new mea-
suring station is on average a factor 40.

total neutron time-of-flight, i.e. from the start of the spal-
lation process to the arrival of the neutron at the sample
position in EAR2.



Page 12 of 13 Eur. Phys. J. A (2017) runline to be inserted

The comparison between the measured neutron flux
and the simulations is shown in fig. 14. As already ob-
served for the flux in EAR1 [34], the shape is reproduced
reasonably well by both codes, but in general simulations
tend to overestimate the absolute value of the neutron
flux, by approximately 20%. In particular, while the two
simulations show a very similar trend between 100meV
and 1MeV, FLUKA reproduces more closely the ther-
mal peak, while GEANT4 shows a better agreement with
the evaluated flux at higher energy, i.e. above 1MeV.
The origin of the inconsistencies among the simulations
and with the experimental result are unclear, and re-
quire more detailed investigations on the Monte Carlo
side. One possible explanation is related to the effect of
small details in material and position of the different el-
ements in the beam line, although it has recently been
suggested that the systematic overestimate in the neutron
flux could be related to pion production in the spallation
reactions [35].

5 Conclusions

After the completion of the second experimental area at
n TOF, a commissioning program was carried out by the
Collaboration with the aim of determining with good ac-
curacy the characteristics of the neutron beam, i.e. flux,
spatial beam profile, resolution function, et cetera. The re-
sults of the commissioning in terms of neutron flux, in par-
ticular its shape as a function of neutron energy, have been
reported in this paper. The combination of three different
detector systems, SiMon2, micromegas and PPAC, based
on different operational concepts, and exploiting three dif-
ferent neutron-converting reactions with standard cross
sections, i.e. 10B(n, α), 6Li(n, t) and 235U(n, f), has pro-
vided the energy dependence of the neutron flux in EAR2
with an uncertainty due to systematic effects between 2
and 6%, in an energy range which extends from 2meV
to 100MeV [36]. The absolute value was determined on
the basis of the most accurate result, obtained with the
SiMon2 detector, and was used as reference for all other
measurements. This result was compared with the flux de-
termined via activation of a 197Au sample. The observed
agreement within few percents confirms the quoted uncer-
tainty on the absolute value of the flux of around 5%. In
addition, a comparison between the evaluated neutron flux
in EAR2 and in EAR1 shows on average a 40 times higher
neutron flux at the new measuring station, as shown in
fig. 15.

The evaluated flux in EAR2 has been also compared
with the results of Monte Carlo simulations, performed
with FLUKA and GEANT4 of the n TOF neutron spalla-
tion source, showing a reasonable agreement in the whole
energy range. Some minor differences are observed among
the two simulations and with the measured flux, possi-
bly indicating some minor shortcomings in the simulation
physics/geometry or in the neutron propagation proce-
dure.

The evaluated neutron flux reported here is an impor-
tant quantity for the planning and execution of cross sec-

tion measurements in EAR2 at n TOF and a fundamental
prerequisite for collecting high quality data. Apart from
the measurements of this work, the neutron flux is contin-
uously monitored during the various measurements, with
the SiMon2 and micromegas detectors, and is verified with
a dedicated measurement at the beginning of each exper-
imental campaign.

The authors acknowledge support from the European Atomic
Energy Communitys (Euratom) Seventh Framework Pro-
gram FP7/2007-2011 under the Project CHANDA (Grant
No. 605203). We acknowledge the support by the Nar-
odowe Centrum Nauki (NCN), under the grant UMO-
2012/04/M/ST2/00700 and UMO-2016/22/M/ST2/00183.
We acknowledge the support by the Croatian Science Foun-
dation under Project No. 1680.

References

1. N. Colonna et al., Energy Environ. Sci. 3, 1910 (2010).
2. OECD/NEA WPEC Subgroup 26 Final Report, Uncer-

tainty and Target Accuracy Assessment for Innovative Sys-
tems Using Recent Covariance Data Evaluations, NEA No.
6410 (2008), http://www.nea.fr/html/science/wpec/
volume26.

3. G. Wallerstein et al., Rev. Mod. Phys. 69, 995 (1997).
4. F. Käppeler, R. Gallino, S. Bisterzo, Wako Aoki, Rev.

Mod. Phys. 83, 157 (2011).
5. I. Porras et al., Nucl. Data Sheets 120, 246 (2014).
6. M. Sabaté-Gilarte et al., Rep. Pract. Oncol. Radiother. 21,

113 (2016).
7. C. Guerrero et al., Eur. Phys. J. A 49, 27 (2013).
8. C. Weiss et al., Nucl. Instrum. Methods A 799, 90 (2015).
9. S. Barros et al., J. Instrum. 10, 09003 (2015).

10. M. Barbagallo et al., Phys. Rev. Lett. 117, 152701 (2016).
11. ICRU, International Commission on Radiation Units and

Measurements, report 60, issue 30, December 1998.
12. M. Barbagallo et al., Eur. Phys. J. A 49, 156 (2013).
13. A.D. Carlson et al., Nucl. Data Sheets 110, 3215 (2009).
14. A.D. Carlson, Metrologia 48, S328 (2011).
15. L. Cosentino et al., Rev. Sci. Instrum. 86, 073509 (2015).
16. S. Marrone et al., Nucl. Instrum. Methods A 517, 389

(2004).
17. I. Giomataris et al., Nucl. Instrum. Methods A 376, 29

(1996).
18. S. Andriamonje et al., J. Korean Phys. Soc. 59, 1597

(2011).
19. I. Giomataris, R. De Oliveira, Patent CEA-CERN, Appli-

cation Number 09 290 825.0 (2009), Method for fabricating
an amplification gap of an avalanche particle detector.

20. C. Paradela et al., Phys. Rev. C 82, 034601 (2010).
21. D. Tarŕıo et al., Phys. Rev. C 83, 044620 (2011).
22. D. Tarŕıo, Neutron-induced fission fragment angular dis-

tribution at CERN n TOF: The Th-232 case, PhD Thesis
(2012).

23. Y.H. Chen, L. Tassan-Got, L. Audouin et al., EPJ Web of
Conferences 146, 03020 (2017).

24. P. Žugec et al., Nucl. Instrum. Methods A 812, 134 (2016).
25. M.B. Chadwick et al., Nucl. Data Sheets 112, 2887 (2011).
26. A. Fasso et al., Technical Report CERN-2005-10,

INFN/TC 05/11, SLAC-R-73 (2005), Fluka: A multi-
particle transport code.



Eur. Phys. J. A (2017) runline to be inserted Page 13 of 13

27. J. Allison et al., Nucl. Instrum. Methods A 835, 186
(2016).

28. J. Lerendegui et al., Eur. Phys. J. A 52, 100 (2016).
29. F. Gunsing et al., Phys. Rev. C 85, 064601 (2012).
30. F.J. Hambsch, I. Ruskov, Nucl. Sci. Eng. 163, 1 (2009).
31. M.S. Moore, Nucl. Instrum. Methods 169, 245 (1980).
32. C. Borcea et al., Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. A

513, 524 (2003).

33. R.J. Brown, L.M. Bollinger, Nucl. Sci. Eng. 4, 576 (1958)
https://www.oecd-nea.org/janisweb/exfor/11468.

002.
34. S. Lo Meo et al., Eur. Phys. J. A 51, 160 (2015).
35. D. Mancusi et al., Eur. Phys. J. A 53, 80 (2017).
36. https://twiki.cern.ch/twiki/bin/view/NTOFPublic/

NTOF PublicEAR2Flux.



Production Queries for the Author

AUTHOR: Please check VERY CAREFULLY throughout
1) TEXT (Copy-editing corrections already inserted in the manuscript-to-proofs process)

2) FIGURES (if any): All writings and symbols. Thank you


