























































PRESENTATION


EUROPEAN MASTER IN NUCLEAR ENERGY (EMINE). 
WHEN ACADEMY AND INDUSTRY MEET 

 
B. CABON1; P. ANZIEU2; L. BATET3; S. COSTE-LECONTE2; I. DARRIGUES4;  

C. DOMINJON1; E. FERRIÉ1; F. GARRIDO5;  
W. GUDOWSKI6; H. HENRIKSSON7; M. MOUSSAVI8; A. NUTTIN1; B. REYNIER5; 

L. SALVO1; E. SERRA9; A.L. VERNAY10 
 

1Grenoble Institute of Technology, Grenoble-INP, Grenoble (France). 
2INSTN-CEA, Paris (France) 

3Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya. BarcelonaTech, Barcelona (Spain) 
4EDF Paris (France) 

5Université Paris-Saclay, Paris (France) 
6Royal Institute of Technology (KTH), Stockholm (Sweden)7 

7Vattenfall, Stockholm (Sweden) 
8AREVA, Paris (France) 

9ENDESA, Madrid (Spain) 
10Grenoble École de Management, Grenoble (France). 

 
 

ABSTRACT 
 

EMINE master programme is an international education initiative offered by KIC-
InnoEnergy under the framework of the European Institute of Innovation and Technology 
(EIT). Students in the programme have the opportunity to acquire an in-depth knowledge 
of the nuclear industry, through unique and specialised courses covering a wide range of 
subjects. Students choose between UPC (Barcelona) and KTH (Stockholm) for the first 
year and between Grenoble-INP and Paris-Saclay University (France) for the second 
year. Grenoble École de Management (GEM) completes the list of academic partners: 
students take a 3-week summer course on energy management issues after their first 
year in EMINE. EMINE students also benefit from the involvement of our industrial 
partners (AREVA, EDF, ENDESA, INSTN-CEA, and Vattenfall) in the Programme. For 
the academic institutions, EMINE is the opportunity to provide a high level education 
aligned with the industrial needs. The international collaboration among universities helps 
improving the quality and the adoption of best practices. EMINE attracts good students to 
our centres whereas the EIT funding and the industrial involvement allows a number of 
activities that otherwise would have been difficult to carry out, such as the assistance of 
external industrial experts or field activities. MSc EMINE helps tomorrow’s nuclear 
engineers take up the challenges the nuclear energy industry faces in terms of safety, 
social acceptability and waste management. By offering outstanding technical training 
and addressing the economic, social and political aspects of nuclear energy, the 
programme broadens the scope of traditional nuclear education. 

 
 
1. Introduction 
 
The European Master in Nuclear Energy, now running its 5th edition, is an international 
education initiative offered by KIC InnoEnergy under the framework of the European Institute 
of Innovation and Technology (EIT).  
 
EMINE helps tomorrow’s nuclear engineers take up the challenges that the nuclear energy 
industry faces in terms of safety, social acceptability and waste management. By offering 
outstanding technical training and addressing the economic, social and political issues of 
nuclear energy, this MSc programme broadens the scope of traditional nuclear education. 
 
The uniqueness of EMINE lies in the strong involvement of its industrial partners. Four major 
players in nuclear energy – AREVA, EDF, ENDESA and Vattenfall – take active part in the 



programme. CEA, and its educational body, INSTN, actively contribute to teaching activities 
which allows EMINE to benefit from the expertise of one of the most important research 
centres in nuclear energy in Europe. 
 
The master is fully taught in English and its duration is two years (120 ECTS credits). EMINE 
students acquire an in-depth knowledge of the nuclear industry, through a series of unique 
and specialised courses in the field of Nuclear Engineering, covering a wide range of 
subjects. In the first year students take courses at either of the following locations (see 
Figure 1): 

- Royal Institute of Technology (KTH), Stockholm, Sweden 
- Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya. BarcelonaTech (UPC), Barcelona, Spain 

 
At the end of this first year, students from both UPC and KTH gather for a three week 
summer school at Grenoble École de Management. During the second year, students have 
the choice between 6 specialties offered by the following institutions: 

- Grenoble Institute of Technology (Grenoble INP), France 
- Paris-Saclay University (UPSay), France 

 
Upon successful completion of the programme, students are awarded a double diploma from 
the first and second universities, as well as a certificate delivered by KIC Innonergy. 

 
Figure 1. Mobility of students in MSc EMINE. 

 
 
2. KIC InnoEnergy Master School 
 
KIC InnoEnergy is an European company for innovation, business creation and education in 
sustainable energy. It is one of the so-called Knowledge and Innovation Communities 
created by the European Institute of Innovation and Technology (EIT) 
 
The EIT was set up in March 2008 by the European Parliament and Council. Its mission is to: 

- Contribute to the competitiveness of Europe, its sustainable economic growth and job 
creation by promoting and strengthening synergies and cooperation among 
businesses, education institutions and research organisations. 

- Create favourable environments for creative thoughts, to enable world-class 
innovation and entrepreneurship to thrive in Europe. 

 
The EIT strongly contributes to the objectives set out in Horizon 2020, in particular by 
addressing societal challenges in a manner that is complementary to other initiatives in these 
areas. 
 



The EIT fully integrates the three sides of the Knowledge Triangle (higher education, 
research and business) by bringing together leading players from all these dimensions to 
cooperate within the KICs. The EIT's first three KICs were launched in 2010: 

- Climate-KIC: addressing climate change mitigation and adaptation 
- EIT Digital: addressing information and Communication Technologies 
- KIC InnoEnergy: addressing sustainable energy 

and a further two in 2014: 

- EIT Health: addressing healthy living and active ageing 
- EIT Raw Materials: addressing sustainable exploration, extraction, processing, 

recycling and substitution 
 
KICs’ activities cover the entire innovation chain, including training and education 
programmes, innovation projects and business incubators. Each KIC has been set up as a 
legal entity and has appointed a CEO to run its operations. KICs have a great degree of 
autonomy to define their legal status, internal organisation and working methods. 
 
KIC InnoEnergy aims to achieve a sustainable energy future for Europe through innovation. 
Its mission is to build an operational framework between industry, research and higher 
education. The strategic objective is to become the leading engine of innovation in the field of 
sustainable energy. 
 
KIC InnoEnergy is a world class alliance of top European players from Industry, Research, 
Universities and Business Schools (Figure 2). The Consortium consists of 27 shareholders 
and additional 160 associate and project partners. They are organised around six regional 
units, the so-called Co-Location Centres (CC): France, Benelux, Germany, Iberia, Poland 
Plus and Sweden.  
 

 

                      
Figure 2. Kic Innoenergy as an European network. 

http://www.kic-innoenergy.com/
https://eit.europa.eu/


KIC InnoEnergy Master School is running seven Master programmes in sustainable and low 
carbon energy that offer a combination of engineering and entrepreneurship. All these 
programmes deliver high quality content, covering a range of subjects considered crucial to 
meeting today’s global energy challenges: 

- MSc RENE – Renewable Energy 
- MSc EMINE – European Master in Nuclear Energy  
- MSc SENSE - Smart Electrical Networks and Systems  
- MSc SELECT – Environomical Pathways to Sustainable Energy Systems  
- MSc ENTECH – Energy Technologies  
- MSc Energy for Smart Cities – Efficient Energy for Smart Cities 
- MSc Clean Fossil and Alternative Fuels Energy 

 
All these Programmes have international mobility as a common character: 

- Students take courses in two different universities and countries. 
- They get a training in innovation and entrepreneurship during the summer school 
- Eventually students start an internship with one of KIC InnoEnergy partners. 

 
Top European Universities are involved in the Master School: 

AGH   AGH University of Science and Technology, Poland 
INP   Grenoble Institute of Technology, France  
IST   Instituto Superior Técnico, Portugal  
KIT   Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Germany  
KUL   KU Leuven, Belgium  
KTH   Royal Institute of Technology, Sweden  
UPSay  Paris-Saclay University, France  
SUT  Silesian University of Technology, Poland  
TU/e  Eindhoven University of Technology, The Netherlands  
UPC   Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya·BarcelonaTech, Spain  
UU   Uppsala University, Sweden 

and two business schools: 
ESADE Business School, Spain  
Grenoble École de Management, France  

 
For all admitted students from the EU/EEA, and for the best among the students from other 
countries, KIC InnoEnergy covers the cost of the tuition fee. KIC InnoEnergy also offers 
scholarships to top applicants and also covers the costs related to events integrated in the 
curriculum (Kick-off event, summer school, field visits, European energy fairs…).  
 
Some key figures of the Master School are given in Figure 3. 
 

 
Figure 3. Some key figures of the KIC InnoEnergy Master School. 



3. Description of the EMINE programme  
 
The master provides an in-depth knowledge of the nuclear industry. The first year EMINE, 
either at KTH or at UPC, students acquire a series of competencies that are required in 
nuclear engineering: they learn the fundamentals of nuclear engineering, nuclear safety and 
radiation protection; they learn as well key aspects of the design and management of nuclear 
power plants.  
 
During the summer school at GEM, students have the unique opportunity to develop 
transversal skills and acquire competences that are generally not delivered by standard 
master programmes and that will help them in their professional life: ranging from Energy 
Economics topics to facets of the Emotional Intelligence a leader must have, and including 
issues like Strategy and Innovation in the Energy sector and Intellectual Property. 
 
During the second year students choose among the following majors, the first one carried out 
at Grenoble-INP and the other five at Paris-Saclay University (France): 

- Materials Science for Nuclear Energy 
- Nuclear Reactor Physics and Engineering 
- Nuclear Plant Design 
- Operations 
- Fuel Cycle Engineering 
- Decommissioning and Waste Management 

The courses that students follow in the different itineraries are listed in tables 1 to 4. Towards 
the end of the second year, students develop a Master thesis during their internship at an 
industrial or research position. The involvement of EMINE industrial partners makes it easy 
for the students to find a Master thesis internship. 

 
Table 1. Course structure for the EMINE first year at KTH. 

Course Credits (ECTS) Type 
Radiation, Protection, Dosimetry and Detectors 6 Mandatory 
Sustainable Power Generation 9 Mandatory 
Nuclear Reactor Physics, Major Course 9 Mandatory 
Nuclear Reactor Technology Nuclear power Safety 8 Mandatory 
Renewable Energy Technology 6 Elective 
Thermal-Hydraulics in Nuclear Energy Engineering 6 Elective 
Nuclear Physics 8 Elective 
Radiation Damage in Materials 6 Elective 
Generation IV Reactors 6 Elective 
Nuclear Reactor Dynamics and Stability 6 Elective 

Table 2. Course structure for the EMINE first year at UPC. 

Course Credits (ECTS) Type 
Fundamentals of nuclear engineering and radiation protection 8 Mandatory 
Systems, components and materials  6 Mandatory 
Reactor Physics and Thermal Hydraulics 7.5 Mandatory 
Fuel Cycle and Environmental Impact (FCEI) 5.5 Mandatory 
Course Project 1 3 Mandatory 
Regulations and Safety 5 Mandatory 
Management of nuclear power plants 8.5 Mandatory 
Course Project 2 3 Mandatory 
Fusion technology 4.5 Elective 
Non-destructive testing methods 4.5 Elective 
Core Design 4.5 Elective 
Monte-Carlo methods for radiation transport calculation 4.5 Elective 
Computational Fluid-Dynamics applied to Nuclear Technology 4.5 Elective 



Table 3. Course structure for the major at Grenoble-INP (EMNE 2nd year). 

Course (all mandatory) 
Credits 
(ECTS) Location 

Reactor concept and materials 6 Grenoble INP 
Material ageing in nuclear environment 6 Grenoble INP 
Energy and Components EDF 6   

General approach to energy issues 1 Grenoble INP 
Components 5 Materials Ageing Institute (EDF) 

Nuclear Fuels CEA 6 CEA Cadarache 
Innovation an management 6 GEM 
Internship and Master Thesis 30   

 

Table 4. Course structure for the five majors at Paris-Saclay (EMINE 2nd year). 

Nuclear Reactor Physics and 
Engineering  

Credits 
(ETCS) 

Nuclear plant design Credits 
(ETCS) 

Operations Credits 
(ETCS) 

Safety Introduction  2 Safety Introduction  2 Safety Introduction  2 
Functional description of a 
power station  

3 Functional description of a 
power station  

3 Functional description of a 
power station  

3 

Thermo hydraulics of 
reactors  

6 Risk Management  5 Risk Management  5 
Environment & society  5 Environment & society  5 

Calculation Codes for 
Reactors  

4 Radioprotection 1  2 Radioprotection 1  2 
Nuclear power station 
materials  

5 Installation management  5 
Nuclear Materials  5 Nuclear Thermal Hydraulics  5 
Introductory Nuclear Physics  6 Nuclear Thermal Hydraulics  5 Applied Nuclear Physics  5 
Neutronics – Part I  4 Applied Nuclear Physics  5 Radioprotection 2  3 
Labworks on PWR and Other 
Systems  

4 Radioprotection 2  3 Safety and production  4 
Design and construction of 
structures and infrastructures  

4 Maintenance of nuclear 
installations  

4 
Neutronics 2  4 
Fuel and associated cycles; 
Criticality-Safety; Protection 
and Radiation Shielding 

4 Safety design: General 
Architecture, Systems and 
Equipment  

4 Instrumentation and 
calculation codes  

4 

Internship 18 
Internship 18 Control Systems  4     
    Internship 18     
Fuel Cycle Engineering Credits 

(ETCS) 
Decommissioning and Waste 
Management 

Credits 
(ETCS) 

  Safety Introduction  2 Safety Introduction  2 
  Functional description of a 

power station  
3 Functional description of a 

power station  
3 

  Risk Management  5 Risk Management  5 
  Environment & society  5 Environment & society  5 
  Radioprotection 1  2 Radioprotection 1  2 
  Nuclear fuel and the front 

end of the nuclear fuel cycle  
5 Politics, strategy and 

management of 
decommissioning  

5   

  Nuclear spent fuel recycling  5 
  Radioprotection 2  3 Sanitation and environment  5 
  Waste conditioning  4 Radioprotection 2  3 
  Radioactive waste 

management and repository 
design  

4 Practical training and 
simulation of the dismantling 
activities  

4 

  Internship 18 Methods of decommissioning  4 
      Waste management and 

decommissioning of waste  
4 

      
      Internship 18 
   

The programme thus combines science and technology with management and innovation in 
the energy field and leadership skills in nuclear safety. Real industrial problems are 
presented in the classroom to be solved by students, and engaging pedagogical methods 
like PBL or e-learning strategies are used so as to create a learning atmosphere that help 
students achieve meaningful learning. The collaboration of the Industry is essential in 
achieving this goal. 
 
 



4. Industrial involvement in EMINE 
 
For the nuclear industry, it is a challenge to maintain the excellence and nuclear competence 
in our countries in particular and in Europe, in view of the recent changes towards nuclear 
phase out in some countries. The strong European exchange within EMINE is clearly 
beneficial and has been shown very fruitful already. 

EMINE students benefit from the involvement of our industrial partners in the Programme. 
Industrial implication in the master takes a multifaceted form: 

- A large number of topics and subjects are covered directly by lecturers from industrial 
partners or other collaborators from industry, research centres and Regulatory 
Authority, either at the universities’ classrooms or at the premises of the companies 
(EDF, CEA-INSTN, Tecnatom). The “immersion” courses organized by CEA and EDF 
at their facilities offer the student a unique opportunity to discover the nuclear industry 
and their research activities. 

- EMINE industrial partners participate in the Programme Steering Board and are 
active members of the EMINE consortium. 

- Industrial partners and collaborators organise technical visits to their facilities: nuclear 
power plants, heavy components factories, laboratories, full-scope and incidental 
simulators, La Hague fuel reprocessing plant, Georges Besse II enrichment plant, 
Bure deep storage site, the Vattenfall Research Laboratory in Älvkarleby (Sweden), 
etc. 

- The industrial partners offer internship positions for the students to develop their 
Master Thesis. 

 
Some of the courses with a large implication of the industry are listed below: 

- Leadership for Safety in the Nuclear Energy Industry (KTH, 6 ECTS). The course is 
organized around the presentation and analysis of actual cases (accidents and 
incidents, decision situations) from which relevant lessons are to be learnt. Lectures 
are given by expert guest lecturers from authorities and industry. 

- Elements of the Back-end of the Nuclear Fuel Cycle: Geological Storage of Nuclear 
Spent Fuel (KTH, 7.5 ECTS).  This course is organized within the EMINE programme 
by the KTH, the Center for University Studies Research and Development (Nova - 
Oskarshamn) and by the Swedish Nuclear Fuel and Waste Management Company 
(SKB) and supported by the Linnaeus University and the University of Illinois at 
Urbana-Champaign. The unique feature of the course is that the students visit Clab 
(an interim geological repository for spent fuel), the Laxemar Site (study area for 
bedrock and surface geology), the Äspö Hard Rock Laboratory (research laboratory 
for geological spent fuel disposal), and the Canister Laboratory (development centre 
for spent fuel encapsulation technology). See figure 4. 

- Systems, components and Materials (UPC, 6 ECTS). More than one half of the 
lectures are delivered professionals from Tecnatom, CIEMAT, ENSA and Nuclenor.  

- Fuel Cycle and Environmental Impact (UPC, 5.5 ECTS). About one half of the 
lectures are delivered professionals from ENUSA and AREVA.  

- Regulations and Safety (UPC, 5 ECTS). Most of this course is lectured by external 
teachers (Regulatory Authority, ENUSA, CIEMAT, Tecnatom) or take place in an 
industrial facility (Tecnatom’s Fulls Scope Simulator) 

- Management of Nuclear Power Plants (UPC, 8.5 ECTS). Most of this course is 
lectured by external teachers (senior retired engineers from ANAV and 
Westinghouse, and active professionals from ANAV, Endesa, ENRESA, Tecnatom, 
and Westinghouse) or take place in an industrial facility (Tecnatom’s Fulls Scope 
Simulator, Tecnatom’s headquarters in Madrid, one Nuclear Power Plant, ENSA 
factory in Santander, Endesa headquarters in Madrid, etc.). See figure 4. 



- Project course (UPC, 3 ECTS). This course is organised as a transversal PBL activity 
that students develop in teams and is followed up by specialists from industry 
together with academic staff. 

- Energy and Components (Grenoble INP, 6 ECTS). These courses are delivered by 
EDF, the main part of it at its premises of the Materials Ageing Institute, where 
students spend 2 weeks (see figure 4). The courses consist of a detailed synopsis of 
selected operating experiences concerning PWR primary circuit components which 
EDF considers to be crucial issues for safety. Specific problems concerning fuel, fuel 
cladding, internals, pressure vessels, and water chemistry are detailed. This is a 
unique opportunity for students to learn what are the technological issues that 
engineers and researchers in materials have to tackle within nuclear industry.  

- Nuclear Fuels (Grenoble INP, 6 ECTS). These courses are delivered by CEA – 
INSTN  during 3 weeks stay at CEA Cadarache. This module gives a broad overview 
of the different key aspects of nuclear fuels which are useful to any engineer 
intending to work in the nuclear industry.  

- Radioprotection 1 & 2 (Paris-Saclay, 5 ECTS in total). These courses are  endorsed 
by CEA, EDF and IRSN  

- Labworks on PWR and other systems (Paris-Saclay, 4 ECTS), endorsed by CEA.  
- Fuel Cycles (Paris-Saclay, 4 ECTS). This module is endorsed by CEA for the  

Nuclear Reactor Physics and Engineering major. 
- Design and construction of structures and infrastructures (Paris-Saclay, 4 ECTS), 

endorsed by EDF and BOUYGUES for the Nuclear Plant Design major. 
- Systems and equipment (Paris-Saclay, 4 ECTS), endorsed by AREVA for the Nuclear 

Plant Design major. 
- Operation management (Paris-Saclay, 5 ECTS), endorsed by CEA, AREVA and EDF 

for the Operations major. 
- Safety and Production (Paris-Saclay, 4 ECTS), endorsed by EDF for the Operations 

major. 
- Politics, strategy and management of decommissioning (Paris-Saclay, 5 ECTS), 

endorsed by EDF and CEA (39h, 5 ECTS) for the Decommissioning and Waste 
Management major. 

- Methods of decommissioning (Paris-Saclay, 4 ECTS), endorsed by CEA, SALVAREM 
and EDF for the Decommissioning and Waste Management major. 

- Separation and Recycling (Paris-Saclay, 6 ECTS), endorsed by CEA for the Fuel 
Cycle major. 

 

 
Figure 4. Top-left: Visit to Äspö Hard Rock Laboratory. Top-right: In the turbine 

building of a PWR plant. Bottom-left: at the Materials Ageing Institute (EDF). Bottom-right: 
at the ENSA factory in Spain. 



 
5. Sharping the saw 
 
EMINE programme is in constant evolution as a result of the continuous interaction of the 
four local academic institutions with their respective industrial partners (some of them, as 
well, partners of EMINE). Moreover, the international collaboration among universities helps 
improving the quality and the adoption of best practices. 
 
EMINE programme pedagogical evolution is also strongly supported by KIC InnoEnergy, 
which offers opportunities to support teacher’s initiative for programme improvement. 
 
In the last editions, new interesting courses have been developed at KTH combining 
efficiently theoretical and practical skills for the comprehensive competence building, like: 
Leadership for Safety in Nuclear Power Industry and Geological Storage of the Spent 
Nuclear Fuel, described above. Students graded those courses above 6.5 on a 0-7 scale. 
Moreover, the EMINE programme at KTH has developed and started to implement the 
integration of the entire programme into to E-learning platform in order to improve the 
pedagogy of the programme and to increase its efficiency. 
 
At UPC, continuous adjustments are done on the contents of the courses. For instance, in 
the course on Systems, Components and Materials, a couple of relevant actions have been 
undertaken: 

- The module on Systems (Tecnatom) has now a sharper focus on a limited number of 
systems; nevertheless, all the information given in previous years is made available 
to the students, so that they can use it in the assignments of the course on 
Management of Nuclear Power Plants. 

- The module on Materials, mainly lectured by CIEMAT, has been made more 
attainable for students: whereas all the written information is still supplied to the 
students, lecturers pay more attention to the basic and crucial aspects. 

 
An effort has been recently done at UPC to improve the exercises proposed for the course 
Management of Nuclear Power Plants. These exercises aimed to be as close as possible to 
actual engineering activities, e.g. analysing the suitability of the performance of any interface, 
designing a system, or specifying a component. Over the years these exercises have been 
adjusted to make them more effective learning tools, focusing the effort of the students on 
the more crucial aspects and increasing the instances of feedback provided by instructors.  
 
At Grenoble INP a couple of initiatives have been developed as first raw tests. The first one 
is focused in the “learning by doing” principle and, more particularly, in the idea that “the best 
way to learn is to teach”. A “student conference initiative on world energy issues”, with real 
audience has been proposed and then organized and held with a strong implication of the 
students. Two different presentations have been made by two groups of 6 students each with 
the help of 3 scientific experts, in order to allow creativity and spontaneity both in the way of 
presenting facts and answering questions. Students had to use all their talent to make 
themselves as clear and convincing as possible. This initiative was a great success. The 
second initiative explores the innovation potential of the light “tangible games”, which are 
typically games of cards and are the brand new trend of “gamification”, in comparison to the 
“serious games”, which impose heavy computing infrastructures. 
 
At Paris-Saclay University the pedagogical committee, gathering the ten academic and 
industrial partners, improve annually the program during pedagogical meetings taking 
account for the students’ evaluations. For example, the new EDF R&D and training campus 
in Plateau of Saclay will facilitate reactor simulator sessions for the students from 2017 on. 
Moreover, a set of conferences has been included in the program, to open perspectives and 
allow debate between experts and students on Energy themes. Some of them are given by 
AREVA and EDF senior experts. 



EMINE programme has been recently evaluated by the students, who indicated a number of 
strengths and weaknesses and finally concluded: 

- EMINE consolidates unique and specialised courses in the field of Nuclear 
Engineering – students are very happy about that. 

- Providing double-diploma is still a unique thing in European Union. Ability to travel 
and learn is a dream of every student. While there are some hiccups on organisation 
side, most of the students are very pleased with this opportunity. 

- Cooperation with industry enables EMINE to invite specialists to the lectures. Detailed 
insight is of high value in this field of science. Usually, these lecturers not only 
operate state of the art knowledge, but also give to the students an idea about 
possible work conditions and positions in future career. 

 
 
6. Conclusions 
 
MSc EMINE helps tomorrow’s nuclear engineers take up the challenges the nuclear energy 
industry faces in terms of safety, social acceptability and waste management. By offering 
outstanding technical training and addressing the economic, social and political aspects of 
nuclear energy, the programme broadens the scope of traditional nuclear education. 
 
KIC InnoEnergy offers scholarships to the best EMINE applicants and covers as well the 
participation costs at the hosting universities. This fact, along with the quality and focus of the 
programme and the industrial implication, helps EMINE attract good students.  
 
The EIT funding and the industrial involvement allows a number of activities that otherwise 
would be difficult to carry out, such as the assistance of external industrial experts or field 
activities. The latter include several visits to factories, plants or even to an underground 
laboratory for Geological Storage of Spent Nuclear Fuel. The participation of external 
specialists in the lectures not only provides an insight on the state of the art, but also gives 
students an idea about possible work conditions and positions in their future career. 
 
EMINE students receive the high-level technical education required to master the 
engineering complexities of nuclear power generation, as well as business training related to 
innovation issues and energy management. The programme helps students integrate the 
technical aspects of the nuclear industry with key political, economic and social issues. 
 
EMINE offers students the possibility of carrying out an international MSc Programme of 
quality with large industrial involvement and allowing them to travel within Europe. The 
design of EMINE is attractive, combining science and technology with management and 
innovation in the energy field and leadership skills in nuclear safety, bringing to the 
classroom real industrial problems to be solved by students, and deploying a series of 
engaging pedagogical methods like PBL or e-learning strategies.  
 
On finishing this MSc Programme, students enjoy of good job or PhD opportunities in the 
nuclear industry worldwide.  
 
 
For more information 
 
http://www.kic-innoenergy.com/education/master-school/msc-emine-european-master-in-
nuclear-energy/ 

 
http://eit.europa.eu/ 
 
 


