





















































Paper submission


  
 

 
  

 

 
 

 

Master’s degree in Nuclear Engineering UPC-ENDESA. A consolidated 
international program. 

L. Batet1, F. Calviño1, M.A. Duch2, F. Reventós1 
Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya (BarcelonaTECH) 

1Dept. of Physics. Division of Nuclear Engineering. 
 2Institute of Energy Technologies 

ETSEIB, Av Diagonal 647, 08028, Barcelona - Spain 
 

P. León3, P. Fernández-Olano4, E. Serra3 
Endesa.  

3Directorate-General for Nuclear Energy 
4Institutional Relations 

 

Summary – The Master’s degree in Nuclear Engineering (MNE) UPC-ENDESA offers a unique and 
practical oriented training, with the aim to prepare competent engineers so that they can assume 
managerial positions within the Nuclear Industry. The program combines science, technology and 
management in the nuclear energy field, including the elements of the safety culture. MNE is 
embedded in EMINE, the European Master in Nuclear Energy (KIC InnoEnergy) and is completely 
taught in English. Its 90 credits (each credit implies 25 hours of student’s work) are divided into one 
year of subjects (60 credits), and one semester of internship plus final project (30 credits). MNE has 
a strong industrial implication: lecturers from companies, research institutes and the Spanish 
Regulatory Authority (cover about one half of the lectures; companies accept students in internships 
and organize technical visits. The participation of professionals external to the University in the 
definition and revision of the Program is one of MNE’s assets. A large portion of the contents of the 
MNE are organized in the form of Problem and Project Based Learning: real industrial problems are 
brought into the classroom to be solved by students, most of the time assisted by experts from the 
nuclear industry. MNE is in continuous evolution, seeking for a continuous improvement of the 
contents and learning methods. Starting the sixth edition, the master is firmly consolidated and the 
alumni value it positively. 

 

1. INTRODUCTION.  
The Master’s degree in Nuclear Engineering (MNE) UPC-ENDESA [1] aims to prepare 

engineers with a high level of competencies so that they can assume managerial positions within 
the Nuclear Industry, which demands professionals able to work rigorously, accordingly to the 
Safety Culture, imbued of a high sense of responsibility, and at the same time able to work in an 
international context, within transcultural teams and in a continuously changing environment. 

The Programme was born, with a clear industrial vocation, in 2010 when Endesa, the largest 
nuclear plant operator in Spain, approached UPC with the aim to start defining a future Master in 
Nuclear Engineering in Barcelona. The contents and scope of the master were defined with the 
contribution of professionals from industry, the CSN and research and academic institutions. Early 
in 2011 the Program was submitted to the National Agency for Quality Assessment and 
Accreditation of Spain (ANECA) for verification. In March same year a Memorandum of 
Understanding UPC-Endesa was signed, by which Endesa committed to sponsor the Master. In 
October 2011, the first edition of the Master started. In 2015 the Program was accredited by 
ANECA.  

42 Annual Meeting  Spanish Nuclear Society 28-30 September 2016                                                                                                            Page 1 out of 8 



  
 

 
  

 

 
 

 

The Programme is characterized by a strong industrial implication that makes it possible to 
offer a unique and practical oriented training. It combines science, technology and management in 
the nuclear energy field, including the elements of the safety culture.  

MNE is embedded in EMINE, the European Master in Nuclear Energy (KIC InnoEnergy) [2]. 

After five editions, the Programme is firmly consolidated and the alumni value it positively. 
This September, the sixth edition has been launched. 

 

2. DESCRIPTION OF THE PROGRAMME.  
The MNE program has been designed to help students:  

- Understand the theoretical and practical fundamentals of nuclear engineering. 
- Acquire a clear vision of the nuclear fuel cycle, from uranium mining to the management 

of spent nuclear fuel. 
- Comprehend the lifecycle of the different installations, from the erection to the 

decommissioning of a nuclear facility. 
- Gain a deep understanding of regulation and apprehend the principles of nuclear safety. 
- Develop a strategic view of the nuclear industry and the ability to formulate problems and 

to make decisions. 

The Master’s 90 credits are divided into one year of courses (60 credits) and one semester 
of internship plus master thesis (30 credits). The Programme is fully adapted to the European 
Higher Education Area (EHEA) standards and each credit implies 25 hours of students’ work, be it 
in the classroom, in the laboratory, in a field visit, before a computer, or reading their notes when 
preparing for an exam, to mention some of the activities. Table 1 gives an overview of the 
distribution of the credits.  

In order to help students gain the competences needed to manage the kind of projects 
developed in the industry (material supply logistics, plant safety and technical management), an 
important part of the contents of the MNE are organised in the form of Problem and Project Based 
Learning. The courses and their respective allocated credits are listed in Table 2. Figure 1 
illustrates the temporal organization of the contents with an indication of the transversal character of 
the two Course Projects.  

MNE is completely taught in English, to attract international students and to train Spanish 
students to compete in an internationalised labour market. 

 

3. LEARNING METHODOLOGY 
To achieve meaningful learning, learners must face realistic situations, similar to those 

encountered in the workplace; they have to apply their knowledge to address problems whose 
solution requires making decisions. For this reason, active learning methodologies and team work 
are thoroughly used in the master. Assessment instruments and activities are integrated into the 
learning activities. 

As aforementioned, an important part of the contents of the Master are dealt with by means 
of a Problem or Project Based Learning (PBL) framework, which has shown to be quite adequate in 
the engineering education and training.  

 

42 Annual Meeting  Spanish Nuclear Society 28-30 September 2016                                                                                                            Page 2 out of 8 



  
 

 
  

 

 
 

 

Table 1. Structure of the MNE programme. 

Type of Subject Credits 
Required courses 46.5 
Elective courses 13.5 
Internship 15 
Master’s Diploma Thesis 15 
TOTAL 90 

 

Table 2. Credits allocated for the different courses. 

Courses Credits 
First Semester 

Fundamentals of Nuclear Engineering and Radiological Protection 8 
Reactor Physics and Thermal-Hydraulics 7.5 
Systems, Components and Materials 6 
Fuel Cycle and Environmental Impact 5.5 
Course Project 1 3 

Second Semester 
Regulations and Safety 5 
Management of Nuclear Power Plants 8.5 
Elective subjects 3 x 4.5 
Course Project 2 3 

 

 
Figure 1: Distribution of the curriculum in semesters. 

 

For instance, in the recent editions, the transversal project developed during the second 
semester has been a 'Feasibility study of plant power up-rating". Beyond the small courses 
organized as projects (Project 1 and Project 2), PBL techniques have been used, for instance, 
within the course Management of Nuclear Power Plants (MNPP), when students have been faced 
with the "Design of a portable system to support the operation in Station Blackout scenarios" (more 
details of these activities can be found in Reventós et al. [3]). These projects, scheduled in the 
second semester, are mentored by specialists from industry together with academic staff. 

The master aims to ease students’ transition from University to Industry. The industrial 
internship in the third semester is part of the strategy. Another part is the fact that towards one half 
of the classes are delivered by lecturers external to UPC (half of them from the Industry); this 

42 Annual Meeting  Spanish Nuclear Society 28-30 September 2016                                                                                                            Page 3 out of 8 



  
 

 
  

 

 
 

 

participation is more relevant in subjects of the second semester. Students’ visits to industrial 
facilities complete the strategy. 

 

4. INDUSTRIAL VOCATION 
The MNE was born from the alignment of objectives of Academy and Industry; from the of 

Endesa’s and UPC’s commitment to maintain and nurture the know-how in nuclear engineering 
education in a social and political context that makes this task difficult. 

Because of its penetration in the Spanish Energy System, Endesa has eased the path for 
MNE in order to obtain the collaboration of the Spanish Nuclear Industry. Industrial collaboration 
includes one or more of the following activities: lecturing, organization of guided visits, hosting of 
students for internships, guidance in the definition of the contents of the master. 

The implication of a large part of the Spanish Nuclear Industry has been a reality from the 
beginning of the MNE project. Research institutions and the Spanish Regulatory Authority have 
made important contributions to it as well. The participation of engineers, technicians and 
researchers external to the university in the definition and revision of the programme is one of the 
most valuable MNE’s assets.  

Endesa makes it possible the attendance of MNE students to an important annual event of 
the Spanish Nuclear Society in Madrid (the Seminar on Operating Experiences and Perspectives, 
where the Spanish NPPs managers expose the operation of their plants during the previous year), 
by means of sponsoring the simultaneous translation of the event into English. To take advantage 
of the trip to Madrid, Endesa invites the students to visit its Headquarters, where the future nuclear 
engineers have the opportunity to exchange some words with the managing director of Endesa’s 
Nuclear Division and a guided visit is arranged to the Generation Control Center (Figure 2). 

 

 
Figure 2. Images of MNE students in their visit to ENDESA and during a Seminar on 

Operating Experiences and Perspectives. Left: Seminar of Spanish Nuclear Society in Madrid in 
2015. Right-bottom: visit to Endesa Headquarters the day before the Seminar. Right-top: visit to the 

Generation Control Center during the visit of 2016. 

42 Annual Meeting  Spanish Nuclear Society 28-30 September 2016                                                                                                            Page 4 out of 8 



  
 

 
  

 

 
 

 

 
Endesa and ANAV (the operator of Ascó-1, Ascó-2 and Vandellòs-2 power plants) provide 

lecturers for specific topics in the course on Management of Nuclear Power Plants.  

The list of companies involved in the Programme includes: Nuclenor (a company 
participated by Endesa that operates a BWR plant in Santa Maria de Garoña), ENUSA (a publicly 
traded Spanish company for design, manufacture and supply of fuel), ENRESA (a public company 
in charge of the safe management, storage and disposal of the  radioactive wastes produced in 
Spain), ENSA (a State owned company specialized in the manufacturing of heavy equipment), 
Tecnatom (advanced engineering), IDOM (engineering company), Westinghouse and AREVA. 
These companies participate in different ways, either facilitating that their professionals lecture 
some specific topics, opening internship positions, or offering guided visits to their facilities (see 
Figure 3). 

 
Figure 3. Images of some of the visits of the MNE students to industrial facilities. 
Top (left-to-right): Vandellòs-II NPP, Tecnatom Headquarters, Vandellòs-I graphite-gas 

reactor being decommissioned by ENRESA. Bottom (left-to-right): ENSA factory in 
Santander, ITER site in Cadarache, José Cabrera NPP being dismantled by ENRESA.  

 
The list of external participants includes lecturers from CIEMAT (the public major Spanish 

research centre), who lecture in the area of structural materials for nuclear plants and material 
degradation, but as well in other topics related with the activities of the centre, like neutronics and 
severe accident phenomena or nuclear fusion. For the elective course on Fusion Technology, the 
MNE has had the support of professionals from F4E and researchers from CEA and the Max-
Planck-Princeton Center for Plasma Physics. 

Last but not least, the Master has the invaluable collaboration of the Spanish Regulatory 
Authority (CSN). Technicians from this institution lecture some topics related to Nuclear Safety and 
Regulations. Moreover, the Argos Chair, sponsored by the CSN, offers fee waivers to the students 

 

5. INTERNATIONAL PROJECTION 
Since its beginnings, the MNE is embedded in EMINE [2], the European Master in Nuclear 

Energy (European Institute of Technology [4], KIC InnoEnergy). Part of the academic program of 

42 Annual Meeting  Spanish Nuclear Society 28-30 September 2016                                                                                                            Page 5 out of 8 



  
 

 
  

 

 
 

 

the MNE is offered as well in the framework of EMINE. The students of this European master 
choose between UPC and KTH (Sweden) for their first year and then move to France (Grenoble 
INP or ParisTech) for their second year [5]. In the summer between the two academic years, 
students gather for a summer school in Grenoble École de Management.  

KIC InnoEnergy is an European company for innovation, business creation and education in 
sustainable energy. It is one of the so-called Knowledge and Innovation Communities created by 
the European Institute of Innovation and Technology (EIT). 

The EIT was set up in March 2008 by the European Parliament and Council with the aim to: 

- Contribute to the competitiveness of Europe, its sustainable economic growth and job 
creation by promoting and strengthening synergies and cooperation among businesses, 
education institutions and research organisations. 

- Create favourable environments for creative thoughts, to enable world-class innovation 
and entrepreneurship to thrive in Europe. 

KIC InnoEnergy is a consortium of top European players from Industry, Research, 
Universities and Business Schools, with 27 shareholders (UPC among them) and additional 160 
associate and project partners (Figure 4). 

 
 

Figure 4. Kic InnoEnergy as an European network. 
KIC InnoEnergy Master School is running seven Master programmes in sustainable and low 

carbon energy that offer a combination of engineering and entrepreneurship. EMINE is one of these 
programmes; all of them have international mobility as a common character: 

- Students take courses in two different universities and countries. 
- They get a training in innovation and entrepreneurship during the summer school 
- Eventually students start an internship with one of KIC InnoEnergy partners. 

 

42 Annual Meeting  Spanish Nuclear Society 28-30 September 2016                                                                                                            Page 6 out of 8 



  
 

 
  

 

 
 

 

The participation of UPC in EMINE has reinforced the links between this university and the 
other institutions participating in the European Programme, and has placed the UPC in a visible 
place within the international community of higher education on nuclear engineering.  

The support of KIC InnoEnergy has allowed to develop a series of activities that otherwise 
wouldn’t be possible. The continuous program reviews and improvements requested by KIC 
InnoEnergy have forced the MNE at UPC to sharpen the saw, and have reinforced the self-
demanding attitude of the master’s faculty, thus improving the quality of the Programme. 

In what concerns the daily development of the master, EMINE and MNE students share the 
classroom and courses. Having EMINE and MNE students together creates a good working 
atmosphere, while allowing the future engineers work in a multicultural and international 
environment.  

 

6. SHARPENING THE SAW 
MNE is in continuous evolution. Self-criticism of the teaching staff at UPC, the constant 

interaction with our industrial partners, the contact with other EMINE partners, which leads to the 
adoption of best practices, and the requirements of KIC InnoEnergy, all these elements combine to 
boost the continuous improvement of the contents and learning methods.  

Continuous adjustments are done on the contents of the courses. For instance, in the 
course on Systems, Components and Materials, a couple of relevant actions have been 
undertaken: 

- The module on Systems (Tecnatom) has now a sharper focus on a limited number of 
systems; nevertheless, all the information given in previous years is made available to 
the students, so that they can use it in the assignments of the course on Management of 
Nuclear Power Plants. 

- The module on Materials, mainly lectured by CIEMAT, has been made more attainable 
for students: whereas all the written information is still supplied to the students, lecturers 
pay more attention to the basic and crucial aspects. 

An effort has been recently done to improve the exercises proposed for the course 
Management of Nuclear Power Plants. These exercises aimed to be as close as possible to actual 
engineering activities, e.g. analysing the suitability of the performance of any interface, designing a 
system, or specifying a component.  

The exercises prepared following this general guideline were studies involving all the steps 
needed in design activities. Concepts like Design Basis, Reference Documentation or Traceability 
were reinforced by its use. The review of lists of systems in order to establish the impact of any 
design modification on their function was usually considered in the exercises. Should the exercise 
involve any equipment supply, the specification for it had to be prepared by the students. 

Although the general guideline is still valid, self-criticism and analysis of student’s results 
have driven the evolution of these assignments. Students still work in teams (3 people is the 
standard), but an increasing number of questions have to be answered individually. Teachers 
prepare questionnaires and wrap-up sessions bearing in mind the contents of other connected 
courses (not only MNPP). Each group works as a small technical office and (although the instructor 
is the ultimate advisor) leadership and making value judgments are skills often stimulated. 
Technical meetings and debates are simulated and practiced and the response of students is 
extremely positive since they really try to solve the problem that is posed. Debates are also used to 
develop other skills like summarizing, conducting a meeting or writing down the minutes. 

42 Annual Meeting  Spanish Nuclear Society 28-30 September 2016                                                                                                            Page 7 out of 8 



  
 

 
  

 

 
 

 

7. CONCLUSION 
The Master’s degree in Nuclear Engineering from the Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya 

was born with a clear industrial vocation. Students develop a strategic view of the nuclear industry 
and the ability to formulate problems and make decisions, acquire the competencies needed to 
manage the projects that are run within a company, and cultivate the sense of responsibility which 
is at the basis of the Safety Culture. 

The involvement of Industry and the Regulatory Authority has been essential in the definition 
of the master’s programme. The contents of the program are being continuously improved with the 
help of our industrial partners. 

The use of active learning, PBL and team work activities all along the programme help the 
students not only achieve the learning objectives but also acquire a number of soft skills valued by 
industry. This way the master contributes to prepare the future professionals the society needs.  

UPC is committed to the quality of education; specifically, the MNE’s faculty is highly 
motivated for continuous improvement. In this line, among other actions, transversal and course 
projects are being rethought, in line with the requirements of KIC InnoEnergy.  

After the launch of its sixth edition, the Master’s degree in Nuclear Engineering UPC-
ENDESA is a consolidated programme with a solid international projection and an accredited 
quality.  

 
REFERENCES 

[1] MNE web page at UPC. http://nuclearengineering.masters.upc.edu/en  
[2] EMINE web page. http://www.kic-innoenergy.com/emine/home/  
[3] F. Reventós et al., Project-Based Learning in the Master’s degree in Nuclear 

Engineering at BarcelonaTECH. Experience gained in the area of Management of 
Nuclear Power Plants. 40th Annual Meeting of the Spanish Nuclear Society, Valencia, 
2014.  

[4] EIT institutional web page. https://eit.europa.eu/  
[5] B. Cabon et al. (2016), European Master in Nuclear Energy (EMINE). When Academy 

and Industry Meet. NESTet 2016 (European Nuclear Society). Berlin, May 2016. In 
proceedings. 

 

42 Annual Meeting  Spanish Nuclear Society 28-30 September 2016                                                                                                            Page 8 out of 8 

http://nuclearengineering.masters.upc.edu/en
http://www.kic-innoenergy.com/emine/home/
https://eit.europa.eu/

	1. INTRODUCTION.
	2. Description of the programme.
	3. LEARNING METHODOLOGY
	4. INDUSTRIAL VoCATION
	5. INTERNATIONAL PROJECTION
	6. SHARPENING THE SAW
	7. CONCLUSION
	REFERENCES

