












































Journal of the Korean Physical Society, Vol. 59, No. 2, August 2011, pp. 1573∼1576

Monte Carlo Simulations for the Study of a Moderated Neutron Detector

M. B. Gomez Hornillos,∗ V. Gorlychev, R. Caballero, G. Cortes, A. Poch, C. Pretel and F. Calvino
Seccio d’Enginyeria Nuclear, Universitat Politecnica de Catalunya, 08028, Barcelona, Spain

J. L. Tain, A. Algora and J. Agramunt
IFIC, CSIC-Univ. Valencia, Valencia, Spain

D. Cano-Ott, T. Martinez and E. Mendoza
CIEMAT-Madrid, Spain

J. Rissanen, J. Aysto, A. Jokinen, T. Eronen, I. Moore and H. Penttila
JYFL, Jyväskylä, Finland

(Received 26 April 2010)

This work presents the Monte Carlo simulations performed with the MCNPX and GEANT4 codes
for the design of a BEta deLayEd Neutron detector, BELEN-20. This detector will be used for the
study of beta delayed neutron emission and consists of a block of polyethylene with dimensions
90 × 90 × 80 cm3 and 20 cylindrical 3He gas counters. The results of these simulations have
been validated experimentally with a 252Cf source in the laboratory at UPC, Barcelona. Also the
first experiment with this detector has been carried out in November 2009 in JYFL, Finland. In
this experiment the neutron emission probability after beta decay of the fission products 88Br,
94,95Rb, and 138I has been measured; this data is still under analysis. Simulations with MCNPX
and GEANT4 have been performed in order to obtain the efficiency of the BELEN-20 detector for
each of the above nuclei using the neutron energy distribution corresponding to each nucleus.

PACS numbers: 29.40.-n, 29.20.Hm
Keywords: Monte Carlo simulations, GEANT4, MCNPX, Beta delayed neutron emission, Neutron detector
DOI: 10.3938/jkps.59.1573

I. INTRODUCTION

Monte Carlo simulations are a basic tool for the opti-
misation of the design of new detectors and experimental
setups. Two of the most commonly used Monte Carlo
simulation codes for the passage of particles through
matter are GEANT4 [1] and MCNPX [2]. GEANT4 is
a very versatile code and provides complete information
on the particle track among other features. MCNPX is
the simulation code that is most widely accepted by the
neutron community. Both codes, GEANT4 (v.4.9.1.p2)
and MCNPX (v.2.5.0), have been used in this work in
a complementary way in order to design a detector to
measure the probability of neutron emission after beta
decay (Pn).

Neutron emission after beta decay plays a major role
in the safe design of nuclear power plants [3]. Further-
more the Pn is a very valuable piece of data for nuclear
astrophysics, in particular for the r-process, since it de-
fines the decay path towards stability during freeze-out,
and these emitted neutrons provide a source of late time

∗E-mail: belen.gomez@upc.edu

neutrons. Also, the Pn carries important nuclear struc-
ture information for nuclei very far from the valley of
stability, where other measurements are not yet possi-
ble. However the existing experimental data nowadays
is scarce and new high precision measurements are nec-
essary to improve the data bases.

The aim of this work is to design an optimal detec-
tor to provide experimental data from experiments per-
formed in existing and future new accelerator facilities.

II. DETECTOR CHARACTERISTICS

The main features of the BELEN-20 detector have
been decided based on simulations with the MCNPX
Monte Carlo code. The objective of these simulations
was to obtain a device with a neutron detection effi-
ciency as high and as constant as possible in the energy
range of interest for β-delayed neutron emission (from a
few keV to a few MeV).

Based on the results of the MCNPX simulations the
detector consists of a block of polyethylene surrounded
by a shielding polyethylene layer with total dimensions
90 × 90 × 80 cm3 and a cylindrical beam hole in the

-1573-



-1574- Journal of the Korean Physical Society, Vol. 59, No. 2, August 2011

Fig. 1. (Color online) Scheme of the polyethylene matrix
with the 20 3He counters in two crowns around the beam
hole.

centre with a radius of 5 cm [4]. The central block has
two concentric crowns of 8 and 12 3He gas cylindrical
counters around the beam hole. The 3He counters have
a 60 cm effective length and 2.54 cm diameter and con-
tain 20 atm of 3He gas. The layout of the detector is
presented in Fig. 1.

The detection of the neutrons is achieved via the de-
tection of the charged particles that are produced in the
reaction

3He + n −→ 3H + p + 763.7 keV.

The cross section of this reaction increases with decreas-
ing neutron energy [5] and therefore motivates the need
for neutron moderation in the polyethylene in order to
increase the neutron detection probability.

The request of having an efficiency curve as constant
as possible for the neutron energy range of interest is
due to the fact that the information on the initial en-
ergy of the emitted neutron will be lost because of the
moderation in the polyethylene. Thus having a constant
response curve reduces the uncertainty in the neutron
emission probability.

III. MONTE CARLO SIMULATIONS

The efficiency curve obtained with MCNPX is pre-
sented in Fig. 2 along with the one obtained with
GEANT4 in order to compare the results of both codes.
It can be appreciated that the relative difference between
MCNPX and GEANT4 is 7.5% in average along the en-
ergy range from 1 keV to 5 MeV, although the difference
between both simulation codes reduces for high energy.

Regarding the simulation of neutron transport it is
common knowledge among the neutron community that
there are some discrepancies between the results ob-
tained by GEANT4 and by the more widely accepted
neutron transport simulation code MCNPX as it has
been shown in Fig. 2. For this reason both codes have
been used for the design of this neutron detector in a
complementary way. MCNPX was used to decide the

Fig. 2. (Color online) Neutron detection efficiency accord-
ing to the Monte Carlo simulation codes GEANT4 and MC-
NPX.

best placement for the detectors in order to achieve con-
stant neutron detection efficiency. GEANT4 was used
to study the particles produced in the ensemble due to
the passage of the neutron and the energy deposited by
them in the 3He gas. Keeping the discrepancy between
GEANT4 and MCNPX in mind, the information pro-
vided by GEANT4 is of high interest for the design of the
detector in order to look at aspects on which GEANT4
provides information more readily, such as the particles
created in the ensemble due to the interactions, their
energy deposition and full tracking information.

1. GEANT4 simulations

A GEANT4 simulation using the energy distribution
of the neutrons from a 252Cf source has been performed
in order to obtain the shape of the spectrum of the de-
posited energy in the 3He gas and study the energy de-
position of particles other than protons and tritons in
the gas. The distribution of the 252Cf neutrons has been
implemented as the Watt Spectrum from [7].

The spectrum of the energy deposited in the gas is
presented in Fig. 3, it can be clearly appreciated that
the influence of events other than the ones from neutron
detection is not statistically significant and the noise can
be discriminated since it occurs at low energies.

The time pattern of the appearance of the 3H in the
3He gas (i.e., detection of the neutron) is another main
point of the simulations due to the long delay (hundreds
of µs) between the emission of the neutron and its detec-
tion in the 3He caused by the neutron moderation pro-
cess in the polyethylene matrix. The results of the simu-
lation are shown in Fig. 4. This time has to be known in
order to be able to correlate the decay of the precursor
nucleus with the detected neutron in the experimental
data. The data acquisition with this detector will be
performed in a triggerless mode where all signals above
an energy threshold will be stored with a time stamp [8].
The events will be reconstructed in the on/offline anal-
ysis, with full flexibility to modify the correlation time.
The capability of being able to modify the correlation



Monte Carlo Simulations for the Study of a Moderated Neutron Detector – M. B. Gomez Hornillos et al. -1575-

Fig. 3. (Color online) Energy deposited in the 3He coun-
ters in each of the two crowns with a 252Cf neutron source.
The plot shows the wall effect counts above 191 keV and the
full energy deposition peak at 763.7 keV.

Fig. 4. (Color online) Time elapsed from the emission of
a neutron to its detection in each of the two 3He crowns with
a 252Cf neutron source.

time is key to an optimised background removal.

IV. SIMULATION VALIDATION

1. 252Cf test

An experimental test has been carried out with a 252Cf
neutron source in the UPC laboratory in order to val-
idate the different aspects of the Monte Carlo simula-
tions, such as the efficiency, the energy deposited in the
counter and the moderation time. At the time of the
experiment, the 252Cf source had an activity of 6.0 ±
0.9 kBq which corresponded to a neutron emission rate
of 630 ± 90 n/s. The results of the efficiency of the
neutron detector in this experimental test are presented
in Table 1 along with the values of the GEANT4 and
MCNPX simulation codes. The agreement between the
experimental and the calculated efficiency is good, how-
ever it should be pointed out that the activity of the
252Cf source has a 15% uncertainty.

Figure 5 shows the spectrum of the deposited energy
in one counter from the inner crown and one from the
outer crown. This figure can be compared to (Fig. 3),
illustrating the good agreement of the shape predicted by

Table 1. Efficiency of the neutron detector with a 252Cf
source according to GEANT4, MCNPX and experiment.

crown GEANT4 (%) MCNPX (%) Experimental(%)

1st crown 25.0 ± 1.6 21.3 ± 1.5 21.3 ± 3.2
2nd crown 5.4 ± 0.7 6.0 ± 0.8 4.9 ± 0.7

total 30.4 ± 1.7 27.3 ± 1.7 26.1 ± 3.9

Fig. 5. (Color online) Energy deposited in a counter in
the inner crown and a counter in the outer crown in the
laboratory test at UPC with the 252Cf source.

Fig. 6. (Color online) Time correlation between the neu-
tron emission and the neutron detection (in the inner crown
of detectors) for a 252Cf source. GEANT4 simulations and
experiment at UPC lab.

the GEANT4 simulations. Additionally it is clear from
Fig. 5 that the noise can be easily discriminated since it
occurs at energies below 191 keV. In the experimental
spectrum (Fig. 5) there is a more marked 2nd edge effect
than in the one from the simulations (Fig. 3). This is
due to the ballistic deficit since the time constant of the
preamplifier was not large enough to collect the complete
charge of the reaction in some cases.

Regarding the time correlation between the neutron
emission and its detection, the comparison between the
simulations and the experiment is presented in Fig. 6 for
the inner crown and in Fig. 7 for the outer crown. The
agreement was good in general, which confirmed that
the triggerless data acquisition was working as expected,
however there was some disagreement about the rising
time between the simulations and the experiment. In



-1576- Journal of the Korean Physical Society, Vol. 59, No. 2, August 2011

Fig. 7. (Color online) Same as Fig. 6 but for the outer
crown of detectors.

Fig. 8. (Color online) Setup in the experiment at the
JYFLTRAP beam line with the neutron and Germanium de-
tector.

Fig. 9. Energy distribution of the beta delayed neutrons
from 94Rb according to ENDF7.

the beta delayed neutron emission experiments the
correlation will be performed between the detection of
the beta particle in a Si detector and the detection of the
neutron in the 3He. In the laboratory test at UPC with
the neutrons emitted by the 252Cf source, the detection
of the beta particle was substituted by the detection
of the prompt gamma rays emitted in the fission of 252Cf.

Table 2. Efficiency of the neutron detector for the neutron
energy distributions of the following nuclei.

Nucleus GEANT4 (%) MCNPX (%)

88Br 32.4 ± 1.8 30.2 ± 1.7
94Rb 32.3 ± 1.8 30.0 ± 1.7
95Rb 32.0 ± 1.8 30.1 ± 1.7
138I 32.0 ± 1.8 30.1 ± 1.7

2. Experiment at JYFL

The first experiment using the BELEN-20 detector
and its triggerless acquisition system was performed in
November 2009 at JYFL, Finland. In this experiment
the precursor nuclei were 88Br, 94,95Rb, and 138I, all of
them are fission products and neutron emitters after
beta decay. Data is still under analysis. A picture
of the setup is shown in Fig. 8. Simulations with
MCNPX and GEANT4 have been used to predict the
efficiency of the BELEN-20 detector for each of the
nuclei above. The neutron energy distribution for each
of the nuclei was obtained from ENDF7 [5]. These
neutron energy distributions were implemented in the
simulation codes as neutron sources. The shape of one
of these distribution (94Rb) is presented in Fig. 9 as
an example since the energy distributions of the four
nuclei studied here are quite similar and they all have
their mean value below 500 keV. In the case of 95Rb
there was no ENDF7 [5] neutron energy distribution
available and the values were obtained from [6]. The
detection efficiencies of BELEN-20 obtained in the
simulations with GEANT4 and MCNPX for each of
the above fission products are presented in Table 2.
Both simulation codes agree within the statistical error,
being the average difference between the predictions of
MCNPX and GEANT4 of 7%. These values will be
compared to the results obtained in the experiment at
JYFLTRAP once the analysis is finished.

REFERENCES

[1] J. Allison et al., IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci. 53, 1 (2006).
[2] MCNPX: https://mcnpx.lanl.gov.
[3] G. Rudstam et al., NEA/WPEC6 report, 2002.
[4] M. B. Gomez Hornillos, et al., Nucl. Instrum. Methods

Phys. Res., Sect. A, in progress.
[5] M. B. Chadwick et al., Nucl. Data Sheets 107, 2931

(2006).
[6] R. C. Greenwood et al., Nucl. Sci. Eng. 91, 305 (1985).
[7] A. B. Smith et al., Phys. Rev. 108, 411 (1957).
[8] J. Agramunt et al., Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res.,

Sect. A, in progress.


