




















































































































































































































































































































































































































































































8 March/April 2012 Published by the IEEE Computer Society 0272-1716/12/$31.00 © 2012 IEEE

Visualization Viewpoints Editor: Theresa-Marie Rhyne

In Color Perception, Size Matters
Maureen Stone
StoneSoup Consulting

Most studies on the effective use of color for visualization evaluate different col-orings on objects of the same size. This 
is good practice for experimentation because it 
minimizes the number of variables being studied. 
But color appearance changes dramatically with the 
size of the object being viewed. Anyone who has 
picked a paint color from a sample chip and been 
surprised as to how much more colorful it appeared 
on the wall has experienced this effect. My experi-
ence designing colors for digital visualization sys-
tems suggests that the interaction between size and 
color appearance is a critical design factor. Whereas 
artists and visual designers understand this, recom-
mendations for using color in computer-generated 
visualization rarely address the issue, or even rec-
ognize it. I write this to bring the topic to the com-
munity’s attention, provide practical guidelines, 
and possibly inspire research in this area.

Consider the fi ve colors in Figure 1, which are 
different hues of the same luminance (perceived 
brightness) and similar colorfulness, as is typically 
recommended for categorical labeling.1,2 Shown as 
half-inch squares, they are distinct and visually 
balanced. You could easily use these colors to color 
bars in a bar chart or the regions of a choropleth 
map, such as those used for census data. The same 
colors applied to a line graph, however, are less 
distinct, especially between blue-green and yellow-
green. In the scatter plot, the colors are even 
harder to distinguish.

The problem becomes even more severe for 
lighter, more pastel colors. In Figure 2, the light 
shading colors in the table are easily distinguished. 
If anything, the strongest colors are darker and 
more colorful than are ideal for display behind text. 
Consider, however, the same colors displayed as 
little squares in the adjoining color picker. Which 
correspond to the colors in the table? The arrow 
marks the column containing the strongest colors, 
with the two lighter steps of the same color to the 
right. The strongest colors are just visibly different, 

the lighter values nearly indistinguishable. Only 
the context makes guessing the color of the lighter 
steps possible.

Physical and Psychophysical Factors
So what is going on in these examples? There 
are both physical and psychophysical effects to 
consider. Small features antialiased in rendering 
will have the adjacent background blended with 
the foreground color. As a result, the rendering 
physically changes the color to one that is a blend 
of the foreground and background. Even without 
antialiasing, light between adjacent display pixels 
can mix. So, a single colored pixel surrounded by 
a background color is effectively emitting light of 
a different color than one embedded in a fi eld of 
pixels of the same color.

A similar blending process also occurs in the 
human visual system, which is spatially sampling 
and integrating as our eyes scan. Vision science 
calls this effect spreading. This is typically illus-
trated as in Figure 3, in which the colors of the 
distinctly cyan and yellow stripes start blending 
as the stripes become smaller (higher frequency). 
In the limit, the distinction between adjacent col-
ors vanishes, as it does in pointillist paintings or 
halftone printing.

Color science offers little help in computing the 
effect of size on color perception. The standard 
CIE (International Commission on Illumination) 
metrics for color matching and measurement are 
based on observations of 2-degree samples (the 
1931 standard observer). Two degrees is fairly 
large compared to many digital-imaging features, 
roughly the size of your thumb joint held at arm’s 
length. (The samples in Figure 1 will be 2 degrees 
if viewed at 15 inches.) Two degrees is the area 
viewed by the fovea, the part of the retina that has 
the highest density of cones. The CIE established 
a 10-degree observer (about the size of your fi st at 
arm’s length) in 1964 and recommends using it for 
samples larger than 4 degrees. In practice, however, 



 IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications 9

the 1931 observer is widely used for samples of 
all sizes, including in the formulation of the color 
difference metrics CIELAB and CIELUV.

Researchers have modeled spreading, but only 
for objects as small as a pixel or halftone dot. 
Consider the problem of automatically comparing 
two images, one of which has undergone processing 
such as dithering or halftoning. Compared pixel 
by pixel, the images would be very different, 
although visually, they might be quite similar. The 
S-CIELAB color difference model uses filtering to 
mimic the spatial integration that occurs with 
pixel-sized samples.3 Images are compared by 
converting their pixel values from CIE tristimulus 
values (XYZ) to a representation closer to that of 
the cone responses and applying a low-pass filter 
to blend adjacent values. This creates similar pixel 
values for visually similar images.

Implications for Visualization
Figure 4 shows a set of categorical colors that 
differ more distinctly at small sizes than those 
in Figure 1. Overall, they are darker and more 
colorful, and their luminance varies as indicated 
in the caption. In the line graph, the colored 
lines are now quite distinct. In the scatter plot, 
the luminance variation gives the strongest cues. 
The dark blue dots stand out strongly, as do the 
light cyan ones. However, it is more difficult to 
distinguish the orange dots from the pink ones, or 
even the green from the blue.

These scatter plot examples show that color 
alone cannot reliably label items as small as the 
individual dots, even for as few as five categories. 
However, the coloring does indicate clusters and 
trends, even for much higher numbers of colors. I 
would argue that most colorings applied to scatter 
plots and images do not robustly show unique 
values on features the size of a pixel, but instead 
show clusters or regions of similar or contrasting 
values. These larger aggregations of color will 
be usefully visible. For example, discussions of 
effective pixel-based techniques emphasize the 
need to organize the data to create clusters.4

Designing colors for different-sized objects is a 
balancing act; colors must be strong enough to work 
for small objects but not overwhelming for larger 
ones. If the size range is extreme, adjusting the 
coloring to the size might be necessary. Research 
in models to do this automatically would be a 
useful contribution to the visualization literature.

When designing colors for very large regions, 
the challenge is to keep the color from being too 
dark and too colorful, especially when it is used 
behind other visual elements, such as text in a 

table (see Figure 2), or when it highlights a region 
in a graph. On a white background, well-designed 
background colors have L* values in the range of 
90 to 96 (lower for blue and purple, higher for 

Figure 1. A set of colors with different hues but equal luminance (L* =  
72). In the squares, these colors are distinct and visually balanced. 
However, in a line graph or scatter plot, they are harder to distinguish. 
The colors in this figure are adapted from one of the ColorBrewer 
qualitative color sets (www.colorbrewer.org).

Figure 2. The shading colors are easy to distinguish in the table but 
difficult to distinguish in the small color picker. The arrow indicates the 
darkest colors shown in the table; lighter shades are to the right.

Figure 3. An example of spreading, demonstrating 
that the human eye blends small areas of color that 
are close together. The alternating cyan and yellow 
colors are the same in both bars.



10 March/April 2012

Visualization Viewpoints

yellow and green). On an sRGB display, a pixel 
value as light as RGB = (240, 240, 240), which 
has an L* value of 95, is a usefully visible color 
for such a background and seems fairly robust 
across most modern LCD displays (although less 
so for projectors). Small variations around this 
value can produce a set of visibly different colors 
suitable for large areas. As Figure 2 also shows, 
creating an effective UI for these ultralight colors 
can be challenging. I speculate that one reason 
background colors are consistently too dark and 
vivid in applications such as Excel is that they are 
designed in the context of their UI rather than 
their application.

Some New Approaches
Rather than basing our research in color for 
visualization on purely perceptual characteristics, 
we need to design coloring in the broader context 
of the visualization system. Rather than providing 
a unique label for categories or quantity, coloring 
is simply one part of a dynamic exploration, in 
which tooltips and the ability to filter and recolor 
also assist users in exploring their data.

In designing colors for data, increasing colorful-
ness and introducing luminance variation makes 
colors easier to distinguish and helps make the 

colors more visible to people with less than perfect 
color vision. People with the more common forms 
of color vision deficiency (CVD) have normal lu-
minance perception, often enhanced by their re-
duced color perception. Many can see colors that 
are strong and colorful but have difficulty with 
pastel or grayish ones. (For more information on 
designing for CVD, see Guidelines for Using Color 
in Voting Systems.5)

Varying luminance and colorfulness also helps to 
make full use of the available color gamut. It could 
be argued that the common practice of using the 
corners of the RGB color cube is effective because 
it maximizes luminance variation and optimizes 
the use of the gamut. A better goal, however, is to 
achieve a balance, in which the colors appear to 
have similar visual weight while including some 
luminance variation, as in Figure 4.

The most critical limits on color are constraints 
on legibility, which is controlled almost entirely by 
size and luminance contrast. Smaller characters 
need higher contrast to be readable. ISO legibility 
standards are stated as luminance ratios (for 
example, 3:1 and 10:1). Table 1 shows metrics 
based on DL*, computed as the absolute value of the 
difference between the L* values of the foreground 
color and the background color. An advantage of 
using DL* instead of a luminance ratio is that 
you can use Adobe Photoshop to select colors with 
specific L* values. The guidelines are for a typical 
text label or table entry (for example, 9-point Ariel).

Tableau Example
Tableau Software designs business analytics sys-
tems that provide an innovative visualization 
front end to enterprise-sized databases (www.
tableausoftware.com). Visualizations include text 
tables, scatter plots, line graphs, bar graphs, and 
data maps. The graphs in Figures 1 and 4 were 
created using the Tableau Desktop product; Figure 
5 shows some other examples. Working with Tab-
leau developers, I designed the colors used in these 
applications and contributed to the design of their 
user interfaces for managing and applying color.

For categorical coloring, the goal was to create 
the maximum number of colors that were legible, 
identifiable, and easily named. We found that a set 
of 10 basic colors for labeling (categorical colors) 
and a second set of 20 colors consisting of the 10 
basic colors plus a lighter set of those colors met 
this goal. If the user has more than 20 categories, 
the system gives a warning and reuses the colors. 
Users can also select from other palettes and, if 
necessary, use the system color picker to select 
their own colors.

Table 1. DL* guidelines for text readability.*

DL* Description

10 Easily visible but difficult to distinguish similar shapes

20 Legible but not comfortably readable

30 Easily readable, similar to the ISO recommendation of 3:1

60 Robustly readable, similar to the ISO recommendation of 10:1

100 Maximum contrast, black and white

*DL* is the absolute value of the difference between the L* values of the foreground color 
and the background colors

Figure 4. These colors vary in luminance, which makes them more 
distinguishable when rendered small. From left to right, L* = 70, 68, 47, 
65, and 58.



 IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications 11

Users can also use shapes to indicate categories; 
Tableau provides tools that allow quick selection 
and filtering of categories. Tooltips let users easily 
query individual items for their specific data 
values. Users can also select items by name in the 
color legend, to display only the selected items in 
color, reducing all others to shades of gray.

Users employ a palette-based interface to apply 
colors, which are by default assigned in the order 
shown in Figure 6, top to bottom, left to right. For 
the Tableau 20 palette (see Figure 6b), the system 
intermixes light and dark colors to balance the 
number of light and dark colors used. The colors 
were designed visually in Photoshop but tuned 
by analysis in CIELAB space using custom tools 
written in Python. The colors in Figure 4 are from 
the Tableau 10 palette (see Figure 6a).

Figure 7 shows the Tableau 20 colors plotted in 
the CIELAB space, L*a*b*. While a* and b* are color 
difference values (roughly red-green and blue-
yellow), the a*b* plot (see Figure 7a) can be more 
usefully viewed as a hue circle, with the achro matic 
axis in the center, the hue defined by the angle, 
and the chroma (saturation) increasing radially. 
For comparison, Figure 7a also shows a represen-
tation of the gamut boundary, which interpolates 
the primary and secondary colors (corners of the 

RGB color cube). As you can see, the light Tableau 
colors have a lower chroma than the dark ones, a 
constraint of the color gamut. Brown is a darker, 
lower-chroma version of red-orange. In the L* 
stacked diagram (see Figure 7b), the white back-
ground has an L* value of 100. The dark colors are 
all easily readable (L* < 80), but some of the light 

Figure 5. An example showing a pair of visualizations created using Tableau Software’s Desktop product. Tableau creates business 
analytics systems that provide an innovative visualization front end to enterprise-sized databases.

Figure 6. The (a) Tableau 10 and (b) Tableau 20 colors, shown in the 
palette-based UI. Users can assign the entire palette or select individual 
colors and map them to items in a list (not shown).

(a) (b)



12 March/April 2012

Visualization Viewpoints

ones fall into the “legible but not comfortable to 
read range” (80 < L* < 90) and are therefore less 
suitable for text. The infamous HSV (hue, satura-
tion, and value) rainbow color map would traverse 
the gamut boundary shown and would range in L* 
value from 97 (yellow) to 32 (blue).

A different set of colors called “formatting 
colors” were designed for shading (very light, for 
large areas; see Figure 8a) and annotation (dark, 
for text and lines; see Figure 8b). These colors were 
chosen to be aesthetically different than the data 
colors and optimized for their specific application. 
Again, they were visually designed but analyzed and 
tuned algorithmically. These colors are arranged in 
groups of three so that for the pale shading colors, 
the darkest colors can label the lighter ones.

The darkest of the light colors range in L* value 
between 85 and 90, the lightest step is 96 to 98, 
and the middle step is roughly halfway between. 
For the dark colors, the darkest step is around 
L* = 45 and the lightest is around L* = 70. The 
exception is red, which is much darker. The slider 
controls transparency, which can be used to 
lighten the colors. Clicking on “More Colors …” 
will drop into the Windows color picker, but most 
users are satisfied with the set provided.

Visualization systems map color to a property of the data, such as its category or value. This 
article has focused on categorical colors, but the 

-80 -60 -40 -20 0 20 40 60 80 100

-100

-80

-60

-40

-20

0

20

40

60

80

100

a*

b*

Dark Light Gamut

20

40

60

80

100

90

70

50

30

10

0

L*

(a) (b)

Figure 7. The Tableau 20 colors plotted in CIELAB space, L*a*b*. (a) Colors projected onto the a*b* plane. The 
dark colors (Tableau 10) are circles, the light ones (added for Tableau 20) are diamonds, and each is colored 
by its corresponding hue. The corners of the RGB color cube are plotted as small crosses, and connecting 
lines have been drawn to represent the gamut boundary. (b) The L* value for each color in Figure 7a plotted 
as a horizontal line. (Dark and light versions of each Tableau color are the same dark color in both plots, for 
legibility.)

(a) (b)

Figure 8. The Tableau formatting colors for (a) shading and  
(b) annotation. The slider controls transparency, which can be used to 
lighten the colors.



 IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications 13

issue of size is also significant for color scales 
used for numeric values. This viewpoint has two 
primary messages. First, size matters, and an op-
portunity exists for more research in effective 
color for visualization around this factor. Sec-
ond, color in visualization systems is designed in 
a broader context than color perception or color 
design. The goal should be to keep the user fo-
cused on the data, with color simply one of many 
tools used toward problem solving and discovery. 
We are only beginning to learn how to optimize 
for this larger goal. 

References
 1. C.G. Healey, “Choosing Effective Colours for Data 

Visualization,” Proc. 7th Conf. Visualization (VIS 
96), IEEE CS Press, 1996, pp. 263–270; doi:10.1109/
VISUAL.1996.568118.

 2. R. Ihaka, “Colour for Presentation Graphics,” Proc. 
3rd Int’l Workshop Distributed Statistical Computing 
(DSC 03), 2003; www.ci.tuwien.ac.at/Conferences/
DSC-2003/Proceedings/Ihaka.pdf.

 3. X.M. Zhang and B.A. Wandell, “A Spatial Extension 

of CIELAB for Digital Color-Image Reproduction,” 
SID Symp. Digest of Tech. Papers, vol. 27, Soc. for In-
formation Display, 1996, pp. 731–734; http://white.
stanford.edu/~brian/scielab/scielab3/scielab3.html.

 4. D.A. Keim, “Designing Pixel-Oriented Visualization 
Techniques: Theory and Applications,” IEEE Trans. 
Visualization and Computer Graphics, vol. 6, no. 1, 
2000, pp. 59–78.

 5. M.C. Stone, S.J. Laskowski, and S.Z. Lowry, 
Guidelines for Using Color in Voting Systems, NIST 
Interagency Report 7537, US Nat’l Inst. of Standards 
and Technology, Oct. 2008; www.nist.gov/itl/vote/
upload/NISTIR-7537.pdf.

Maureen Stone works as StoneSoup Consulting and is an 
adjunct professor at Simon Fraser University’s School of In-
teractive Arts + Technology. She has recently accepted a job at 
Tableau Software. Contact her at stone@stonesc.com.

Contact department editor Theresa-Marie Rhyne at  
theresamarierhyne@gmail.com.

Selected CS articles and columns are also available 

for free at http://ComputingNow.computer.org.

PURPOSE: The IEEE Computer Society is the world’s largest 
association of computing professionals and is the leading provider 
of technical information in the field.
MEMBERSHIP: Members receive the monthly magazine Computer, 
discounts, and opportunities to serve (all activities are led by 
volunteer members). Membership is open to all IEEE members, 
affiliate society members, and others interested in the computer field.
COMPUTER SOCIETY WEBSITE: www.computer.org

Next Board Meeting: 11–15 June, Seattle, Wash., USA

EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE
President: John W. Walz*
President-Elect: David Alan Grier;* Past President: Sorel Reisman;* VP, 
Standards Activities: Charlene (Chuck) Walrad;† Secretary: Andre Ivanov 
(2nd VP);* VP, Educational Activities: Elizabeth L. Burd;* VP, Member & 
Geographic Activities: Sattupathuv Sankaran;† VP, Publications: Tom M. 
Conte (1st VP);* VP, Professional Activities: Paul K. Joannou;* VP, Technical 
& Conference Activities: Paul R. Croll;† Treasurer: James W. Moore, CSDP;* 
2011–2012 IEEE Division VIII Director: Susan K. (Kathy) Land, CSDP;† 2012–
2013 IEEE Division V Director: James W. Moore, CSDP;†  2012 IEEE Division 
Director VIII Director-Elect: Roger U. Fujii† 
*voting member of the Board of Governors †nonvoting member of the Board of Governors

BOARD OF GOVERNORS
Term Expiring 2012: Elizabeth L. Burd, Thomas M. Conte, Frank E. 
Ferrante, Jean-Luc Gaudiot, Paul K. Joannou, Luis Kun, James W. Moore, 
William (Bill) Pitts
Term Expiring 2013: Pierre Bourque, Dennis J. Frailey, Atsuhiro Goto, 
André Ivanov, Dejan S. Milojicic, Paolo Montuschi, Jane Chu Prey, Charlene 
(Chuck) Walrad

EXECUTIVE STAFF
Executive Director: Angela R. Burgess; Associate Executive Director, 
Director, Governance: Anne Marie Kelly; Director, Finance & Accounting: 
John Miller; Director, Information Technology & Services: Ray Kahn; 
Director, Membership Development: Violet S. Doan; Director, Products 
& Services: Evan Butterfield; Director, Sales & Marketing: Chris Jensen

COMPUTER SOCIETY OFFICES
Washington, D.C.: 2001 L St., Ste. 700, Washington, D.C. 20036-4928
Phone: +1 202 371 0101 • Fax: +1 202 728 9614
Email: hq.ofc@computer.org
Los Alamitos: 10662 Los Vaqueros Circle, Los Alamitos, CA 90720-1314
Phone: +1 714 821 8380 • Email: help@computer.org

MEMBERSHIP & PUBLICATION ORDERS
Phone: +1 800 272 6657 • Fax: +1 714 821 4641 • Email: help@computer.org
Asia/Pacific: Watanabe Building, 1-4-2 Minami-Aoyama, Minato-ku, Tokyo 
107-0062, Japan
Phone: +81 3 3408 3118 • Fax: +81 3 3408 3553
Email: tokyo.ofc@computer.org

IEEE OFFICERS
President: Moshe Kam; President-Elect: Gordon W. Day; Past President: 
Pedro A. Ray; Secretary: Roger D. Pollard; Treasurer: Harold L. Flescher; 
President, Standards Association Board of Governors: Steven M. Mills; VP, 
Educational Activities: Tariq S. Durrani; VP, Membership & Geographic 
Activities: Howard E. Michel; VP, Publication Services & Products: David 
A. Hodges; VP, Technical Activities: Donna L. Hudson; IEEE Division V 
Director: James W. Moore, CSDP; IEEE Division VIII Director: Susan K. 
(Kathy) Land, CSDP; President, IEEE-USA: Ronald G. Jensen

revised 24 Jan. 2012


