






















































Hanwell et al. Journal of Cheminformatics 2012, 4:17
http://www.jcheminf.com/content/4/1/17

SOFTWARE Open Access

Avogadro: an advanced semantic chemical
editor, visualization, and analysis platform
Marcus D Hanwell1,2*, Donald E Curtis3, David C Lonie4, Tim Vandermeersch5,
Eva Zurek4 and Geoffrey R Hutchison1

Abstract

Background: The Avogadro project has developed an advanced molecule editor and visualizer designed for
cross-platform use in computational chemistry, molecular modeling, bioinformatics, materials science, and related
areas. It offers flexible, high quality rendering, and a powerful plugin architecture. Typical uses include building
molecular structures, formatting input files, and analyzing output of a wide variety of computational chemistry
packages. By using the CML file format as its native document type, Avogadro seeks to enhance the semantic
accessibility of chemical data types.

Results: The work presented here details the Avogadro library, which is a framework providing a code library and
application programming interface (API) with three-dimensional visualization capabilities; and has direct applications
to research and education in the fields of chemistry, physics, materials science, and biology. The Avogadro application
provides a rich graphical interface using dynamically loaded plugins through the library itself. The application and
library can each be extended by implementing a plugin module in C++ or Python to explore different visualization
techniques, build/manipulate molecular structures, and interact with other programs. We describe some example
extensions, one which uses a genetic algorithm to find stable crystal structures, and one which interfaces with the
PackMol program to create packed, solvated structures for molecular dynamics simulations. The 1.0 release series of
Avogadro is the main focus of the results discussed here.

Conclusions: Avogadro offers a semantic chemical builder and platform for visualization and analysis. For users, it
offers an easy-to-use builder, integrated support for downloading from common databases such as PubChem and the
Protein Data Bank, extracting chemical data from a wide variety of formats, including computational chemistry output,
and native, semantic support for the CML file format. For developers, it can be easily extended via a powerful plugin
mechanism to support new features in organic chemistry, inorganic complexes, drug design, materials, biomolecules,
and simulations. Avogadro is freely available under an open-source license from http://avogadro.openmolecules.net.

Background
Many fields such as chemistry, materials science, physics,
and biology, need efficient computer programs to both
build and visualize molecular structures. The field of
molecular graphics is dominated by viewers with lit-
tle or no editing capabilities, such as RasMol [1], Jmol
[2], PyMOL [3], VMD [4], QuteMol [5], BALLView [6],
VESTA [7], and XCrySDen [8,9], among many others. The

*Correspondence: marcus.hanwell@kitware.com
1Department of Chemistry, University of Pittsburgh, 219 Parkman Avenue,
Pittsburgh, PA, 15260, USA
2Department of Scientific Computing, Kitware, Inc., 28 Corporate Drive, Clifton
Park, NY, 12065, USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

aforementioned viewers are all freely available, and most
of them are available under open-source licenses and work
on the most common operating systems (Linux, Apple
Mac OS X, Microsoft Windows, and BSD).

The choice of software capable of building chemical
structures in three dimensions is far smaller. There are
existing commercial packages, such as CAChe/Scigress
[10], ChemBio3D [11], GaussView [12], HyperChem [13],
CrystalMaker [14], Materials Studio [15], and Spartan
[16], which are polished and capable of constructing many
different types of molecular structures. They are, however,
not available for all operating systems (most of them only
run on Microsoft Windows), and are not easily extensi-
ble, customized, or integrated into automated workflows.

© 2012 Hanwell et al.; licensee Chemistry Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

http://avogadro.openmolecules.net


Hanwell et al. Journal of Cheminformatics 2012, 4:17 Page 2 of 17
http://www.jcheminf.com/content/4/1/17

Licensing costs can be prohibitive. If the company were to
change its direction or focus, this can lead to a loss of a
significant research investment in a commercial product.
Furthermore, in most cases, these programs use custom,
proprietary file formats, and semantic and chemical data
can be lost in conversion to other data formats.

The selection of free, open-source, cross-platform,
three-dimensional, molecular builders was quite limited
when the Avogadro project was founded in late 2006.
Ghemical [17] was one of the only projects satisfying these
needs at the time. Two of the authors (Hutchison and
Curtis) contributed to Ghemical previously, but had found
that it was not easily extensible. This led them to found
a new project to address the issues they had observed in
Ghemical and other packages. The Molden [18] applica-
tion was also available, able to build up small molecules
and analyze output from several quantum codes. How-
ever, it suffers from a restrictive license and it uses an
antiquated graphical toolkit, which is not native on most
modern operating systems.

Broad goals for the design of a molecular editor were
identified following a case study of the available appli-
cations. One of the main issues with both commercial
and open-source applications is a lack of extensibility;
many of the applications also only work on one or two
operating systems. The creation of an open and exten-
sible framework that implements many of the necessary
foundations for a molecular builder and visualizer would
facilitate more effective research in this area. Further, the
open, standardized Chemical Markup Language (CML)
file format [19,20] would be used, to secure semantic and
chemical data and allow easy interoperability with other
chemistry software.

At the time of writing, it is apparent that other
researchers have perceived similar needs. Several new
applications are available today that focus on both build-
ing and visualizing molecular structure. These include
CCP1GUI [21], Gabedit [22] and some highly specific edi-
tors such as MacMolPlt [23] which focus on particular
computational packages (i.e., GAMESS-US for MacMol-
Plt). Whilst offering many interesting and useful fea-
tures, these projects suffer from the same issues centering
around effective reuse of existing code, well commented
and documented code, and easy extension to add new
features and adapt for specialized areas.

Implementation
The Avogadro project was started in earnest in 2007, and
over the first 5 years of development has been downloaded
over 270,000 times [24], been translated into over 20 lan-
guages [25], and has over 20 contributors [26]. So far, it
has been cited over 100 times [27], including applications
in spectroscopy, catalysis, materials chemistry, theoretical

chemistry, biochemistry, and molecular dynamics, among
many others [28-47].

From the beginning, the project has strived to make a
robust, flexible framework for both building and visual-
izing molecular structures. Much of the initial focus has
been placed on preparing input and analyzing output from
quantum calculations. Other applications such as prepar-
ing input for MD simulations and visualizing periodic
structures will also be presented, demonstrating the flex-
ibility of the Avogadro platform. The development team
has also been members of the Blue Obelisk movement, fol-
lowing the three pillars outlined by the group: Open Data,
Open Standards, and Open Source [48,49].

Software architecture
One area that seems to suffer in many code bases in
chemistry is software architecture. This can lead to less
maintainable code, poor code reuse, and a much higher
barrier to entry. Problems were identified in other projects
with a view to minimize their impact when developing
Avogadro. Modern software design processes were used
in the initial planning stages of Avogadro, along with the
choice of modern programming languages and libraries.

Avogadro has close ties to several other free, cross-
platform, open-source projects to reuse as much code
as is practical. These projects include Qt [50] to pro-
vide a free, cross-platform graphical toolkit; Open Babel
[51] for chemical file input/output, geometry optimiza-
tion, and other chemical perception; Eigen [52] for matrix
and vector mathematics; OpenGL/GLSL for real-time,
three-dimensional rendering; and POV-Ray for ray-traced
rendering.

Based on the previous experience of the authors and
a review of available programs at the time, several fun-
damental choices were made. The C++ programming
language; the Qt graphical toolkit; OpenGL for 3D visu-
alization; CMake as the build system; and Open Babel as
the chemical library. Using this combination of languages
and libraries requires the project to be licensed under the
GNU GPLv2 [53] license and made openly available to all.

The core of Avogadro is written in portable C++ code
with platform-specific differences abstracted away by Qt,
OpenGL, and Open Babel. The CMake build system
makes the build process relatively simple on all supported
platforms. Avogadro has been successfully built and tested
on Linux, Apple Mac OS X, and Microsoft Windows in
common 32 and 64 bit hardware architectures.

The Avogadro framework uses the model, view, con-
troller paradigm. The model is comprised of the core data
classes such as Molecule, Atom, and Bond, views are
made up of the engine/display plugins, and controllers
are the tools (interactive mouse) and extensions (non-
interactive, form based/menu based). Every plugin has full
access to the core data model, but view and controller



Hanwell et al. Journal of Cheminformatics 2012, 4:17 Page 3 of 17
http://www.jcheminf.com/content/4/1/17

plugins are conceptually different; views are responsible
for displaying data and controllers are responsible for
modifying/changing data.

Plugins rely on Avogadro’s set of programming inter-
faces and almost all functionality is implemented in self
contained plugins that are loaded at runtime. The major-
ity of plugins distributed with Avogadro are written in
C++, but the API is also available in the Python script-
ing language. This allows for a great deal of choice in how
plugins are implemented. Each plugin is a singleton class
that implements a particular set of functions–depending
on the type of plugin–which allows for features to be
implemented in a very modular way.

Over the last few years Avogadro development has
started to use nightly builds of the latest version of the
code in order to automatically flag issues introduced in
new commits. Code review was also introduced in order
to add a review step before new code is merged, along with
softening the line between someone with commit rights
and someone without (anyone can propose and upload a
patch, but a small group can choose if/when the patch will
be merged). Some automated testing has been added, but
coverage at this point remains relatively low. API docu-
mentation is automatically generated from comments in
the code using Doxygen.

Plugin interface
Avogadro plugins are divided into four different types
corresponding to four main classes that derive from this
common base class, specializing their interface for specific

activities (Figure 1). The Avogadro::Color base class
defines the virtual interface for applying colors to atoms,
bonds, and other properties. Avogadro::Engine
defines the common interface for all display types
in Avogadro: simple ball and stick, Van der Waals
visualizations, surfaces, and force visualizations. The
Avogadro::Tool base class provides the interface for
all interactive tools, focusing principally on mouse and
keyboard interaction with Avogadro. Examples of tool
plugins include the draw tool used to draw molecules
atom by atom, and the navigation tool used to pan, rotate,
and scale the view of the molecule. There are also several
specialized tools such as the alignment tool.

Finally there is the Avogadro::Extension class,
which defines the interface for dialog based plugins.
These extensions can interact with the molecule, and
are used for a variety of purposes from molecule prop-
erties dialogs to input file generation dialogs for many
quantum codes including NWChem, Gaussian, GAMESS,
and others. This class of plugin is also applied to
file import, and network aware extensions querying
web databases for structures given their common name
for example.

At start up, several standard directories, which may
be customized, are searched for plugins. The Qt plugin
framework is used to check that the plugins have a recent
enough version to be loaded, and the plugin type can be
deduced once loaded. The user interface is then populated
with appropriate entries; tools are added to the main tool-
bar using their embedded icons, display types are added

Extensions

ToolsPainters

Engines

Open Babel Qt Eigen

Force 
Fields

Manipulate 
Tool

Balls & 
Sticks

POV-RayOpenGL

Scripting
Python
Tools

Colors

Elements

Figure 1 General code architecture of Avogadro. General code architecture of Avogadro, indicating major plugin interfaces for colors, display
engines, tools, and extensions. Red boxes indicate code dependencies of Avogadro, blue boxes indicate plugin API classes, and green boxes
inidicate examples of each plugin type.



Hanwell et al. Journal of Cheminformatics 2012, 4:17 Page 4 of 17
http://www.jcheminf.com/content/4/1/17

to the display type list, and menu entries are added for all
loaded extensions.

The tool and display type plugins can both (option-
ally) provide a dialog for configuring the plugin. Dialogs
are specific to each plugin and integrated into the user
interface.

Display types
Display plugins are referred to as “engines” internally.
Their primary focus is rendering graphics to the screen.
As is the case with most molecular graphics, a large por-
tion of the geometric primitives are spheres and cylinders,
typically used to represent atoms and bonds. There are
many other properties that can be rendered using the dis-
play type plugins, for example, some of the engines also
convey information about the underlying data the geomet-
ric primitives represent to allow for the molecule to be
edited. Table 1 shows a summary of the display plugins
distributed with Avogadro.

Engines are performance critical as the render functions
are called each time a frame is requested for display. Effi-
cient rendering is also critical since multiple display types

Table 1 List of default display type (engine) plugins

Name Description

Axes Renders x, y, z Cartesian axes from the origin

Ball and Stick Standard ball and stick representation

Cartoon Secondary biological structure (α helix and β sheet)

Dipole Render direction/magnitude of dipole

moment if present

Force Renders arrows showing forces on atoms from

force field

Hydrogen Bond Renders hydrogen bonds as dotted lines

Label Shows labels on atoms and bonds, configurable

Overlay Overlay of color gradient used for electrostatic

properties

Polygon Renders closed polygons of metallic centers

Ribbon Basic secondary structure ribbon rendering

Ring Renders rings in structure, different colors

depending on ring size

Simple Wireframe Very simple wireframe display

Sticks Stick or liquorice rendering style for atoms

and bonds

Surface Renders triangular isosurface meshes

Van der Waals Van der Waals sphere rendering (no bonds,

Spheres space-filling)

Wireframe Wireframe with more features such as bond order

rendering

can be combined to form a composite display. For exam-
ple, ball and stick display overlaid with a transparent Van
der Waals space-filling display and ring rendering to high-
light all rings in the structure. Figure 2 (d) and (f ) show
two such combinations of multiple display types.

Tools
The tools are responsible for virtually all mouse and key-
board interaction with the molecule. A list of all tools is
given in Table 2.

The navigation tool provides basic scene navigation,
implementing rotation,panning, tilting, and zooming sup-
port. The initial point of interaction (where the click
occurs) changes the anchor point for navigation; navi-
gation takes place about the center of molecule when
clicking in empty space or about the center of any clicked
atom. During interaction, the navigation tool provides
visual cues to show what type of navigation is taking place.
The navigation tool is also used as the default tool if the
currently active tool does not handle the mouse event
passed to it.

One of the other central tools is the draw tool, which
implements a free-hand molecule drawing input method
supporting keyboard shortcuts, combo boxes, and a peri-
odic table view to select elements. The user can use the left
mouse button to add new atoms or bonds, or click on the
bonds to change their order. The right mouse button can
be used to delete atoms or bonds, and the directional keys
can be used in combination with the mouse to quickly
rotate/pan the molecule.

There are also two tools for adjustment of structures
(atom or bond centric), a selection tool supporting stan-
dard selection interactions, and an auto-rotate tool that
allows users to set the speed and angles about which
to rotate the molecule. The interactive auto-optimization
tool provides a sculpting interaction, where the user can
begin a continuous geometry optimization and switch
back to the draw or adjustment tools and change the shape
and structure of the molecule while observing the new
structure being optimized. This can also be combined
with the measurement tool to interactively observe bond
lengths and angles evolve as the structure is updated and
the geometry minimized. If the optimization tool is turned
off, the measurement tool also allows the user to precisely
adjust bond lengths and/or angles using the adjustment
tools.

Extensions
Extensions represent quite a diverse range of plugins
including input generation dialogs for various quantum
chemistry codes such as GAMESS, Molpro, NWChem,
etc., animation of the molecule, and visualization of
molecular orbitals and electron density. Network aware
extensions allow the user to click on a menu item to fetch



Hanwell et al. Journal of Cheminformatics 2012, 4:17 Page 5 of 17
http://www.jcheminf.com/content/4/1/17

Figure 2 Standard molecular structure representations. Several molecular representations of thiophene, (a) wireframe, (b) stick/licorice, (c) ball
and stick, (d) ball and stick with ring, (e) Van der Waals/CPK and (f) transparent Van der Waal’s with stick.

by chemical name and search for “tnt” or “propanol” and
have structures returned by the NIH CACTUS Chem-
ical Structure Resolver service [54]. A summary of the
extensions distributed with Avogadro is shown in Table 3.

Other extensions translate the entire scene to POV-
Ray input, and call POV-Ray to render the molecule
using ray tracing techniques to provide higher quality
renderings for publication. Various molecular property
dialogs are also implemented as plugins, drawing largely
on Open Babel functionality to provide an overview of
the molecule. Cartesian editors, addition and removal
of hydrogens, fragment, SMILES, and peptide insertion

Table 2 List of default mouse tool plugins

Name Description

Draw Tool Build and edit atoms

Navigate Tool Move the camera, rotate, pan, and zoom

Bond Centric Alter bond lengths, angles, and torsions

Manipulate Tool Move atoms and selected fragments

Select Tool Select individual atoms, bonds, or fragments

Auto Rotate Tool Continuously rotate a molecule for presentations

Auto Optimize Tool Continuously optimize molecular geometry using

molecular mechanics

Measure Tool Determine bond lengths, angles, and dihedrals

Align Tool Rotate and translate to a specified frame of

reference

are all implemented as extensions showing up in Avo-
gadro menus. More recently a crystallography extension
was added, giving access to a much wider range to func-
tionality useful to practitioners in that area, including
Miller Plane visualization, slab and surface generation.
New builders for nanotubes, nanoparticles, and DNA are
also planned for upcoming releases.

Colors
The color plugins primarily take either double precision
numbers or integer values and return an RGB value.
The plugins range from the standard color plugin that
takes atomic number and returns the standard RGB value
for that element through to mapping things like partial
change and index to more easily view various aspects of
the molecule’s structure.

By defining a plugin interface for coloring atoms, bonds,
or residues, developers can easily offer flexible render-
ing options to highlight important information without
requiring a user to tediously set colors on specific atoms
or functional groups. Default color plugins are listed in
Table 4, illustrating the variety of options. Each plugin is
usually only 40-50 lines of C++ code.

Python scripting
Python bindings are provided for all of the core API.
Python code can be used in two ways: the first is the inter-
active Python terminal, and the second is to write Python
plugins; extensions, tools, or display types. Writing a



Hanwell et al. Journal of Cheminformatics 2012, 4:17 Page 6 of 17
http://www.jcheminf.com/content/4/1/17

Table 3 List of default extension commands

Name Description

Create Surfaces Create surface meshes from molecular orbital/

electron density data

GAMESS Prepare input files for GAMESS-US, featuring

syntax highlighting, advanced properties

Insert Fragment Insert molecular fragments from a library of

common fragments

Insert Peptide Build up and insert peptide fragments

Molecular Mechanics Use Open Babel’s force fields for geometry

optimization and conformer searches

MOPAC Prepare input for and run MOPAC200x

POV-Ray Ray-trace the displayed structure using POV-Ray

Properties

Angle Properties Table of all bond angles (editable)

Atom Properties Table of all atoms with common properties

Bond Properties Table of all bonds with common properties

Molecule Properties Common properties of the molecule (including

molecular weight, etc.)

Torsion Properties Table of all dihedral angles (editable)

Spectra Visualize spectra from output files

Super Cell Builder Expand atoms with space group, replicate

specified repeats and perform simple bonding

Unit Cell Change crystallographic unit cell display and

parameters

Vibrations Show and animate molecular vibrations

Python plugin requires the same functionality to be imple-
mented as a native C++ plugin [55]. The advantage of
Python plugins is that it’s easier to make prototypes since
no compilation is required. Python plugins can also easily
be shared with other users.

The Python bindings interface with the PyQt python
bindings for the Qt toolkit, which enables Python code to
use all of Qt’s features when writing a plugin. For example,
a short Python script can present a window using Qt and
render molecules using Avogadro [56-58].

Avogadro also includes an interactive Python console
(Figure 3, which allows users to directly script and manip-
ulate the Avogadro environment [59].

Results and discussion
The graphical user interface
The first thing most people will see is the main Avo-
gadro application window, as shown in Figure 4. Binary
installers are provided for Apple Mac OS X and Microsoft
Windows, along with packages for all of the major Linux
distributions. This means that Avogadro can be installed
quite easily on most operating systems. Easy to follow

instructions on how to compile the latest source code are
also provided on the main Avogadro web site [60,61] for
the more adventurous, or those using an operating system
that is not yet supported.

The Qt toolkit gives Avogadro a native look and feel
on the three major supported operating systems—Linux,
Apple Mac OS X, and Microsoft Windows. The basic
functionality expected in a molecular builder and viewer
has been implemented, along with several less common
features. It is very easy for new users to install Avogadro
and build their first molecules within minutes. Thanks to
the Open Babel library [51], Avogadro supports a large
portion of the chemical file formats that are in common
use. The vast majority of this functionality has been writ-
ten using the interface made available to plugin writers,
and is loaded at runtime. We will discuss these plugin
interfaces and descriptions of the plugin types later.

Semantic chemistry
Avogadro has used CML [19,20] as its default file format
from a very early stage; this was chosen over other file
formats because of the extensible, semantic structure pro-
vided by CML, and the support available in Open Babel
[51]. The CML format offers a number of advantages over
others in common use, including the ability to extend the
format. This allows Avogadro and other programs to be
future-proof, adding new information and features neces-
sary for an advanced semantically-aware editor at a later
time, while still remaining readable in older versions of
Avogadro.

Through the use of Open Babel [51], a large array of
file formats can be interpreted. When extending Avogadro
to read in larger amounts of the output from quantum
codes, it was necessary to devote significant develop-
ment resources to understanding and adding semantic
meaning to the quantum code output. This work was
developed in a plugin, which was later split out into

Table 4 List of default color plugins

Name Description

Atom Index Color Color based on atom ID (from atom 1, 2, etc.)

Charge Color Color based on predicted electrostatic partial charge

Custom Color Color all atoms a specific, custom color

Distance Color Color based on distance from one end of the

molecule

Element Color Standard color scheme, giving each atom a color

(Default) defined by its element

Residue Color Color based on amino acid or nucleic acid residue

(i.e., glycine, histidine, etc.)

SMARTS Color Color atoms matching a specific SMARTS pattern

with a custom color



Hanwell et al. Journal of Cheminformatics 2012, 4:17 Page 7 of 17
http://www.jcheminf.com/content/4/1/17

Figure 3 Python scripting terminal, printing atomic numbers.

a small independent library called OpenQube [62,63].
More recently a large amount of work has been done
by the Quixote project [64], JUMBO-Converters, and the
Semantic Physical Science workshop to augment quantum
codes to output more of this data directly from the code.
Since CML can be extended, it is possible to reuse exist-
ing conventions for molecular structure data, and add new
conventions for the additional quantum data.

Building a molecule: atom by atom
After opening Avogadro a window such as that shown in
Figure 4 is presented. By default, the draw tool is selected.

Simply left-clicking on the black part of the display allows
the user to draw a carbon atom. If the user pushes the left
mouse button down and drags, a bonded carbon atom is
drawn between the start point and the final position where
the mouse is released.

A large amount of effort has been expended to create
an intuitive tool for drawing small molecules. Common
chemical elements can be selected from a drop down list,
or a periodic table can be displayed to select less com-
mon elements. Clicking on an existing atom changes it
to the currently selected element, dragging changes the
atom back to its previous element and draws a new atom

Figure 4 The Avogadro graphical user interface. Taken on Mac OS X, showing the editing interface for a molecule.



Hanwell et al. Journal of Cheminformatics 2012, 4:17 Page 8 of 17
http://www.jcheminf.com/content/4/1/17

bonded to the original. If the bonds are left-clicked then
the bond order cycles between single, double, and triple.
Shortcut keys are also available, e.g., typing the atomic
symbol (e.g., “C-o” for cobalt) changes the selected ele-
ment, or typing the numbers “1,” “2,” and “3” changes the
bond order.

Right clicking on atoms or bonds deletes them. If the
“Adjust Hydrogens” box is checked, the number of hydro-
gens bonded to each atom is automatically adjusted to
satisfy valency. Alternatively, this can also be done at the
end of an editing session by using the “Add hydrogens”
extension in the build menu.

In addition to the draw tool, there are two tools for
adjusting the position of atoms in existing molecules. The
“atom centric manipulate” tool can be used to move an
atom or a group of selected atoms. The “bond centric
manipulate” tool can be used to select a bond, and then
adjust all atoms positions relative to the selected bond in
various ways (e.g., altering the bond length, bond angles,
or dihedral angles). These three tools allow for a great
deal of flexibility in building small molecules interactively
on screen.

Once the molecular structure is complete, the force
field extension can be used to perform a geometry opti-
mization. By clicking on “Extensions” and “Optimize
Geometry” a fast geometry optimization is performed on
the molecule. The force field and calculation parameters
can be adjusted, but the defaults are adequate for most
molecules. This workflow is typical when building up a
small molecular structures for use as input to quantum
calculations, or publication quality figures.

An alternative is to combine the “Auto Optimization”
tool with the drawing tool. This presents a unique way of
sculpting the molecule while the geometry is constantly
minimized in the background. The geometry optimiza-
tion is animated, and the effect of changing bond orders,

adding new groups, or removing groups can be observed
interactively.

Several dialogs are implemented to provide information
on molecule properties and to precisely change parame-
ters, such as the cartesian coordinates of the atoms in the
molecule.

Building a molecule: from fragments
In addition to building molecules atom-by-atom, users
can insert pre-built fragments of common molecules,
ligands, or amino-acid sequences, as shown in Figure 5. In
all cases, after inserting the fragment, the atom-centered
manipulate tool is selected, allowing the fragment to be
moved or rotated into position easily.

Users can also insert a SMILES [65,66] string for a
molecule. In this case, a rough 3D geometry is generated
using Open Babel and a quick force field optimization.

Preparing input for quantum codes
Several extensions were developed for Avogadro that
assist the user in preparing input files for popular
quantum codes such as GAMESS-US, [67] NWChem,
[68] Gaussian, [69] Q-Chem, [70] Molpro, [71] and
MOPAC200x [72]. The graphical dialogs present the fea-
tures required to run basic quantum calculations; some
examples are shown in Figure 6.

The preview of the input file at the bottom of each
dialog is updated as options are changed. This approach
helps new users of quantum codes to learn the syntax of
input files for different codes, and to quickly generate use-
ful input files as they learn. The input can also be edited
by hand in the dialog before the file is saved and sub-
mitted to the quantum code. The MOPAC extension can
also run the MOPAC200x program directly if it is avail-
able on the user’s computer, and then reload the output

Figure 5 Dialogs for inserting pre-built fragments. The left shows molecules, and the right amino-acid sequences.



Hanwell et al. Journal of Cheminformatics 2012, 4:17 Page 9 of 17
http://www.jcheminf.com/content/4/1/17

Figure 6 Dialog for generating input for quantum codes. Dialogs for generating input for Q-Chem, NWChem, Molpro and MOPAC200x. Note
that the dialogs are similar in interface, allowing users to use multiple computational chemistry packages.

file into Avogadro once the calculation is complete. This
feature will be extended to other quantum codes in future
versions of Avogadro.

The GAMESS-US plugin is one of the most highly
developed, featuring a basic dialog present in most of the
other input deck generators, as well as an advanced dialog
exposing many of the more unusual and complex calcula-
tion types. In addition to the advanced dialog, the input
deck can be edited inline and features syntax highlight-
ing (Figure 7) as used in many popular editors aimed
at software developers. This can indicate simple typing
errors in keywords, as well as harder to spot whitespace
errors that would otherwise cause the hand-edited input
deck to fail when being read by GAMESS-US.

Alignment and measurements
One of the specialized tools included in the standard Avo-
gadro distribution is the alignment tool. This mouse tool
facilitates the alignment of a molecular structure with

the coordinate origin if one atom is selected, and along
the specified axis if two atoms are selected. The align-
ment tool can be combined with the measure, select,
and manipulate tools to create inputs for quantum codes
where the position and orientation of the molecule is
important. One example of this is calculations where an
external electric field is applied to the molecule. In these
types of calculations, the alignment of the molecule can
have a large effect. Figure 8 shows the measurement tool in
action with the alignment tool configuration dialog visible
in the lower-left corner.

More complex alignment tools for specific tasks could
be created. The alignment tool was created in just a few
hours for a specific research project. This is a prime exam-
ple where extensibility was very important for performing
research using a graphical computational chemistry tool.
It would not be worth the investment to create a new
application just to align molecular structures to an axis,
but creating a plugin for an extensible project is not
unreasonable.



Hanwell et al. Journal of Cheminformatics 2012, 4:17 Page 10 of 17
http://www.jcheminf.com/content/4/1/17

Figure 7 The GAMESS-US input deck generator. This input generator has an advanced panel and syntax highlighting.

Visualization
The Avogadro application uses OpenGL to render molec-
ular representations to the screen interactively. OpenGL
offers a high-level, cross-platform API for rendering
three-dimensional images using hardware accelerated
graphics. OpenGL 1.1 and below is used in most of the
rendering code, and so Avogadro can be used even on
older computer systems, or those without more modern
accelerated graphics. It is capable of taking advantage of
some of the newer features available in OpenGL 2.0 as
described below, but this has been kept as an optional
extra feature when working on novel visualizations of
molecular structure.

Standard representations
In chemistry, there are several standard representations of
molecular structure, originally based upon those possible
with physical models. The Avogadro application imple-
ments each of these representations shown in Figure 2 as
a plugin. These range from the simple wireframe repre-
sentation, stick/licorice, ball and stick, and Van der Waals
spheres.

It is also possible to combine several representations,
such as ball and stick with ring rendering (Figure 2 (d)),
and a semi-transparent Van der Waals space-filling repre-
sentation with a stick representation to elucidate molecu-
lar backbone (Figure 2 (f )).

Quantum calculations and electronic structure
Quantum codes were originally developed for line print-
ers, and unfortunately little has changed since then in the
standard log files. There are several formats developed for
use in other codes and specifically for visualization and
analysis, but there is little agreement on any standard file
format in the computational quantum chemistry commu-
nity. A plugin was developed in Avogadro to visualize the
output of various quantum codes, and get the data into the
right format for further visualization and analysis.

Initially support was added and extended in Open Babel
for Gaussian cube files. This format provides atomic coor-
dinates and one or more regularly spaced grids of scalar
values. This can be read in, and techniques such as the
marching cubes algorithm can be used to compute trian-
gular meshes of isosurfaces at values of electron density
for example. Once the code has been developed to visu-
alize these isosurfaces, it became clear that it would be
useful to be able to calculate these cubes on the fly, and at
different levels of detail depending upon the intended use.

The first format, which was somewhat documented at
the time it was developed, is the Gaussian formatted
checkpoint format. This format is much easier to parse
than the log files generated as the program runs, and
provides all of the detail needed to calculate scalar val-
ues of the molecular orbital or electron density at any
point in space. Once a class structure had been developed



Hanwell et al. Journal of Cheminformatics 2012, 4:17 Page 11 of 17
http://www.jcheminf.com/content/4/1/17

Figure 8 The measurement tool. The measurement tool being used to measure bond angles and lengths (on Linux with KDE 4).

for Gaussian type orbitals, the approach was extended
to read in several other popular output file formats
including Q-Chem, GAMESS-US, NWChem, and Mol-
pro. MOPAC200x support was added later, along with
support for the AUX format and Slater type orbitals used
in that code. All of these codes output their final config-
urations using the standard linear combination of atomic
orbitals, meaning that parallelization is extremely simple.

The plugin was developed to take advantage of the map-
reduce approach offered by QtConcurrent in order to
use all available processor cores. This offers almost lin-
ear scaling as each point in the grid can be calculated

independently of all other points, the results of which can
be seen in Figure 9. An alternate approach to calculating
the molecular orbitals was developed in a second plu-
gin that has since been split off into a separate project
named “OpenQube”. The “OpenQube” library has also
been added as an optional backend in VTK during the
2011 Google Summer of Code, bringing support for sev-
eral output file formats and calculation of cube files that
can later be fed into more advanced data pipelines.

A class hierarchy with a standard API is provided for
quantum output. Adding support for new codes involved
developing a new parser and ensuring the Gaussian or

Figure 9 Molecular orbitals and surfaces. Rendering of a molecular orbital isosurface (left) and an electrostatic surface potential mapped onto
the electron density (right).



Hanwell et al. Journal of Cheminformatics 2012, 4:17 Page 12 of 17
http://www.jcheminf.com/content/4/1/17

Slater set is populated with the correct ordering and the
expected normalization scheme. The s, p, and d-type
Gaussian orbitals are supported, with f and g support
planned in order to support the increasing number of
calculations using these higher-order orbitals. The Basis
Set Exchange hosted by EMSL provides access to the
basis sets in common use, although at present these basis
sets are normally read in directly from the output files.
There are several related projects for adding semantic
meaning to this type of output, including the JUMBO-
Converters project and Quixote. It is hoped that more
codes will adopt semantic output in the future, using a
common format so that data exchange, validation, and
analysis become easier across several codes. This was
the subject of a recent meeting with several computa-
tional chemistry codes beginning to use FoX in order to
output CML. Development has begun on code to read
in CML output, either directly from the codes or from
conversion of other formats using Open Babel or the
JUMBO-Converters. If enough semantic structure can
be added to CML, and the converters support a large
enough range of the output, this could replace most of
the parsing code present in OpenQube. Semantic mean-
ing is one of the most difficult to extract from log files,
and coming together as a community will help projects
like Avogadro to derive more meaning from the outputs of
these codes.

Secondary biological structure
Avogadro uses the PDB reader from Open Babel to read
in the secondary biological structure. Two plugins exist
to process and render this information. The first is a plu-
gin which renders a simple tube between the biomolecule
backbone atoms. A second more advanced plugin calcu-
lates meshes for the alpha helices and beta sheets. While
the first plugin is much faster, the advanced plugin more
accurately produces output expected in the field. This
allows users flexibility for rendering secondary biological
structures.

GLSL, novel visualization
GLSL, or OpenGL Shader Language, is a C-like syntax
that can be used to develop code that will run on graphics
cards and included in the OpenGL 2.0 specification. It has
been used to great effect by the games industry, as well as
in many areas of data visualization. Several recent papers
highlight the potential in chemistry, such as QuteMol [5]
in adding support for features such as ambient occlusion
to add depth to images.

Avogadro has support for vertex and fragment shader
programs, and several examples are bundled with the
package. If the user’s graphics card is capable, these pro-
grams can be loaded at runtime and used to great effect
to visualize structure. Some of these include summariza-
tion techniques such as isosurface rendering where only
the edges orthogonal to the view plane are visible, giv-
ing a much better rendering of both the molecular and
electronic structure (Figure 10).

Ray tracing
Avogadro uses a painter abstraction that makes it much
easier for developers to add new display types. It also
abstracts away the renderer, making it possible to add
support for alternative backends. Currently only OpenGL
and POV-Ray are supported. Due to the abstraction, we
are able to use the implicit surfaces available in ray trac-
ers to render molecular structure at very high levels of
clarity and with none of the triangle artifacts present in
standard OpenGL rendered images. Much higher quality
transparency and reflection also allow for the images to be
used in poster and oral presentations as well as research
articles (Figure 11).

This feature is implemented in an extension, with an
additional painter class deriving from the base class and
a dialog allowing the user to edit the basic rendering
controls. The POV-Ray input file can also be retained
and edited to produce more complex images, or to
allow for much finer control of the rendering process if
desired.

Figure 10 Molecular orbitals rendering using GLSL shaders. Rendering of a molecular orbital isosurface using two GLSL shaders to highlight the
edges of the surfaces. The X-ray effect (left) and red and blue (right) showing the positive and negative molecular orbital shapes.



Hanwell et al. Journal of Cheminformatics 2012, 4:17 Page 13 of 17
http://www.jcheminf.com/content/4/1/17

Figure 11 Ray-traced HOMO isosurfaces of varying cube density. Rendering of a molecular orbital isosurface using POV-Ray with cubes of low
(left) and high (right) density.

Avogadro library in use
The Avogadro library’s first use was the Avogadro appli-
cation, closely followed by the Kalzium periodic table
program that is part of the KDE software collection. This
initial work was funded in part by the Google Summer
of Code program in 2007, and also resulted in the addi-
tion of several other features in the Avogadro library to
support Kalzium and general visualization and editing of
molecular structure (Figure 12).

The Q-Chem package [70] has developed “QUI - The
Q-Chem User Interface” [73] around Avogadro, originally
as an Avogadro extension. This is a more advanced ver-
sion of the input generator developed in Avogadro, with
much tighter integration. Molpro [71] has also published

some results from their development of a Molpro interface
using the Avogadro library [74].

Packmol
Packmol is a third-party package designed to create ini-
tial “packed” configurations of molecules for molecular
dynamics or other simulations [75,76]. Examples include
surrounding a protein with solvent, solvent mixtures, lipid
bilayers, spherical micelles, placing counterions, adding
ligands to nanoparticles, etc. Typically, users may have
equilibrated “solvent boxes” which have been run for long
simulations to ensure proper density, and both short and
long-range interactions between solvent molecules. Using
such solvent boxes allows placing solute molecules, such

Figure 12 The Kalzium application in KDE using Avogadro to render molecular structures.



Hanwell et al. Journal of Cheminformatics 2012, 4:17 Page 14 of 17
http://www.jcheminf.com/content/4/1/17

Figure 13 The PackMol lipid layer as produced by the PackMol extension.

as proteins, in an approximately correct initial structure,
such as that shown in Figure 13. The solute is added into
the box, and solvent molecules with overlapping atoms are
removed. While these utilities are often enough, creating
complex input files is not always easy. For more compli-
cated systems, Packmol can create an initial configuration
based on defined densities, geometries (e.g., sphere, box,
etc.), and the molecules to be placed. An Avogadro devel-
oper wrote an external plugin to facilitate use of Packmol,

including estimating the number of molecules in a given
volume.

The plugin is not currently distributed with Avogadro as
a standard feature, although it is planned for some future
version. It serves as an example of how Avogadro can facil-
itate a workflow with a text-oriented package (Packmol),
including saving files in the PDB format required by Pack-
mol, generating an input file, and reading the output for
visualization, analysis, and further simulations.

Figure 14 The XtalOpt extension. XtalOpt extension showing a plot of stability vs. search progress for a TiO2 supercell.



Hanwell et al. Journal of Cheminformatics 2012, 4:17 Page 15 of 17
http://www.jcheminf.com/content/4/1/17

XtalOpt
The XtalOpt [77,78] software package is implemented as a
third-party C++ extension to Avogadro and makes heavy
use of the libavogadro API. The extension implements
an evolutionary algorithm tailored for crystal structure
prediction. The XtalOpt development team chose Avo-
gadro as a platform because of its open-source license,
well-designed API, powerful visualization tools, and intu-
itive user-interface. XtalOpt exists as a dialog window
(Figure 14) and uses the main Avogadro window for visu-
alizing candidate structures as they evolve. The API is well
suited for XtalOpt’s needs, providing a simple mechanism
to allow the user to view, edit, and export the struc-
tures generated during the search. Taking advantage of the
cross-platform capabilities of Avogadro and its dependen-
cies, XtalOpt is available for Linux, Windows, and Mac.

Conclusions
Avogadro has grown over its first six years to become an
important tool for building, editing, visualizing, and ana-
lyzing chemical and molecular data. With over 270,000
downloads, language translations and localizations, and
over 100 citations, it has become an integral part of the
chemical software toolbox. Through use of the native
CML file format and a wide variety of chemical data
import, Avogadro can provide semantic chemical data
editing and conversion. We seek to provide an inte-
grated environment in the simulation and cheminfor-
matics workflow. While more must be done, particularly
in regards to documentation, tutorials, ease-of-use, and
automation, we aim to improve the quality and feature set
with each new release.

Currently, two upcoming versions of Avogadro are
under development. The first is Avogadro version 1.1,
which adds additional features and refinement, par-
ticularly including crystallography support developed
through the XtalOpt project. The second is a more sub-
stantial development for Avogadro version 2.0, where
many of the core data structures are being rewritten
in order to offer greater flexibility and scalability. Our
goal is to support an increasing scope of chemical sys-
tems, including biomolecules (DNA, RNA, saccarides,
etc.), materials (crystallography, polymers, surfaces),
nanoscience (nanoparticles, nanotubes, graphene, etc.)
with improved speed, intuitive ease-of-use and simpler
non-reciprocal licensing terms.

Avogadro is freely available from http://avogadro.
openmolecules.net/, and new contributors are welcome in
all areas (users, developers, testers, translators, educators,
students, researchers, dreamers).

Availability and requirements
Project Name: Avogadro
Project home page: http://avogadro.openmolecules.net/

Operating system(s): Cross-platform
Programming language: C++, bindings to Python
Other requirements (if compiling): CMake 2.6+, Open

Babel, Qt 4.6+, Eigen 2
License: GNU GPL v2
Any restrictions to use by non-academics: None addi-

tional

Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Authors’ contributions
GRH and DEC are the founders of the Avogadro project. MDH is the current
lead developer and maintainer of Avogadro. GRH, DL and TV are active
developers. DL and EZ are founders of the XtalOpt project which is discussed
in this work. TV developed the PackMol plugin. All authors read and approved
the final manuscript.

Acknowledgements
We wish to thank the many contributors to the Avogadro project, including
developers, testers, translators, and users. We thank SourceForge for providing
resources for issue tracking and managing releases, Launchpad for hosting
language translations, and Kitware for additional dashboard resources. MDH
and GRH thank the University of Pittsburgh for support. DEC would like to
thank Jan Halborg Jensen for designing the GAMESS-US interface and
supporting Avogadro in its infancy; believing Avogadro could be better than
what was available. MDH acknowledges the Engineering Research
Development Center (W912HZ-11-P-0019) for financial support. EZ and DL
acknowledge the NSF (DMR-1005413) for financial support.

Author details
1Department of Chemistry, University of Pittsburgh, 219 Parkman Avenue,
Pittsburgh, PA, 15260, USA. 2Department of Scientific Computing, Kitware, Inc.,
28 Corporate Drive, Clifton Park, NY, 12065, USA. 3Department of Computer
Science, Coe College, 1220 First Avenue NE, Cedar Rapids, Iowa 52402, USA.
4Department of Chemistry, State University of New York at Buffalo, Buffalo,
New York 14260-3000, USA. 5Avogadro development team.

Received: 25 June 2012 Accepted: 31 July 2012
Published: 13 August 2012

References
1. Sayle R, Milner-White EJ: RasMol: Biomolecular graphics for all. Trends

Biochem Sci(TIBS) 1995, 20(9):374.
2. Hanson RM, Howard MT, Willighagen EL, et al.: Jmol: an open-source

Java viewer for chemical structures in 3D. 2012. [http://www.jmol.org]
3. DeLano WL: The PyMOL Molecular Graphics System. 2002. [http://

www.pymol.org]
4. Humphrey W, Dalke A, Schulten K: VMD - Visual Molecular Dynamics.

J Molec Graphics 1996, 14:33–38.
5. Tarini M, Cignoni P, Montani C: Ambient Occlusion and Edge Cueing

for Enhancing Real Time Molecular Visualization. IEEE Trans
Visualization and Comput Graphics 2006, 12(5):1237–1244.

6. Mehlhorn K, Lenhof HP, Kholbacher O, Hildebrandt A: BALLView. 2012.
[http://www.ballview.org]

7. Momma K, Izuma F: VESTA 3 for three-dimensional visualization of
crystal, volumetric and morphology data. J Appl Cryst 2011,
44:1272–1276.

8. Kokalj A: XCrySDen—a new program for displaying crystalline
structures and electron densities. J Mol Graphics and Model 1999,
17(3–4):176–179.

9. Kokalj A: Computer graphics and graphical user interfaces as tools in
simulations of matter at the atomic scale. Comput Mater Sci 2003,
28(2):155–168.

10. SCIGRESS 2012. [http://www.fujitsu.com/global/services/solutions/tc/
hpc/app/scigress]

11. ChemBio3D 2012. [http://www.cambridgesoft.com/software/
chembio3d]

12. GaussView 5 2012. [http://gaussian.com/g prod/gv5.htm]

http://avogadro.openmolecules.net/
http://avogadro.openmolecules.net/
http://www.jmol.org
http://www.pymol.org
http://www.pymol.org
http://www.ballview.org
http://www.fujitsu.com/global/services/solutions/tc/hpc/app/scigress
http://www.fujitsu.com/global/services/solutions/tc/hpc/app/scigress
http://www.cambridgesoft.com/software/chembio3d
http://www.cambridgesoft.com/software/chembio3d
http://gaussian.com/g_prod/gv5.htm


Hanwell et al. Journal of Cheminformatics 2012, 4:17 Page 16 of 17
http://www.jcheminf.com/content/4/1/17

13. HyperChem 2012. [http://www.hyper.com/]
14. CrystalMaker 2012. [http://www.crystalmaker.com]
15. Materials Studio 2001–2007. [http://accelrys.com/products/materials-

studio]
16. Spartan 2012. [http://www.wavefun.com]
17. Hassinen T, et al.: Ghemical. 2012. [http://www.uku.fi/thassine/projects/

ghemical]
18. Schaftenaar G, Noordik JH: Molden: a pre- and post-processing

program for molecular and electronic structures. J Comput-Aided Mol
Des 2000, 14:123–134.

19. Murray-Rust P, Townsend J, Adams S, Phadungsukanan W, Thomas J: The
semantics of Chemical Markup Language (CML): dictionaries and
conventions. J Cheminformatics 2011, 3:43.

20. Murray-Rust P, Rzepa H: CML: Evolution and Design. J Cheminformatics
2011, 3:44.

21. Thomas J, Sherwood P: The CCP1 GUI Project. 2009. [http://www.cse.
scitech.ac.uk/ccg/software/ccp1gui]

22. Allouche AR: Gabedit. 2012. [http://gabedit.sourceforge.net]
23. Bode BM, Gordon MS: Macmolplt: a graphical user interface for

GAMESS. J Mol Graphics Model 1998, 16(3):133–138.
24. Avogadro Downloads 2012. [http://sourceforge.net/projects/avogadro/

files/stats/timeline?dates=2006-04-14+to+2012-03-29]
25. Avogadro Translations 2012. [https://translations.launchpad.net/

avogadro/trunk/+translations]
26. Avogadro Contributors 2012. [http://www.ohloh.net/p/avogadro/

contributors]
27. Avogadro Citations from Google Scholar 2012. [http://scholar.google.

com/scholar?&amp;q=22http://avogadro.openmolecules.net/22]
28. Mera-Adasme R, Mendizábal F, Olea-Azar C, Miranda-Rojas S, Fuentealba

P: A Computationally Efficient and Reliable Bond Order Measure.
J Phys Chem A 2011, 115(17):4397–4405.

29. Closser KD, Head-Gordon M: Ab Initio Calculations on the
Electronically Excited States of Small Helium Clusters. J Phys Chem A
2010, 114(31):8023–8032.

30. Ide T, Takeuchi D, Osakada K, Sato T, Higuchi M: Aromatic Macrocycle
Containing Amine and Imine Groups: Intramolecular
Charge-Transfer and Multiple Redox Behavior. J Org Chem 2011,
76(22):9504–9506.

31. Menegazzo N, Zou Q, Booksh KS: Characterization of electrografted
4-aminophenylalanine layers for low non-specific binding of
proteins. New J Chem 2012, 36(4):963–970.

32. Patel DGD, Ohnishi Yy, Yang Y, Eom SH, Farley RT, Graham KR, Xue J,
Hirata S, Schanze KS, Reynolds JR: Conjugated polymers for pure UV
light emission: Poly(meta-phenylenes). J Polym Sci Part B-Polym Phys
2011, 49(8):557–565.

33. Popov AV, Gould EA, Salvitti MA, Hernandez R, Solntsev KM: Diffusional
effects on the reversible excited-state proton transfer. From
experiments to Brownian dynamics simulations. Phys Chem Chem
Phys 2011, 13(33):14914.

34. Hu W, Webb LJ: Direct Measurement of the Membrane Dipole Field in
Bicelles Using Vibrational Stark Effect Spectroscopy. J PhysChem Lett
2011, 2(15):1925–1930.

35. Bingöl B, Durrell AC, Keller GE, Palmer JH, Grubbs RH, Gray HB: Electron
Transfer Triggered by Optical Excitation of Phenothiazine-tris(meta-
phenylene-ethynylene)-(tricarbonyl)(bpy)(py)rhenium(I). J Phys
Chem B 2012:120503135353007 .

36. Yao CJ, Sui LZ, Xie HY, Xiao WJ, Zhong YW, Yao J: Electronic Coupling
between Two Cyclometalated Ruthenium Centers Bridged by
1,3,6,8-Tetra(2-pyridyl)pyrene (tppyr). Inorg Chem 2010,
49(18):8347–8350.

37. Fleisher A, Morgan P, Pratt D: High-Resolution Electronic Spectroscopy
Studies of meta-Aminobenzoic Acid in the Gas Phase Reveal the
Origins of its Solvatochromic Behavior. Chem Phys Chem 2011,
12(10):1808–1815.

38. Mayorkas N, Malka I, Bar I: Ionization-loss stimulated Raman
spectroscopy for conformational probing of flexible molecules. Phys
Chem Chem Phys 2011, 13(15):6808–6815.

39. Tian H, Bora I, Jiang X, Gabrielsson E, Karlsson KM, Hagfeldt A, Sun L:
Modifying organic phenoxazine dyes for efficient dye-sensitized
solar cells. J Mater Chem 2011, 21(33):12462.

40. Kapla J, Stevensson B, Dahlberg M, Maliniak A: Molecular Dynamics
Simulations of Membranes Composed of Glycolipids and
Phospholipids. J Phys Chem B 2012, 116:244–252.

41. Mandal D, Mondal B, Das AK: Nucleophilic Degradation of
Fenitrothion Insecticide and Performance of Nucleophiles:
a Computational Study. J Phys Chem A 2012, 116(10):2536–2546.

42. Bernstein N, Kulp III JL, Cato Jr MA, Clark TD: Simulations of
Nanocylinders Self-Assembled from Cyclic β-Tripeptides. J Phys
Chem A 2010, 114(44):11948–11952.

43. Hlawacek G, Khokhar FS, van Gastel R, Poelsema B, Teichert C: Smooth
Growth of Organic Semiconductor Films on Graphene for
High-Efficiency Electronics. Nano Lett 2011, 11(2):333–337.

44. Förster S, Hahn T, Loose C, Röder C, Liebing S, Seichter W, Eißmann F,
Kortus J, Weber E: Synthesis and characterization of new derivatives
of azulene, including experimental and theoretical studies of
electronic and spectroscopic behavior. J Phys Org Chem 2012: . [http://
onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/poc.2934/abstract?
deniedAccessCustomisedMessage=&amp;userIsAuthenticated=false]

45. Burkhardt SE, Rodŕıguez-Calero GG, Lowe MA, Kiya Y, Hennig RG, Abruña
HD: Theoretical and Electrochemical Analysis of Poly(3,4-
alkylenedioxythiophenes): Electron-Donating Effects and Onset of
p-Doped Conductivity. J Phys Chem C 2010, 114(39):16776–16784.

46. Burkhardt SE, Conte S, Rodŕıguez-Calero GG, Lowe MA, Qian H, Zhou W,
Gao J, Hennig RG, Abruña HD: Towards organic energy storage:
characterization of 2,5-bis(methylthio)thieno[3,2-b]thiophene.
J Mater Chem 2011, 21(26):9553.

47. Madison TA, Hutchison GR: Effects of Charge Localization on the
Orbital Energies of Bithiophene Clusters. J Phys Chem C 2011,
115(35):17558–17563.

48. Guha R, Howard MT, Hutchison GR, Murray-Rust P, Rzepa H, Steinbeck C,
Wegner J, Willighagen EL: The Blue Obelisk - Interoperability in
Chemical Informatics. J Chem Inf and Model 2006, 46(3):991–998.

49. O’Boyle N, Guha R, Willighagen E, Adams S, Alvarsson J, Bradley JC,
Filippov I, Hanson R, Hanwell M, Hutchison G, James C, Jeliazkova N, Lang
A, Langner K, Lonie D, Lowe D, Pansanel J, Pavlov D, Spjuth O, Steinbeck
C, Tenderholt A, Theisen K, Murray-Rust P: Open Data, Open Source and
Open Standards in chemistry: the Blue Obelisk five years on.
J Cheminformatics 2011, 3:37.

50. Qt Framework 2012. [http://qt-project.org/]
51. O’Boyle NM, Banck M, James CA, Morley C, Vandermeersch T, Hutchison

GR: Open Babel: an open chemical toolbox. J Cheminf 2011, 3:33.
52. Guennebaud G, Jacob B, et al.: Eigen v2. 2010. [http://eigen.tuxfamily.org]
53. GNU General Public License v2.0 2012. [http://www.gnu.org/licenses/

gpl-2.0.html]
54. Sitzmann M, Filippov IV, Nicklaus MC: Internet resources integrating

many small-molecule databases. SAR QSAR Environ Res 2008,
19(1–2):1–9.

55. Python Extensions - Avogadro wiki 2012. [http://avogadro.
openmolecules.net/wiki/Python Extensions]

56. Vandermeersch T: Python Example. 2009. [http://timvdm.blogspot.
com/2009/05/using-avogadro-library-from-python.html]

57. Python Scripting in Avogadro 2012. [http://avogadro.openmolecules.
net/wiki/Category:Scripting]

58. PyQt Scripting Example 2012. [https://gist.github.com/3194164]
59. Vandermeersch T: Avogadro Python Terminal Tutorial 2012. [http://

avogadro.openmolecules.net/wiki/Tutorials:Console]
60. Compiling Avogadro on Windows 2012. [http://avogadro.

openmolecules.net/wiki/Compiling on Windows]
61. Compiling Avogadro on Linux 2012. [ http://avogadro.openmolecules.

net/wiki/Compiling on Linux and Mac OS X]
62. Hanwell MD: OpenQube. 2012. [http://www.openchemistry.org]
63. OpenQube Source 2012. [http://github.com/OpenChemistry/

openqube]
64. Adams S, de Castro, P, Echenique P, Estrada J, Hanwell MD, Murray-Rust P,

Sherwood P, Thomas J, Townsend JA: The Quixote project:
Collaborative and Open Quantum Chemistry data management in
the Internet age. J Cheminformatics 2011, 3:38.

65. Weininger D: SMILES, a chemical language and information system. 1
Introduction to methodology and encoding rules. J Chem Inf Comp Sci
1988, 28:31–36.

http://www.hyper.com/
http://www.crystalmaker.com
http://accelrys.com/products/materials-studio
http://accelrys.com/products/materials-studio
http://www.wavefun.com
http://www.uku.fi/ thassine/projects/ghemical
http://www.uku.fi/ thassine/projects/ghemical
http://www.cse.scitech.ac.uk/ccg/software/ccp1gui
http://www.cse.scitech.ac.uk/ccg/software/ccp1gui
http://gabedit.sourceforge.net
http://sourceforge.net/projects/avogadro/files/stats/timeline?dates=2006-04-14+to+2012-03-29
http://sourceforge.net/projects/avogadro/files/stats/timeline?dates=2006-04-14+to+2012-03-29
https://translations.launchpad.net/avogadro/trunk/+translations
https://translations.launchpad.net/avogadro/trunk/+translations
http://www.ohloh.net/p/avogadro/contributors
http://www.ohloh.net/p/avogadro/contributors
http://scholar.google.com/scholar?&amp;q=22http://avogadro.openmolecules.net/22
http://scholar.google.com/scholar?&amp;q=22http://avogadro.openmolecules.net/22
http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/poc.2934/abstract?deniedAccessCustomisedMessage=&amp;use rIsAuthenticated=false
http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/poc.2934/abstract?deniedAccessCustomisedMessage=&amp;use rIsAuthenticated=false
http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/poc.2934/abstract?deniedAccessCustomisedMessage=&amp;use rIsAuthenticated=false
http://qt-project.org/
http://eigen.tuxfamily.org
http://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-2.0.html
http://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-2.0.html
http://avogadro.openmolecules.net/wiki/Python_Extensions
http://avogadro.openmolecules.net/wiki/Python_Extensions
http://timvdm.blogspot.com/2009/05/using-avogadro-library-from-python.html
http://timvdm.blogspot.com/2009/05/using-avogadro-library-from-python.html
http://avogadro.openmolecules.net/wiki/Category:Scripting
http://avogadro.openmolecules.net/wiki/Category:Scripting
https://gist.github.com/3194164
http://avogadro.openmolecules.net/wiki/Tutorials:Console
http://avogadro.openmolecules.net/wiki/Tutorials:Console
http://avogadro.openmolecules.net/wiki/Compiling_on_Windows
http://avogadro.openmolecules.net/wiki/Compiling_on_Windows
http://avogadro.openmolecules.net/wiki/Compiling_on_Linux_and_Mac_OS_X
http://avogadro.openmolecules.net/wiki/Compiling_on_Linux_and_Mac_OS_X
http://www.openchemistry.org
http://github.com/OpenChemistry/openqube
http://github.com/OpenChemistry/openqube


Hanwell et al. Journal of Cheminformatics 2012, 4:17 Page 17 of 17
http://www.jcheminf.com/content/4/1/17

66. James CA, Willighagen EL, Dalke A, Landrum G, Apodaca R, Morley C:
OpenSMILES. 2012. [http://opensmiles.org]

67. Schmidt M, Baldridge K, Boatz J, Elbert S, Gordon M, Jensen J, Koseki S,
Matsunaga N, Nguyen K, Su S, Windus T, Dupuis M, Montgomery J:
General Atomic and Molecular Electronic-Structure System.
J Comput Chem 1993, 14(11):1347–1363.

68. Valiev M, Bylaska EJ, Govind N, Kowalski K, Straatsma TP, Van Dam HJJ,
Wang D, Nieplocha J, Apra E, Windus TL, de Jong W: NWChem: a
comprehensive and scalable open-source solution for large scale
molecular simulations. Comput Phys Commun 2010, 181(9):1477–1489.

69. Frisch MJ, Trucks GW, Schlegel HB, Scuseria GE, Robb MA, Cheeseman JR,
Scalmani G, Barone V, Mennucci B, Petersson GA, Nakatsuji H, Caricato M,
Li X, Hratchian HP, Izmaylov AF, Bloino J, Zheng G, Sonnenberg JL, Hada
M, Ehara M, Toyota K, Fukuda R, Hasegawa J, Ishida M, Nakajima T, Honda
Y, Kitao O, Nakai H, Vreven T, Montgomery JJA, et al.: Gaussian 09 Revision
A.1. Wallingford CT: Gaussian Inc.; 2009.

70. Shao Y, Molnar LF, Jung Y, Kussmann Jr, Ochsenfeld C, Brown ST, Gilbert
ATB, Slipchenko LV, Levchenko SV, O Neill DP, DiStasio Jr RA, Lochan RC,
Wang T, Beran GJO, Besley NA, Herbert JM, Yeh Lin C, Van Voorhis T, Hung
Chien S, Sodt A, Steele RP, Rassolov VA, Maslen PE, Korambath PP,
Adamson RD, Austin B, Baker J, Byrd EFC, Dachsel H, Doerksen R J, et al.:
Advances in methods and algorithms in a modern quantum
chemistry program package. Phys Chem Chem Phys 2006,
8(27):3172–3191.

71. Werner HJ, Knowles PJ, Knizia G, Manby FR, Schütz M, Celani P, Korona T,
Lindh R, Mitrushenkov A, Rauhut G, Shamasundar KR, Adler TB, Amos RD,
Bernhardsson A, Berning A, Cooper DL, Deegan MJO, Dobbyn AJ, Eckert F,
Goll E, Hampel C, Hesselmann A, Hetzer G, Hrenar T, Jansen G, Köppl C,
Liu Y, Lloyd AW, Mata RA, May AJ, et al.: MOLPRO, version 2010.1, a package
of ab initio programs. Cardiff, UK ; 2010. See http://www.molpro.net

72. Stewart JJP: MOPAC2009. Internet. USA: Colorado Springs CO; 2008.
[http://openmopac.net]

73. Gilbert ATB: QUI - The Q-Chem User Interface 2008. [http://rsc.anu.edu.
au/agilbert/gilbertspace/qui.php]

74. Werner HJ, Knowles PJ, Knizia G, Manby FR, Schütz M: Molpro: a
general-purpose quantum chemistry program package. Wiley
Interdisciplinary Rev: Comput Mol Sci 2012, 2(2):242–253. [http://dx.doi.org/
10.1002/wcms.82]

75. Mart́ınez L, Andrade R, Birgin EG, Mart́ınez JM: Packmol: a package for
building initial configurations for molecular dynamics simulations.
J Comp Chem 2009, 30(13):2157–2164.

76. Mart́ınez JM, Martı́nez L: Packing optimization for automated
generation of complex system’s initial configurations for molecular
dynamics and docking. J Comp Chem 2003, 24(7):819–825.

77. Lonie D, Zurek E: XtalOpt. 2011. [http://xtalopt.openmolecules.net]
78. Lonie D, Zurek E: XtalOpt: an Open-Source Evolutionary Algorithm for

Crystal Structure Prediction. Comput Phys Commun 2011, 182:372–387.

doi:10.1186/1758-2946-4-17
Cite this article as: Hanwell et al.: Avogadro: an advanced semantic chem-
ical editor, visualization, and analysis platform. Journal of Cheminformatics
2012 4:17.

Open access provides opportunities to our 
colleagues in other parts of the globe, by allowing 

anyone to view the content free of charge.

Publish with ChemistryCentral and every
scientist can read your work free of charge

W. Jeffery Hurst, The Hershey Company.

available free of charge to the entire scientific community
peer reviewed and published immediately upon acceptance
cited in PubMed and archived on PubMed Central
yours     you keep the copyright

Submit your manuscript here:
http://www.chemistrycentral.com/manuscript/

http://opensmiles.org
http://www.molpro.net
http://openmopac.net
http://rsc.anu.edu.au/ agilbert/gilbertspace/qui.php
http://rsc.anu.edu.au/ agilbert/gilbertspace/qui.php
http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/wcms.82
http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/wcms.82
http://xtalopt.openmolecules.net

	Abstract
	Background
	Results
	Conclusions

	Background
	Implementation
	Software architecture
	Plugin interface
	Display types
	Tools
	Extensions
	Colors
	Python scripting

	Results and discussion
	The graphical user interface
	Semantic chemistry
	Building a molecule: atom by atom
	Building a molecule: from fragments
	Preparing input for quantum codes
	Alignment and measurements
	Visualization
	Standard representations
	Quantum calculations and electronic structure
	Secondary biological structure
	GLSL, novel visualization
	Ray tracing

	Avogadro library in use
	Packmol
	XtalOpt


	Conclusions
	Availability and requirements
	Competing interests
	Authors' contributions
	Acknowledgements
	Author details
	References
















<<
  /ASCII85EncodePages false
  /AllowTransparency false
  /AutoPositionEPSFiles true
  /AutoRotatePages /PageByPage
  /Binding /Left
  /CalGrayProfile (Dot Gain 20%)
  /CalRGBProfile (sRGB IEC61966-2.1)
  /CalCMYKProfile (U.S. Web Coated \050SWOP\051 v2)
  /sRGBProfile (sRGB IEC61966-2.1)
  /CannotEmbedFontPolicy /Error
  /CompatibilityLevel 1.4
  /CompressObjects /Tags
  /CompressPages true
  /ConvertImagesToIndexed true
  /PassThroughJPEGImages true
  /CreateJobTicket false
  /DefaultRenderingIntent /Default
  /DetectBlends true
  /DetectCurves 0.0000
  /ColorConversionStrategy /LeaveColorUnchanged
  /DoThumbnails true
  /EmbedAllFonts true
  /EmbedOpenType false
  /ParseICCProfilesInComments true
  /EmbedJobOptions true
  /DSCReportingLevel 0
  /EmitDSCWarnings false
  /EndPage -1
  /ImageMemory 1048576
  /LockDistillerParams true
  /MaxSubsetPct 100
  /Optimize true
  /OPM 1
  /ParseDSCComments true
  /ParseDSCCommentsForDocInfo true
  /PreserveCopyPage true
  /PreserveDICMYKValues true
  /PreserveEPSInfo true
  /PreserveFlatness true
  /PreserveHalftoneInfo false
  /PreserveOPIComments false
  /PreserveOverprintSettings true
  /StartPage 1
  /SubsetFonts true
  /TransferFunctionInfo /Apply
  /UCRandBGInfo /Preserve
  /UsePrologue false
  /ColorSettingsFile ()
  /AlwaysEmbed [ true
  ]
  /NeverEmbed [ true
  ]
  /AntiAliasColorImages false
  /CropColorImages true
  /ColorImageMinResolution 300
  /ColorImageMinResolutionPolicy /OK
  /DownsampleColorImages true
  /ColorImageDownsampleType /Bicubic
  /ColorImageResolution 300
  /ColorImageDepth -1
  /ColorImageMinDownsampleDepth 1
  /ColorImageDownsampleThreshold 1.50000
  /EncodeColorImages true
  /ColorImageFilter /DCTEncode
  /AutoFilterColorImages true
  /ColorImageAutoFilterStrategy /JPEG
  /ColorACSImageDict <<
    /QFactor 0.15
    /HSamples [1 1 1 1] /VSamples [1 1 1 1]
  >>
  /ColorImageDict <<
    /QFactor 0.15
    /HSamples [1 1 1 1] /VSamples [1 1 1 1]
  >>
  /JPEG2000ColorACSImageDict <<
    /TileWidth 256
    /TileHeight 256
    /Quality 30
  >>
  /JPEG2000ColorImageDict <<
    /TileWidth 256
    /TileHeight 256
    /Quality 30
  >>
  /AntiAliasGrayImages false
  /CropGrayImages true
  /GrayImageMinResolution 300
  /GrayImageMinResolutionPolicy /OK
  /DownsampleGrayImages true
  /GrayImageDownsampleType /Bicubic
  /GrayImageResolution 300
  /GrayImageDepth -1
  /GrayImageMinDownsampleDepth 2
  /GrayImageDownsampleThreshold 1.50000
  /EncodeGrayImages true
  /GrayImageFilter /DCTEncode
  /AutoFilterGrayImages true
  /GrayImageAutoFilterStrategy /JPEG
  /GrayACSImageDict <<
    /QFactor 0.15
    /HSamples [1 1 1 1] /VSamples [1 1 1 1]
  >>
  /GrayImageDict <<
    /QFactor 0.15
    /HSamples [1 1 1 1] /VSamples [1 1 1 1]
  >>
  /JPEG2000GrayACSImageDict <<
    /TileWidth 256
    /TileHeight 256
    /Quality 30
  >>
  /JPEG2000GrayImageDict <<
    /TileWidth 256
    /TileHeight 256
    /Quality 30
  >>
  /AntiAliasMonoImages false
  /CropMonoImages true
  /MonoImageMinResolution 1200
  /MonoImageMinResolutionPolicy /OK
  /DownsampleMonoImages true
  /MonoImageDownsampleType /Bicubic
  /MonoImageResolution 1200
  /MonoImageDepth -1
  /MonoImageDownsampleThreshold 1.50000
  /EncodeMonoImages true
  /MonoImageFilter /CCITTFaxEncode
  /MonoImageDict <<
    /K -1
  >>
  /AllowPSXObjects false
  /CheckCompliance [
    /None
  ]
  /PDFX1aCheck false
  /PDFX3Check false
  /PDFXCompliantPDFOnly false
  /PDFXNoTrimBoxError true
  /PDFXTrimBoxToMediaBoxOffset [
    0.00000
    0.00000
    0.00000
    0.00000
  ]
  /PDFXSetBleedBoxToMediaBox true
  /PDFXBleedBoxToTrimBoxOffset [
    0.00000
    0.00000
    0.00000
    0.00000
  ]
  /PDFXOutputIntentProfile (None)
  /PDFXOutputConditionIdentifier ()
  /PDFXOutputCondition ()
  /PDFXRegistryName ()
  /PDFXTrapped /False

  /CreateJDFFile false
  /Description <<
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
    /BGR <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>
    /CHS <FEFF4f7f75288fd94e9b8bbe5b9a521b5efa7684002000500044004600206587686353ef901a8fc7684c976262535370673a548c002000700072006f006f00660065007200208fdb884c9ad88d2891cf62535370300260a853ef4ee54f7f75280020004100630072006f0062006100740020548c002000410064006f00620065002000520065006100640065007200200035002e003000204ee553ca66f49ad87248672c676562535f00521b5efa768400200050004400460020658768633002>
    /CHT <FEFF4f7f752890194e9b8a2d7f6e5efa7acb7684002000410064006f006200650020005000440046002065874ef653ef5728684c9762537088686a5f548c002000700072006f006f00660065007200204e0a73725f979ad854c18cea7684521753706548679c300260a853ef4ee54f7f75280020004100630072006f0062006100740020548c002000410064006f00620065002000520065006100640065007200200035002e003000204ee553ca66f49ad87248672c4f86958b555f5df25efa7acb76840020005000440046002065874ef63002>
    /CZE <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>
    /DAN <FEFF004200720075006700200069006e0064007300740069006c006c0069006e006700650072006e0065002000740069006c0020006100740020006f007000720065007400740065002000410064006f006200650020005000440046002d0064006f006b0075006d0065006e007400650072002000740069006c0020006b00760061006c00690074006500740073007500640073006b007200690076006e0069006e006700200065006c006c006500720020006b006f007200720065006b007400750072006c00e60073006e0069006e0067002e0020004400650020006f007000720065007400740065006400650020005000440046002d0064006f006b0075006d0065006e0074006500720020006b0061006e002000e50062006e00650073002000690020004100630072006f00620061007400200065006c006c006500720020004100630072006f006200610074002000520065006100640065007200200035002e00300020006f00670020006e0079006500720065002e>
    /DEU <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>
    /ESP <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>
    /ETI <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>
    /FRA <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>
    /GRE <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>
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
    /HRV <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>
    /HUN <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>
    /ITA <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>
    /JPN <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>
    /KOR <FEFFc7740020c124c815c7440020c0acc6a9d558c5ec0020b370c2a4d06cd0d10020d504b9b0d1300020bc0f0020ad50c815ae30c5d0c11c0020ace0d488c9c8b85c0020c778c1c4d560002000410064006f0062006500200050004400460020bb38c11cb97c0020c791c131d569b2c8b2e4002e0020c774b807ac8c0020c791c131b41c00200050004400460020bb38c11cb2940020004100630072006f0062006100740020bc0f002000410064006f00620065002000520065006100640065007200200035002e00300020c774c0c1c5d0c11c0020c5f40020c2180020c788c2b5b2c8b2e4002e>
    /LTH <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>
    /LVI <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>
    /NLD (Gebruik deze instellingen om Adobe PDF-documenten te maken voor kwaliteitsafdrukken op desktopprinters en proofers. De gemaakte PDF-documenten kunnen worden geopend met Acrobat en Adobe Reader 5.0 en hoger.)
    /NOR <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>
    /POL <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>
    /PTB <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>
    /RUM <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>
    /RUS <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>
    /SKY <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>
    /SLV <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>
    /SUO <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>
    /SVE <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>
    /TUR <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>
    /UKR <FEFF04120438043a043e0440043804410442043e043204430439044204350020044604560020043f043004400430043c043504420440043800200434043b044f0020044104420432043e04400435043d043d044f00200434043e043a0443043c0435043d044204560432002000410064006f006200650020005000440046002c0020044f043a04560020043d04300439043a04400430044904350020043f045604340445043e0434044f0442044c00200434043b044f0020043204380441043e043a043e044f043a04560441043d043e0433043e0020043404400443043a04430020043d04300020043d0430044104420456043b044c043d043804450020043f04400438043d044204350440043004450020044204300020043f04400438044104420440043e044f044500200434043b044f0020043e044204400438043c0430043d043d044f0020043f0440043e0431043d0438044500200437043e04310440043004360435043d044c002e00200020042104420432043e04400435043d045600200434043e043a0443043c0435043d0442043800200050004400460020043c043e0436043d04300020043204560434043a0440043804420438002004430020004100630072006f006200610074002004420430002000410064006f00620065002000520065006100640065007200200035002e0030002004300431043e0020043f04560437043d04560448043e04570020043204350440044104560457002e>
    /ENU (Use these settings to create Adobe PDF documents for quality printing on desktop printers and proofers.  Created PDF documents can be opened with Acrobat and Adobe Reader 5.0 and later.)
  >>
  /Namespace [
    (Adobe)
    (Common)
    (1.0)
  ]
  /OtherNamespaces [
    <<
      /AsReaderSpreads false
      /CropImagesToFrames true
      /ErrorControl /WarnAndContinue
      /FlattenerIgnoreSpreadOverrides false
      /IncludeGuidesGrids false
      /IncludeNonPrinting false
      /IncludeSlug false
      /Namespace [
        (Adobe)
        (InDesign)
        (4.0)
      ]
      /OmitPlacedBitmaps false
      /OmitPlacedEPS false
      /OmitPlacedPDF false
      /SimulateOverprint /Legacy
    >>
    <<
      /AddBleedMarks false
      /AddColorBars false
      /AddCropMarks false
      /AddPageInfo false
      /AddRegMarks false
      /ConvertColors /NoConversion
      /DestinationProfileName ()
      /DestinationProfileSelector /NA
      /Downsample16BitImages true
      /FlattenerPreset <<
        /PresetSelector /MediumResolution
      >>
      /FormElements false
      /GenerateStructure true
      /IncludeBookmarks false
      /IncludeHyperlinks false
      /IncludeInteractive false
      /IncludeLayers false
      /IncludeProfiles true
      /MultimediaHandling /UseObjectSettings
      /Namespace [
        (Adobe)
        (CreativeSuite)
        (2.0)
      ]
      /PDFXOutputIntentProfileSelector /NA
      /PreserveEditing true
      /UntaggedCMYKHandling /LeaveUntagged
      /UntaggedRGBHandling /LeaveUntagged
      /UseDocumentBleed false
    >>
  ]
>> setdistillerparams
<<
  /HWResolution [2400 2400]
  /PageSize [595.440 793.440]
>> setpagedevice

