






















































Perceptual Affordances of Wall-Sized Displays for Visualization Applications: Color


Perceptual Affordances of Wall-Sized Displays for

Visualization Applications: Color

Anastasia Bezerianos, Petra Isenberg, Olivier Chapuis, Wesley Willett

To cite this version:

Anastasia Bezerianos, Petra Isenberg, Olivier Chapuis, Wesley Willett. Perceptual Affordances
of Wall-Sized Displays for Visualization Applications: Color. Proceedings of the CHI Workshop
on Interactive, Ultra-High-Resolution Displays (PowerWall), Apr 2013, Paris, France. 2013.
<hal-00799486>

HAL Id: hal-00799486

https://hal.inria.fr/hal-00799486

Submitted on 12 Mar 2013

HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci-
entific research documents, whether they are pub-
lished or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.

L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.

https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr
https://hal.inria.fr/hal-00799486


Perceptual Affordances of
Wall-Sized Displays for
Visualization Applications: Color

Anastasia Bezerianos
Univ Paris-Sud/CNRS/INRIA
Bat. 650 Univ. Paris-Sud
91405 Orsay, France
anastasia.bezerianos@lri.fr

Petra Isenberg
INRIA
Bat. 650 Univ. Paris-Sud
91405 Orsay, France
petra.isenberg@inria.fr

Olivier Chapuis
Univ Paris-Sud/CNRS/INRIA
Bat. 650 Univ. Paris-Sud
91405 Orsay, France
chapuis@lri.fr

Wesley Willett
INRIA
Bat. 650 Univ. Paris-Sud
91405 Orsay, France
wesley.willett@inria.fr

Copyright is held by the author/owner(s).

CHI 2013 Extended Abstracts, April 27 - May 2, 2013, Paris,

France. ACM 978-1-4503-1952-2/13/04

Abstract
Wall-sized displays offer the opportunity to display very
large information spaces. Most data representations can
be scaled to wall size but display walls are not simply big
desktop monitors. We do not yet know how the perceptual
affordances of a wall, such as the wide viewing angles they
cover, affect how data is perceived and comprehended. In
this paper we call for more studies on the perception of
data on wall-sized displays and discuss–with the example
of color–several aspects of wall setups that we hypothesize
will most affect the perception of this visual variable.

Author Keywords
Information visualization, perception, wall-displays.

ACM Classification Keywords
H.5.m [Information interfaces and presentation (e.g.,
HCI)]: Miscellaneous.

Introduction
Wall-sized displays (PowerWalls) engulf viewers in very
large high-resolution information spaces. They are well
suited for data analysis and visualization due to several
inherent benefits: physical rather than virtual navigation
affords a natural pan-and-zoom in the information space,
an enlarged physical space in front of the display enables
collaborative viewing and data analysis, and millions of



pixels support viewing tremendous amounts of data in one
environment. To fully leverage wall-sized displays for data
analysis, however, we need to design wall-sized
visualizations based on a sound understanding of how
such environments affect human perceptual and cognitive
capabilities. One important criterion for the development
of visualizations for wall displays is their immense physical
size. It is not uncommon to see walls of over 5m (16ft) –
2m (6.5ft) in width and height [2], or even complete
rooms covered on all sides by high-resolution displays [16].

Figure 1: Two observers at
different positions in front of a
wall and how basic visual
encodings look to them [6].

With large display-walls, physical navigation becomes an
important means of accessing visualizations [1]. Viewers
choose close or far viewpoints to zoom in and out, and
pan physically by moving left and right. This movement
may involve a physical relocation or a change of head
orientation. Thus, viewers fluidly and frequently switch
viewing distances and angles which may lead to systematic
discrepancies between the actual appearance of displayed
information in physical space (measured by rulers) and its
psychophysical appearance in a person’s visual space. Our
recent findings [6] indicate that this discrepancy can be
very large (errors up to 60%) for quantitative estimations
of certain visual variables and that perception depends
largely on viewing positions and angles.

To build interactive visualizations for wall-displays, we
need to characterize and model how perception and
cognition are affected by this unique viewing environment.
This will help us understand their benefits and limitations,
especially when multiple people make use of the space.
Based on such characterizations we can identify the visual
representations that are best suited for these environments
and provide guidelines for their design. With this paper we
draw attention to the need for further fundamental
research on understanding perception on wall displays.

Related Work
Some studies have already explored issues related to
perception on wall displays. Endert et al. [10] discuss how
a viewer’s distance from a large display influences the
visual aggregation of information. They found that colors
aggregate well across viewing distances for visual search
tasks. In earlier studies Yost and colleagues [19, 20] noted
that spatial encoding (position) of information was
particularly important in displaying large amounts of data,
and that scaling visualizations beyond visual acuity
affected user performance.They argue strongly for design
guidelines that take visual aggregation and physical
navigation into account. Jota et al. [11] studied the
impact of viewing angles on pointing performance on walls
and found that the visual size of an object affected
performance more than its actual size. In previous work
[5], we provided solutions to deal with change blindness by
storing and replaying missed visual changes.

Recently we examined [6] the perception of some visual
encodings (length, area, angle) seen under different
distances and viewing angles (i. e. different viewer
positions) and under conditions where viewers could
move. Our findings indicate that when viewers are close
to the wall and, thus, viewing angles are particularly
steep, an increase of the horizontal displacement of items
on the display can lead to errors up to 60% in some cases.
Our viewers consistently overestimated the size of items,
even in the case of the traditionally robust length and the
underestimated area encodings [8]. Our findings also differ
from a similar study by Wigdor et al. [17] on tabletops.
When their large display was positioned at different
inclinations, the researchers found no increase in error
with horizontal placement. These differences indicate that
we cannot easily generalize findings from perception
research conducted on other setups to wall displays.



Figure 2: Change of color across the LCD screens of the
WILD wall [2] as seen from two different viewpoints.

Studying Perception of Visual Variables for
Wall-Sized Displays
Elementary graphical items such as points, lines, and areas
are the main building blocks of information visualization
applications [3]. They possess individual properties such
as position, color, orientation, or size which are the visual
variables defining them [8]. Any information visualization
consists of an assembly of these elementary items and
their variables. Thus, studying how visual variables are
perceived, quantitatively measured, and compared, has

helped build a basis for further studies on how these
“assembled” visualization are perceived. For example, the
basic understanding that humans are not very good at
quantitatively comparing angles [8] is regularly cited as
one of the reasons that bar charts are better than pie
charts when quantitative comparison is required. A
number of studies have contributed to our understanding
of the perception of visual variables, but as we have
shown [6], the unique viewing environment of wall-sized
displays requires a re-assessment of these studies.

As an example of the many unique perceptual challenges
of walls, we discuss the possible implications in regards to
one visual variable—color. Almost all visualizations use
color (hue and/or saturation) as an information channel.
However, we do not yet have a good understanding about
how the components of color are affected in wall-sized
viewing environments. Moreover, we believe color
perception is particularly impacted by the scale of
wall-sized displays, making it a particularly important
variable to study. Previous research suggests that the
following factors will all influence color perception.

Multiple Projectors/LCDs
High-resolution wall-displays are currently made up by
tiling projectors or LCD displays. Each display may exhibit
individual variation in color calibration and consistency,
making it hard to ensure a uniform color even within the
same display in the case of projectors [15]. The age of
projector lamps, for example, influences the brightness of
a display and the settings of multiple machines driving
individual LCD screens need to be synced to achieve
similar colors [7]. To make matters worse, monitors and
projectors have different brightness/contrast and color
gamut. Thus, it is unclear how color perception findings
will translate from one wall setup to the next.



Viewing Angle
The physical properties of LCD screens lead to color being
perceived differently based on viewing angle. This has
been demonstrated and exploited [12]. On LCD monitors,
there is typically a measured viewing angle at which the
contrast of the LCD falls below 10:1 [18]. It is at this
point that color perception starts to change. On older
screens, the angle at which color is perceived normally can
be quite narrow. While screen technology has greatly
improved in recent years, differences still exist between
vertical to horizontal viewing angles (with horizontal
typically being much better). Thus, as with our other
visual variables [6], color perception may be impacted
differently on high or low screens.

Viewing Distance
As discussed by Stone [14], size of objects matters for
color perception. For example. small objects appear more
distinct with strong color, while strong color on large
objects is overwhelming. As viewers of a wall display
visualization will adopt viewing positions at different
distances from the screen, the same objects will cover
different sizes on the retina. Thus, color perception may
vary as one moves closer or further away from an object.

Room Conditions
Color perception is also influenced by conditions of the
viewing environment. For example, a color will look
differently depending on the kind of light shining on a
display area. Rooms with fluorescent lighting, direct
sunlight, windows behind, next to, or in front of the wall
etc. may all differ. It is also possible that color may look
differently depending on the room design, e. g. whether
the walls are painted in a light or dark color [13]. It is
unclear to what extent these environmental conditions
influence color perception for visualization, even on a

standard desktop monitor. For wall-sized viewing
environments the effect may be smaller, greater, or not
noticeable. We currently do not know.

Bezels
In our previous work we found that screen bezels had an
influence on the quantitative estimation of the position
and length variables, even if the objects tested did not
cross between screens. If and how bezels can affect color
is less clear. While it is known that color hue perception is
influenced by surrounding color (contrast illusion), it is
not clear whether bezels provide sufficient change in
background color. For example, data points on a white
background drawn immediately next to a large black bezel
may be perceived as having a different color hue or
saturation than the same data point drawn elsewhere.

A Call for Groundwork in Perception. . .
Given how many characteristics of wall-sized displays may
influence visual variables such as color hue and saturation,
the key question is whether we can build perceptual
models to help us deal with changes in how a variable is
perceived. In our previous work we found that the
quantitative estimation of lengths, areas and angles was
not correlated in a predictable way to the visual size of
objects, but rather to a collection of factors, such as the
viewer’s distance from the wall and the vertical and
horizontal placement of the objects. We subsequently
began to suggest a model that fits the object’s true
magnitude to their perceived one. Similar investigations
need to be carried out for color, and other visual variables.
This includes taking into account a wide range of factors
that may influence perception, such as the type of display
or lighting in a room.



This ground work is an important first step in
understanding how visualizations are affected by the
varying position and viewing angles possible in front of
wall-displays. Nevertheless, to acquire a complete picture
we also need to investigate the effect of assembling visual
variables to construct complete visualizations. For
example, we want to know not only how size affects color
perception but also whether the perception of an object’s
size is affected in turn by its color (irradiation illusion).
Given that both size and color are also affected by
wall-display environments, what is the overall effect of
combining them in a visualization? Such questions
regarding the assembly of visual variables must be
answered if we are to have a clear understanding of how
human visual perception is affected by these environments.

. . . and Interaction
Our discussion so far has focused on how visual perception
is affected in wall-sized display settings, without taking
into account the effect of interaction. If we have a good
understanding of perception, can we use implicit or
explicit interaction to correct possible negative effects?

Explicit Interaction
We can use explicit interaction to improve perception
limitations. For example, if we can reliably identify visual
distortion we can suggest interaction techniques that can
help to alleviating specific perception limitations. We are
currently adapting existing techniques (such as [4]) to
bring remote content—that we know is being perceived
incorrectly—closer to viewers.

Implicit Interaction
We may also be able to use implicit interaction to
automatically deal with limitations. For example, de
Almeida et al. [9] use viewers’ position to simulate motion

parallax and allow them to see behind bezels on a wall
display. In the same way, it may be possible to track
people in the space and make color corrections based on
their position. The more accurate this tracking (e. g.
tracking markers on viewers’ heads), the more adapted
our corrections can be. On the other hand, it is important
to use tracking technology that is light-weight and
invisible to the viewer, such as depth sensing technology,
or tracking viewer’s weight on the floor (although this
may be less accurate). There is, therefore, a tradeoff
between the quality of corrections we can make and
viewers’ comfort when conducting their analyses.

or Just Walking
Physical navigation when using walls was identified early
on [10] as being very important for different types of
tasks. In our work [6] we also found that walking, a very
implicit interaction with the wall, improves accuracy in
perception in general. But we observed that walking
strategies changed the improvement factor, and some
extreme participant strategies had no beneficial effect at
all. A deeper understanding of perception can help us
refine existing recommendations and help us take the best
advantage of these environments.

Our knowledge of perceptual limitations can also help us
improve interaction in wall-size display settings. For
example, if we know that some areas of the display are
severely distorted for one viewer, they can be used to
place interactive controls for another. Clearly more work is
needed to identify the interconnections between
interaction and perception, a line of work we are currently
pursuing.



Final Comments
We highlight the need for a deeper understanding of how
human visual perception and cognitive capabilities are
affected by wall-sized displays. We need to characterize
and model visualization perception, especially in cases
where multiple people are active at different locations
within the space. We must be vigilant in exploring not
only the effect of display size, but also the other factors
that affect these environments. Finally, we need to further
consider the interdependence between interaction and
perception. These results can help us to clearly identify
the interactive visualizations that are best suited for these
environments and provide guidelines for their design.

REFERENCES
1. Ball, R., North, C., and Bowman, D. A. Move to Improve:

Promoting Physical Navigation to Increase User
Performance with Large Displays. In Proc. CHI, ACM
(2007), 191–200.

2. Beaudouin-Lafon, M., Chapuis, O., Eagan, J., Gjerlufsen,
T., Huot, S., Klokmose, C., Mackay, W., Nancel, M.,
Pietriga, E., Pillias, C., Primet, R., and Wagner, J.
Multi-surface Interaction in the WILD Room. Computer
45, 4 (2012), 48–56.

3. Bertin, J. Semiology of Graphics: Diagrams Networks
Maps. The University of Wisconsin Press, Madison, USA,
1983.

4. Bezerianos, A., and Balakrishnan, R. The Vacuum:
Facilitating the Manipulation of Distant Objects. In Proc.
CHI, ACM (2005), 361–370.

5. Bezerianos, A., Dragicevic, P., and Balakrishnan, R.
Mnemonic Rendering: An Image-based Approach for
Exposing Hidden Changes in Dynamic Displays. In Proc.
UIST, ACM (2006), 159–168.

6. Bezerianos, A., and Isenberg, P. Perception of Visual
Variables on Tiled Wall-Sized Displays for Information
Visualization Applications. IEEE TVCG 18, 12 (2012),
2516–2525.

7. Brown, M., Majumder, A., and Yang, R. Camera-Based
Calibration Techniques for Seamless Multiprojector
Displays. IEEE TVCG 11, 2 (2005), 193–206.

8. Cleveland, W. S. The Elements of Graphing Data.
Wadsworth Advanced Book Program, 1985.

9. de Almeida, R. A., Pillias, C., Pietriga, E., and Cubaud, P.
Looking Behind Bezels: French Windows for Wall
Displays. In Proc. AVI, ACM (2012), 124–131.

10. Endert, A., Andrews, C., Lee, Y. H., and North, C. Visual
Encodings that Support Physical Navigation on Large
Displays. In Proc. GI, CHCCS (2011), 103–110.

11. Jota, R., Nacenta, M. A., Jorge, J. A., Carpendale, S.,
and Greenberg, S. A Comparison of Ray Pointing
Techniques for Very Large Displays. In Proc.GI, CIPS
(2010), 269–276.

12. Kim, S., Cao, X., Zhang, H., and Tan, D. Enabling
Concurrent Dual Views on Common LCD Screens. In
Proc. CHI, ACM (2012), 2175–2184.

13. Kopacz, J., Ed. Color in Three-Dimensional Design.
McGraw-Hill, 2003.

14. Stone, M. In Color Perception, Size Matters. IEEE CG&A
32, 2 (2012), 8–13.

15. Stone, M. C. Color and brightness appearance issues in
tiled displays. IEEE CG&A 21, 5 (2001), 58–66.

16. Stoney Brook University. SBU Demonstrates Largest
Resolution Immersive Visualization Facility Ever Built.
Press Release, 2012.

17. Wigdor, D., Shen, C., Forlines, C., and Balakrishnan, R.
Perception of Elementary Graphical Elements in Tabletop
and Multi-surface Environments. In Proc. CHI, ACM
(2007), 473–482.

18. Wikipedia. Liquid Crystal Display, Visited January 2013.
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Liquid crystal display.

19. Yost, B., Haciahmetoglu, Y., and North, C. Beyond Visual
Acuity: The Perceptual Scalability of Information
Visualizations for Large Displays. In Proc. CHI, ACM
(2007), 101–110.

20. Yost, B., and North, C. The Perceptual Scalability of
Visualization. IEEE TVCG 12, 5 (2006), 837–844.


	Introduction
	Related Work
	Studying Perception of Visual Variables for Wall-Sized Displays
	Multiple Projectors/LCDs
	Viewing Angle
	Viewing Distance
	Room Conditions
	Bezels

	A Call for Groundwork in Perception…
	…and Interaction
	Explicit Interaction
	Implicit Interaction
	or Just Walking

	Final Comments
	REFERENCES 

