























Eur. Phys. J. Special Topics 227, 1725–1739 (2019)
c© EDP Sciences, Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany,

part of Springer Nature, 2019
https://doi.org/10.1140/epjst/e2019-800162-y

THE EUROPEAN
PHYSICAL JOURNAL
SPECIAL TOPICS

Review

Interactive visualization of biomolecules’
dynamic and complex properties

State of the art and project review

Karsten Schatz1,a, Michael Krone1,2,b, Jürgen Pleiss3, and Thomas Ertl1

1 Visualization Research Center, University of Stuttgart, Stuttgart, Germany
2 Big Data Visual Analytics in Life Sciences, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany
3 Institute of Technical Biochemistry, University of Stuttgart, Stuttgart, Germany

Received 1 October 2018 / Received in final form 19 November 2018
Published online 8 March 2019

Abstract. In this paper, we review the advances in molecular visualiza-
tion over the last 12 years and put the development of the community
in context with our own efforts in the DFG Collaborative Research
Center (CRC) 716. This includes advances in the field of molecular
surface computation and rendering, interactive extraction of protein
cavities, and comparative visualization for biomolecules. Our main fo-
cus was on the development of methods that assist the interactive
and explorative visual analysis of large, dynamic molecular data sets
on single desktop computers. To meet this goal, we often developed
GPU-accelerated algorithms, which is in line with the general research
direction of the field. Over the last years, we made seminal contri-
butions to the field of molecular visualization, which partially still
constitute the state of the art development or provided the basis for
follow-up works.

1 Introduction

Interactive molecular visualization has been an important area of research in the
field of data visualization for more than five decades [1,2]. It has its foundations in
the pre-computer era, where scientists were building physical models of molecules
like the ball-and-stick representation [3]. This paper reviews interactive visualization
of biomolecular structures, which has made tremendous advances during the last
two decades. This review paper builds up on two recent surveys that discuss the
visual analysis of biomolecular structures [4,5]. We summarize the state of the art
development and specifically highlight the contributions that were made by project
D.4 of the Collaborative Research Center CRC 716 over the last 12 years.

The goal of project D.4 was to advance the field of biomolecular visualizations
by developing tailored visualizations for large, complex molecular dynamics simula-
tions – mainly all-atom simulations of one or more proteins in a mixed solvent. This
not only included the adaption and improvement of existing molecular visualization

a e-mail: karsten.schatz@visus.uni-stuttgart.de
b e-mail: michael.krone@uni-tuebingen.de

https://epjst.epj.org
https://doi.org/10.1140/epjst/e2019-800162-y
mailto:karsten.schatz@visus.uni-stuttgart.de
mailto:michael.krone@uni-tuebingen.de


1726 The European Physical Journal Special Topics

techniques to large, dynamic data sets, but also the development of novel visualization
methods that allow users to gain a deeper understanding of the simulation results.
A secondary goal was to make this interactive visual analyis possible with minimal
or no preprocessing on modern consumer desktop PCs equipped with a high-end
graphics card. Since the project focused on research in the fields of scientific visual-
ization and visual analytics, the primary concern was not to create a new molecular
visualization tool to compete with existing software like VMD [6], PyMOL [7,8], or
UCSF Chimera [9], but rather to create working prototypes that could be used and
tested by the project partners within CRC 716. Consequently, almost all research
prototypes developed within D.4 are included in the visualization framework Mega-
Mol [10], which was developed by another project of CRC 716 (D.3) as a common
rapid prototyping platform for visualization research. Due to its flexibility and mod-
ular architecture, MegaMol greatly sped up the development of novel visualization
techniques [11,12].

The rest of the paper is structured as follows: In Section 2, we briefly outline the
basics, assumptions, and prerequisites for molecular visualization. Section 3 reviews
the current state of the art technology in the field of biomolecular visualization.
The contributions of CRC 716 D.4 to this field over the last 12 years with respect
to the state of the art technology are summarized in Section 4. Finally, Section 5
concludes the paper and briefly discusses open questions and directions for future
research.

2 Biochemical basics

Molecules are composed of nuclei and the core electrons belonging to the inner elec-
tron shells; the nuclei are held together by an outer electronic shell (valence shell),
composed of molecular orbitals. Biomolecules are all molecules that play an essential
role in living systems. This comprises large molecules (macromolecules) like proteins,
lipids, DNA, and RNA, as well as small molecules such as metabolites. Weak bonds
between these molecules are important, since they are not only essential for the for-
mation of stable macromolecules, but also critical in maintaining their 3D structures.

Molecular visualization provides graphical depictions of the rich, complex mate-
rial world on an atomistic level by making molecular structures, their properties, and
their interactions visible and, therefore, understandable. The subfield of biomolecular
visualization deals with the depiction of biomolecular systems, which are the molec-
ular machines that drive the processes in all living cells. Thus, it provides means
for integrated visual analysis of biomolecular structure data, an example being the
visual exploration of biomolecular simulations.

The research in D.4 mainly focused on proteins. Proteins are linear macromolecules
consisting of one or more chains of amino acids. Each amino acid consists of an iden-
tical part – the backbone, which consists of a central α-carbon, the amino group and
the carboxyl group – and an individual side chain that defines the properties of the
amino acid. In a protein, the amino group of one amino acid is covalently bound
to the carboxyl group of the next amino acid, thereby forming the aforementioned
chain. Biomolecules are often visualized using general molecular representations like
ball-and-stick, space-filling, or molecular surfaces. However, specialized representa-
tions have been devised that show higher-level structural properties such as the well-
known abstract depiction of the DNA double helix as a twisted ladder-like structure,
or the Cartoon representation of the secondary structure of proteins [13].

The dynamic behavior of biomolecular systems is often investigated using Molec-
ular Dynamics (MD) simulations, which provide a good approximation, even though
the method has several restrictions (e.g., no covalent bonds are newly formed or


