























































LNCS 4950 - The Value of Information Visualization


The Value of Information Visualization

Jean-Daniel Fekete1, Jarke J. van Wijk2, John T. Stasko3, and Chris North4

1 Université Paris-Sud, INRIA, Bât 490,
F-91405 Orsay Cedex, France,
Jean-Daniel.Fekete@inria.fr,
http://www.aviz.fr/~fekete/

2 Department of Mathematics and Computing Science,
Eindhoven University of Technology, P.O. Box 513,

5600 MB EINDHOVEN, The Netherlands,
vanwijk@win.tue.nl,

http://www.win.tue.nl/~vanwijk/
3 School of Interactive Computing, College of Computing & GVU Center,

Georgia Institute of Technology, 85 5th St., NW,
Atlanta, GA 30332-0760, USA,

stasko@cc.gatech.edu,
http://www.cc.gatech.edu/~john.stasko

4 Dept of Computer Science, 2202 Kraft Drive,
Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA 24061-0106, USA,

north@vt.edu,
http://people.cs.vt.edu/~north/

Abstract. Researchers and users of Information Visualization are con-
vinced that it has value. This value can easily be communicated to others
in a face-to-face setting, such that this value is experienced in practice.
To convince broader audiences, and also, to understand the intrinsic
qualities of visualization is more difficult, however. In this paper we con-
sider information visualization from different points of view, and gather
arguments to explain the value of our field.

1 Problems and Challenges

This paper provides a discussion of issues surrounding the value of Information
Visualization (InfoVis). The very existence of the paper should alert the reader
that challenges do exist in both recognizing and communicating the field’s value.
After all, if the value would be clear and undisputed, there would be no need
to write the paper! Unfortunately, the current situation is far from that. By its
very focus and purpose, InfoVis is a discipline that makes the recognition of
value extremely difficult, a point that will be expanded below.

Why is showing value important? Well, today’s research environment places
great importance on evaluation involving quantifiable metrics that can be as-
sessed and judged with clarity and accuracy. Organizations sponsoring research
and corporations that serve to benefit from it want to know that the monetary
investments they make are being well-spent. Researchers are being challenged

A. Kerren et al. (Eds.): Information Visualization, LNCS 4950, pp. 1–18, 2008.
c© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2008



2 J.-D. Fekete et al.

to show that their inventions are measurably better than the existing state of
the art.

In broad analytic fields, of which we include InfoVis as a member, the exis-
tence of a ground truth for a problem can greatly facilitate evaluations of value.
For instance, consider the field of computer vision and algorithms for identifying
objects from scenes. It is very easy to create a library of images upon which new
algorithms can be tested. From that, one can measure how well each algorithm
performs and compare results precisely. The TREC [29] and MUC [3] Contests
are examples of this type of evaluation.

Even with a human in the loop, certain fields lend themselves very well to
quantifiable evaluations. Consider systems that support search for particular
documents or facts. Even though different people will perform differently using
a system, researchers can run repeated search trials and measure how often a
person is able to find the target and how long the search took. Averaged over a
large number of human participants, this task yields quantifiable results that can
be measured and communicated quite easily. People or organizations then using
the technology can make well-informed judgments about the value of new tools.

So why is identifying the value of InfoVis so difficult? To help answer that
question, let us turn to what is probably the most accepted definition of InfoVis,
one that comes from Card, Mackinlay, and Shneiderman and that actually is
their definition for “visualization.” They describe visualization as “the use of
computer-supported, interactive visual representations of data to amplify cog-
nition.” [2] The last three words of their definition communicate the ultimate
purpose of visualization, to amplify cognition. So, returning to our discussion
above, is the amplification of cognition something with a ground truth that is
easily and precisely measurable? Clearly it is not and so results the key challenge
in communicating the value of InfoVis.

Further examining the use and purpose of InfoVis helps understand why
communicating its value is so difficult. InfoVis systems are best applied for ex-
ploratory tasks, ones that involve browsing a large information space. Frequently,
the person using the InfoVis system may not have a specific goal or question in
mind. Instead, the person simply may be examining the data to learn more about
it, to make new discoveries, or to gain insight about it. The exploratory process
itself may influence the questions and tasks that arise.

Conversely, one might argue that when a person does have a specific question
to be answered, InfoVis systems are often not the best tools to use. Instead, the
person may formulate his or her question into a query that can be dispatched
to a database or to a search engine that is likely to provide the answer to that
precise question quickly and accurately.

InfoVis systems, on the other hand, appear to be most useful when a person
simply does not know what questions to ask about the data or when the person
wants to ask better, more meaningful questions. InfoVis systems help people to
rapidly narrow in from a large space and find parts of the data to study more
carefully.

Unfortunately, however, activities like exploration, browsing, gaining insight,
and asking better questions are not ones that are easily amenable to establishing



The Value of Information Visualization 3

and measuring a ground truth. This realization is at the core of all the issues
involved in communicating the value of InfoVis. By its very nature, by its very
purpose, InfoVis presents fundamental challenges for identifying and measuring
value. For instance, how does one measure insight? How does one quantify the
benefits of an InfoVis system used for exploring an information space to gain a
broad understanding of it? For these reasons and others, InfoVis is fundamentally
challenging to evaluate [17].

If we accept that InfoVis may be most valuable as an exploratory aid, then
identifying situations where browsing is useful can help to determine scenarios
most likely to illustrate InfoVis’ value. Lin [11] describes a number of conditions
in which browsing is useful:

– When there is a good underlying structure so that items close to one another
can be inferred to be similar

– When users are unfamiliar with a collection’s contents
– When users have limited understanding of how a system is organized and

prefer a less cognitively loaded method of exploration
– When users have difficulty verbalizing the underlying information need
– When information is easier to recognize than describe

These conditions serve as good criteria for determining situations in which the
value of InfoVis may be most evident.

1.1 Epistemological Issues

Natural sciences are about understanding how nature works. Mathematics is
about truth and systems of verifiable inferences. Human sciences are about un-
derstanding Man in various perspectives. Information Visualization is about de-
veloping insights from collected data, not about understanding a specific domain.
Its object is unique and therefore raises interest and skepticism.

Science has focused on producing results: the goal was essentially the creation
and validation of new theories compatible with collected facts. The importance
of the process — coined as the Method — was raised by the development of
epistemology in the 20th century, in particular with the work of Karl R. Popper
(1902–1994) [18]. It showed that the Method was paramount to the activity of
science.

Karl Popper has explained that a scientific theory cannot be proved true, it
can only be falsified. Therefore, a scientific domain searches for theories that are
as compatible as possible with empirical facts. The good theories are the ones
that have been selected by domain experts among a set of competing theories
in regard of the facts that they should describe. Popper considers science as a
Darwinian selection process among competing theories.

Still, no other scientific domain has argued that generating insights was im-
portant for science. Popper does not explain how a new theory emerges; he only
explains how it is selected when it emerges. Furthermore, Popper has demon-
strated in an article called “The Problem of Induction” that new theories cannot



4 J.-D. Fekete et al.

rationally emerge from empirical data: it is impossible to justify a law by obser-
vation or experiment, since it ’transcends experience’.

Information Visualization is still an inductive method in the sense that it is
meant at generating new insights and ideas that are the seeds of theories, but
it does it by using human perception as a very fast filter: if vision perceives
some pattern, there might be a pattern in the data that reveals a structure.
Drilling down allows the same perception system to confirm or infirm the pattern
very quickly. Therefore, information visualization is meant at “speeding up” the
process of filtering among competing theories regarding collected data by relying
on the speed of the perception system. Therefore, it plays a special role in the
sciences as an insight generating method. It is not only compatible with Popper’s
epistemology system but it furthermore provides a mechanism for accelerating
its otherwise painful Darwinian selection process.

1.2 Moving Forward

It is clear that InfoVis researchers and practitioners face an important challenge
in communicating the value of InfoVis. In the remainder of the paper we explore
this challenge more deeply and we provide several answers to the questions “How
and why is InfoVis useful?”. Since there are several audiences to convince, we
present a number of different sections that are each facets of argumentation to
explain why InfoVis is useful and effective as a mean of understanding complex
datasets and developing insights. The contents of the sections are gathered from
practitioners who already attested that the arguments developed were convinc-
ing. We hope they will be useful to you as well.

2 Cognitive and Perceptual Arguments

Several famous historical figures have argued that the eye was the main sense to
help us understand nature.

The eye. . .
the window of the soul,
is the principal means
by which the central sense
can most completely and
abundantly appreciate
the infinite works of nature.

Leonardo da Vinci (1452 – 1519)

Leonardo’s words are inspirational and they are echoed in everyday expressions
that we are all familiar with such as, “Seeing is believing” and “A picture is worth
a thousand words.” Is there actual support for these sentiments, however?

Let us first consider the case of the phrase, “A picture is worth a thousand
words.” While people may agree or disagree with the sentiments behind that
cliché, specific examples can help support the claim. Consider, for instance, the



The Value of Information Visualization 5

(a) A thousand words (b) A picture

Fig. 1. “A picture is worth a thousand words”

example shown in Figure 1. Part (a) shows a spreadsheet with data for the 50
states and the District of Columbia in the U.S. Also shown are the percentage
of citizens of each state with a college degree and the per capita income of the
states’ citizens.

Given just the spreadsheet, answering a question such as, “Which state has
the highest average income?” is not too difficult. A simple scan of the income
column likely will produce the correct answer in a few seconds. More complex
questions can be quite challenging given just the data, however. For example,
are the college degree percentage and income correlated? If they are correlated,
are there particular states that are outliers to the correlation? These questions
are much more difficult to answer using only the spreadsheet.

Now, let us turn to a graphical visualization of the data. If we simply draw
the data in a scatterplot as shown in part (b), the questions now become much
easier to answer. Specifically, there does appear to be an overall correlation
between the two attributes and states such as Nevada and Utah are outliers on
the correlation. The simple act of plotting the spreadsheet data in this more
meaningfully communicative form makes these kinds of analytic queries easier
to answer correctly and more rapidly.

Note that the spreadsheet itself is a visual representation of the data that
facilitates queries as well. Consider how difficult the three questions would be if
the data for each state was recorded on a separate piece of paper or webpage.
Or worse yet, what if the data values were read to you and you had to answer



6 J.-D. Fekete et al.

the questions? In this case, already challenging questions become practically
impossible.

2.1 Cognitive Benefits

While the states example illustrates that visualizations can help people under-
stand data better, how do visuals facilitate this process? The core of the benefits
provided by visuals seems to hinge upon their acting as a frame of reference or
as a temporary storage area for human cognitive processes. Visuals augment hu-
man memory to provide a larger working set for thinking and analysis and thus
become external cognition aids. Consider the process of multiplying two long in-
tegers in your head versus then having a pencil and paper available. The visual
representations of the numbers on paper acts as a memory aid while performing
the series of multiplication operations.

Performing a multiplication requires the processing of symbolic data, which
is arguably different than the processing of visual features and shapes. In “Ab-
stract Planning and Perceptual Chunks: Elements of Expertise in Geometry” [8],
Koedinger and Anderson show that experts in geometry effectively use their vi-
sion to infer geometrical properties (parallelism, connectivity, relative positions)
on diagrams; they solve simple problems quickly and accurately, several of mag-
nitude faster than if they had to apply symbolic inference rules.

Larkin and Simon, in their landmark paper “Why a diagram is (sometimes)
worth 10,000 words” [10], discuss how graphical visualization can support more
efficient task performance by allowing substitution of rapid perceptual inferences
for difficult logical inferences and by reducing the search for information required
for task completion. They do note that text can be better than graphics for
certain tasks, however.

Don Norman provides many illustrative examples where visuals can greatly
assist task performance and efficiency [15]. He argues that it is vital to match the
representation used in a visualization to the task it is addressing. The examples
he cites show how judicious visuals can aid information access and computation.

Earlier, we noted how the definition of visualization from Card, Mackinlay
and Shneiderman [2] focused on the use of visuals to “amplify cognition.” Fol-
lowing that definition, the authors listed a number of key ways that the visuals
can amplify cognition:
– Increasing memory and processing resources available
– Reducing search for information
– Enhancing the recognition of patterns
– Enabling perceptual inference operations
– Using perceptual attention mechanisms for monitoring
– Encoding info in a manipulable medium

2.2 Perceptual Support

Most lectures on Information Visualization argue about theoretical properties of
the visual system or more broadly to the perception abilities of humans. Rational
arguments rely on information theory [21] and psychological findings.



The Value of Information Visualization 7

According to Information Theory, vision is the sense that has the largest
bandwidth: 100 Mb/s [30]. Audition only has around 100 b/s. In that respect,
the visual canal is the best suited to carrying information to the brain.

According to Ware [30], there are two main psychological theories that explain
how vision can be used effectively to perceive features and shapes. At the low
level, Preattentive processing theory [23] explains what visual features can be
effectively processed. At a higher cognitive level, the Gestalt theory [9] describes
some principles used by our brain to understand an image.

Preattentive processing theory explains that some visual features can be per-
ceived very rapidly and accurately by our low-level visual system. For example,
when looking at the group of blue circles in Figure 2, it takes no time and no
effort to see the red circle in the middle. It would be as easy and fast to see that
there is no red circle, or to evaluate the relative quantity of red and blue cir-
cles. Color is one type of feature that can be processed preattentively, but only
for some tasks and within some limits. For example, if there were more than
seven colors used in Figure 2, answering the question could not be done with
preattentive processing and would require sequential scanning, a much longer
process.

Fig. 2. Example of preattentively processed task: finding if there is a red circle among
the blue circles

There is a long list of visual features that can be preattentively processed for
some tasks, including line orientation, line length or width, closure, curvature,
color and many more. Information visualization relies on this theory to choose
the visual encoding used to display data to allow the most interesting visual
queries to be done preattentively.

Gestalt theory explains important principles followed by the visual system
when it tries to understand an image. According to Ware [30], it is based on the
following principles:



8 J.-D. Fekete et al.

Proximity Things that are close together are perceptually grouped together;
Similarity Similar elements tend to be grouped together;
Continuity Visual elements that are smoothly connected or continuous tend

to be grouped;
Symmetry Two symmetrically arranged visual elements are more likely to be

perceived as a whole;
Closure A closed contour tends to be seen as an object;
Relative Size Smaller components of a pattern tend to be perceived as objects

whereas large ones as a background.

Information Visualization experts design visual representations that try to follow
these principles. For example, graph layout algorithms such as [14] designed to
find communities in social networks adhere to the proximity principle by placing
nodes that are connected to a dense group close together and push away nodes
that are connected to another dense group. The Treemap algorithm [5] uses the
closure principle to layout a tree: children of a node are placed inside their parent
node.

3 Success Stories

Information Visualization is much easier to explain using demonstrations than
words. However, to be understood, the data used should be familiar to the au-
dience and interesting. Preparing demonstrations targeted at all the possible
audiences is not possible but there are some datasets that interest most audi-
ences and greatly help make the point. Several striking static examples can be
found in Tufte’s books [24,25,26].

To better explain the value of visualization, demonstrations should start using
a simple question, show that a good representation answers the question at once
and then argue about additional benefits, i.e. questions the users did not knew
they had. From the users perspective, a good representation will confirm what
they already know, let them answer at once the question asked and show them
several insights, leading to the so-called “a-ha” moments when they feel like they
understand the dataset.

3.1 Striking Examples

Static examples used by most InfoVis courses include the map of Napoleon’s
1812 March on Moscow drawn in 1869 by M. Minard (Figure 3) and the map of
London in 1854 overlaid with marks positioning cholera victims that led John
Snow to discovering the origin of the epidemic: infected water extracted with a
water pump at the center of the marks (Figure 4).

In general, good examples show known facts (although sometimes forgotten)
and reveal several unexpected insights at once. Minard’s map can help answer the
question: “What were the casualties of Napoleon’s Russian invasion in 1812?”.
The map reveals at once the magnitude of casualties (from 400,000 to 10,000



The Value of Information Visualization 9

Fig. 3. Napoleon’s March on Moscow depicted by M. Minard [12]. Width indicates the
number of soldiers. Temperature during the retreat is presented below the map. Image
courtesy of École Nationale des Ponts et Chaussées.

soldiers) as well as the devastating effect of crossing the Berezina river (50,000
soldiers before, 25,000 after). The depiction confirms that Napoleon lost the
invasion (a well known fact) and reveals many other facts, such as the continuous
death rate due to disease and the “scorched earth” tactics of Russia instead of
specific death tolls of large battles.

John Snow’s map was made to answer the question: “What is the origin of the
London cholera epidemics?”. Contrary to the previous map, the answer requires
some thinking. Black rectangles indicate location of deaths. At the center of the
infected zone lies a water pump that John Snow found to be responsible for the
infection. Once again, choosing the right representation was essential for finding
the answer. As a side-effect, the map reveals the magnitude of the epidemic.

Figure 1 answers the question: “Is there a relationship between income and
college degree?” by showing a scatter plot of income by degree for each US state.
The answer is the obvious: yes, but there is much more. There seems to be a
linear correlation between them and some outliers such as Nevada (likely due to
Las Vegas) and Utah do exist, raising new unexpected questions.

Information Visualization couples interaction and visual representation so its
power is better demonstrated interactively. The simplest demonstration suited
to the largest audience is probably the Dynamic HomeFinder5 [32] . It shows the
map of the Washington D.C. area overlaid with all the homes for sale (Figure 5).
Dynamic queries implemented by sliders and check-boxes interactively filter-out
homes that do not fit specific criteria such as cost or number of bedrooms.

Using the interactive controls, it becomes easy to find homes with the desired
attributes or understand how attributes’ constraints should be relaxed to find
some matching homes. Unexpectedly, the Dynamic HomeFinder also reveals the

5
http://www.cs.umd.edu/hcil/pubs/dq-home.zip



10 J.-D. Fekete et al.

Fig. 4. Illustration of John Snow’s deduction that a cholera epidemic was caused by a
bad water pump, circa 1854 [4]. Black rectangles indicate location of deaths.

unpopular neighborhoods around Washington D.C. since they are places where
the homes are cheaper, and the wealthy ones where the houses are more expen-
sive.

Many more examples can be found to demonstrate that InfoVis is effective.
The Map of the Market6, represented by a squarified treemap, is interesting
for people holding stocks or interested by economic matters. InfoZoom video
on the analysis of Formula 1 results7 is interesting for car racing amateurs.
The video8 comparing two large biological classification trees is interesting to
some biologists. The Baby Name Wizard’s NameVoyager9 is useful for persons
searching a name for their baby to come and a large number of other persons as
witnessed by [31].

With the advent of Social InfoVis through web sites such as Swivel10 or IBM’s
Many-Eyes11, more examples can be found to convince specific audiences. Still,
the process of explaining how InfoVis works remains the same: ask a question
that interests people, show the right representation, let the audience understand
the representation, answer the question and realize how many more unexpected
findings and questions arise.

6 http://www.smartmoney.com/marketmap/
7
http://www.infozoom.com/enu/infozoom/video.htm

8
http://www.fit.fraunhofer.de/~cici/InfoVis2003/StandardForm/Flash/

InfoZoomTrees.html
9
http://babynamewizard.com/namevoyager/

10
http://www.swivel.com

11 http://www.many-eyes.com



The Value of Information Visualization 11

Fig. 5. Dynamic HomeFinder showing the Washington D.C. area with homes available
for sale and controls to filter them according to several criterion.

3.2 Testimonials

One effective line of argumentation about the value of InfoVis is through re-
porting the success of projects that used InfoVis techniques. These stories exist
but have not been advertised in general scientific publications until recently
[20,16,13]. One problem with trying to report on the success of a project is that
visualization is rarely the only method used to reach the success. For example,
in biological research, the insights gained by an InfoVis system can lead to an
important discovery that is difficult to attribute mainly to the visualization since
it also required months of experimentation to verify the theory formulated from
the insights. In fact, most good human-computer interaction systems allow users
to forget about the system and focus on their task only, which is probably one
reason why success stories are not so common in the InfoVis literature.

Besides these stories that are empirical evidence of the utility of information
visualization, there are strong theoretical arguments to how and why information
visualization works.

4 Information Visualization vs. Automatic Analysis

Several scientific domains are concerned by understanding complex data. Statis-
tics is the oldest, but Data Mining — a subfield of Artificial Intelligence — is
also concerned with automatically understanding the structure of data. There-
fore, InfoVis practitioners frequently need to explain what InfoVis can do that
statistics and data mining cannot.



12 J.-D. Fekete et al.

4.1 Statistics

Statistics is a well grounded field but is composed of several subfields such
as descriptive statistics, classical statistics (also called confirmatory statistics),
Bayesian statistics and Exploratory Data Analysis. Information Visualization
is sometimes considered as a descendant and expansion of Exploratory Data
Analysis.

The differences between these subfields are the methods and the nature of
the answer they seek. All of them start with a problem and gathered data that is
related to the problem to solve. Classical analysis starts by designing a model of
the data, then uses mathematical analysis to test whether the model is refuted
or not by the data to conclude positively or negatively. The main challenge for
classical statistics is to find a model.

Exploratory Data Analysis performs an analysis using visual methods to
acquire insights of what the data looks like, usually to find a model. It uses
visual exploration methods to get the insights.

So why is visualization useful before the modeling? Because, there are cases
when we have no clear idea on the nature of the data and have no model.

To show why visualization can help finding a model, Anscombe in [1] has
designed four datasets that exhibit the same statistical profile but are quite dif-
ferent in shape, as shown in Figure 6. They have the following characteristics12:

– mean of the x values = 9.0
– mean of the y values = 7.5
– equation of the least-squared regression line is: y = 3 + 0.5x
– sums of squared errors (about the mean) = 110.0
– regression sums of squared errors (variance accounted for by x) = 27.5
– residual sums of squared errors (about the regression line) = 13.75
– correlation coefficient = 0.82
– coefficient of determination = 0.67.

Visualization is much more effective at showing the differences between these
datasets than statistics. Although the datasets are synthetic, Anscombe’s Quar-
tet demonstrates that looking at the shape of the data is sometimes better than
relying on statistical characterizations alone.

4.2 Data Mining

More than statistics, the goal of data mining is to automatically find interesting
facts in large datasets. It is thus legitimate to wonder whether data mining, as a
competitor of InfoVis, can overcome and replace the visual capacity of humans.

This question has been addressed by Spence and Garrison in [22] where
they describe a simple plot called the Hertzsprung Russell Diagram (Figure 7a).
It represents the temperature of stars on the X axis and their magnitude on
the Y axis. Asking a person to summarize the diagram produces Figure 7b. It
12 See http://astro.swarthmore.edu/astro121/anscombe.html for details



The Value of Information Visualization 13

I II III IV

x y x y x y x y

10.0 8.04 10.0 9.14 10.0 7.46 8.0 6.58
8.0 6.95 8.0 8.14 8.0 6.77 8.0 5.76

13.0 7.58 13.0 8.74 13.0 12.74 8.0 7.71
9.0 8.81 9.0 8.77 9.0 7.11 8.0 8.84

11.0 8.33 11.0 9.26 11.0 7.81 8.0 8.47
14.0 9.96 14.0 8.10 14.0 8.84 8.0 7.04
6.0 7.24 6.0 6.13 6.0 6.08 8.0 5.25
4.0 4.26 4.0 3.10 4.0 5.39 19.0 12.50

12.0 10.84 12.0 9.13 12.0 8.15 8.0 5.56
7.0 4.82 7.0 7.26 7.0 6.42 8.0 7.91
5.0 5.68 5.0 4.74 5.0 5.73 8.0 6.89

(a) Four datasets with different values and
the same statistical profile

(b) Dot Plot of the four datasets

Fig. 6. Anscombe’s Quartet

(a) Hertzsprung Russell Diagram (b) Standard interpretation of the
Hertzsprung Russell Diagram

Fig. 7. Hertzsprung Russell Diagram and its standard interpretation

turns out that no automatic analysis method has been able to find the same
summarization, due to the noise and artifacts on the data such as the vertical
bands.

Our vision system has evolved with the human specie to help us survive
in a hostile world. We train it to avoid obstacles since we learn how to walk.
It remains remarkably effective at filtering-out noise from useful data, a very
important capability for hunters in deep forests to distinguish the prey moving



14 J.-D. Fekete et al.

behind leaves. We have relied on it and trained it to survive for millennia and it
still surpasses automatic data mining methods to spot interesting patterns. Data
mining still needs to improve to match these pattern matching capabilities.

4.3 Automating or Not?

Is there a competition between confirmatory, automated and exploratory meth-
ods? No, they answer different questions. When a model is known in advance or
expected, using statistics is the right method. When a dataset becomes too large
to be visualized directly, automating some analysis is required. When exploring
a dataset in search of insights, information visualization should be used, possibly
in conjunction with data mining techniques if the dataset is too large.

Furthermore, combining data mining with visualization is the central issue of
Visual Analytics, described by the paper Visual Analytics: Definition, Process,
and Challenges in this book [6].

5 An Economical Model of Value

One important question is how to assess the value of visualization, ranging from
the evaluation of one specific use-case to the discipline in general. If we know
how to do this, then this might lead to an assessment of the current status as
well as the identification of success factors. An attempt was given by Van Wijk
[27] and is summarized here. After a short overview of his model, we discuss how
this model can be applied for InfoVis.

Visualization can be considered as a technology, a collection of methods,
techniques, and tools developed and applied to satisfy a need. Hence, standard
technological measures apply: Visualization has to be effective and efficient. To
measure these, an economic point of view is adopted. Instead of trying to un-
derstand why visualization works (see previous sections), here visualization is
considered from the outside, and an attempt is made to measure its profit. The
profit of visualization is defined as the difference between the value of the increase
in knowledge and the costs made to obtain this insight. Obviously, in practice
these are hard to quantify, but it is illuminating to attempt so. A schematic
model is considered: One visualization method V is used by n users to visual-
ize a data set m times each, where each session takes k explorative steps. The
value of an increase in knowledge (or insight) has to be judged by the user.
Users can be satisfied intrinsically by new knowledge, as an enrichment of their
understanding of the world. A more pragmatic and operational point of view
is to consider if the new knowledge influences decisions, leads to actions, and,
hopefully, improves the quality of these. The overall gain now is nm(W (∆K)),
where W (∆K)) represents the value of the increase in knowledge.

Concerning the costs for the use of (a specific) visualization V , these can
be split into various factors. Initial research and development costs Ci have to
be made; a user has to make initial costs Cu, because he has to spend time to
select and acquire V , and understand how to use it; per session initial costs Cs



The Value of Information Visualization 15

have to be made, such as conversion of the data; and finally during a session a
user makes costs Ce, because he has to spend time to watch and understand the
visualization, and interactively explore the data set. The overall profit now is

F = nm(W (∆K) − Cs − kCe) − Ci − nCu.

In other words, this leads to the obvious insight that a great visualization method
is used by many people, who use it routinely to obtain highly valuable knowledge,
while having to spend little time and money on hardware, software, and effort.
And also, no alternatives that are more cost-effective should be available.

In the original paper a number of examples of more or less successful visual-
ization methods are given, viewed in terms of this model. One InfoVis application
was considered: SequoiaView, a tool to visualize the contents of a hard disk, us-
ing cushion treemaps [28]. The popularity of this tool can be explained from
the concrete and useful insights obtained, as well as the low costs in all respects
associated with its application.

When we consider InfoVis in general, we can also come to positive conclu-
sions for almost all parameters, and hence predict a bright future for our field.
The number of potential users is very large. Data in the form of tables, hier-
archies, and networks is ubiquitous, as well as the need to get insight in these.
This holds for professional applications, but also for private use at home. Many
people have a need to get an overview of their email, financial transfers, media
collections, and to search in external data bases, for instance to find a house,
vacation destination, or another product that meets their needs. Methods and
techniques from InfoVis, in the form of separate tools or integrated in custom
applications, can be highly effective here to provide such overviews. Also, many
of these activities will be repeated regularly, hence both n and m are high. The
growing field of Casual InfoVis [19] further illustrates how InfoVis techniques
are becoming more common in people’s everyday lives.

The costs Ce that have to be made to understand visualizations depend on
the prior experience of the users as well as the complexity of the imagery shown.
On the positive side, the use of graphics to show data is highly familiar, and
bar-charts, pie-charts, and other forms of business graphics are ubiquitous. On
the other hand, one should not overestimate familiarity. The scatterplot seems
to be at the boundary: Considered as trivial in the InfoVis community, but too
hard to understand (if the horizontal axis does not represent time) by a lay-
audience, according to Matthew Ericson, deputy graphics director of the New
York Times in his keynote presentation at IEEE InfoVis 2007. Visual literacy is
an area where more work can be done, but on the other hand, InfoVis does have
a strong edge compared to non-visual methods here. And, there are examples of
areas where complex visual coding has been a great success, with the invention
of the script as prime example.

The costs Cs per session and Cu per user can be reduced by tight integration
with applications. The average user will not be interested in producing visual-
izations, her focus will be on solving her own problem, where visualization is one
of the means to this end. Separate InfoVis tools are useful for specialists, which



16 J.-D. Fekete et al.

use them on a day-to-day basis. For many other users, integration within their
favourite tool is much more effective. An example of an environment that offers
such a tight integration is the ubiquitous spreadsheet, where storage, manipu-
lation, and presentation of data are offered; or the graphs and maps shown on
many web sites (and newspapers!) to show data. From an InfoVis point of view,
the presentations offered here can often be improved, and also, the interaction
provided is often limited. Nevertheless, all these examples acknowledge the value
of visualization for many applications.

The initial costs Ci for new InfoVis methods and techniques roughly fall into
two categories: Research and Development. Research costs can be high, because
it is often hard to improve on the state of the art, and because many experiments
(ranging from the development of prototypes to user experiments) are needed.
On the other hand, when problems are addressed with many potential usages,
these costs are still quite limited. Development costs can also be high. It takes
time and effort to produce software that is stable and useful under all conditions,
and that is tightly integrated with its context, but here also one has to take
advantage of the large potential market. Development and availability of suitable
middleware, for instance as libraries or plug-ins that can easily customized for
the problem at hand is an obvious route here.

One intriguing aspect here is how much customization is needed to solve the
problem concerned. On one hand, in many applications one of the standard data
types of InfoVis is central (table, tree, graph, text), and when the number of
items is not too high, the problem is not too hard to solve. On the other hand,
for large numbers of items one typically has to exploit all a priori knowledge of
the data set and tune the visualization accordingly; also, for applications such
as software visualizations all these data types pop up simultaneously, which also
strongly increases the complexity of the problem. So, for the time being, research
and innovation will be needed to come up with solutions for such problems as
well.

In conclusion, graphics has been adopted already on a large scale to com-
municate and present abstract data, which shows that its value has been ac-
knowledged, and we expect that due to the increase in size and complexity of
data available, the need for more powerful and effective information visualization
methods and techniques will only grow.

6 Conclusion

In this paper we have described the challenges in identifying and communicat-
ing the value of InfoVis. We have cited and posed a number of answers to the
questions, “How and why is InfoVis useful?” Hopefully, the examples shown
in the paper provide convincing arguments about InfoVis’ value as an analytic
tool. Ultimately, however, we believe that it is up to the community of InfoVis
researchers and practitioners to create techniques and systems that clearly il-
lustrate the value of the field. When someone has an InfoVis system that they
use in meaningful and important ways, this person likely will not need to be
convinced of the value of InfoVis.



The Value of Information Visualization 17

References

1. Anscombe, F.: Graphs in statistical analysis. American Statistician 27(1), 17–21
(1973)

2. Card, S.K., Mackinlay, J., Shneiderman, B. (eds.): Readings in Information Visu-
alization – Using Vision to Think. Morgan Kaufmann, San Francisco (1998)

3. Chincor, N., Lewis, D., Hirschman, L.: Evaluating message understanding sys-
tems: An analysis of the third message understanding conference (MUC-3). Com-
putational Linguistics 19(3), 409–449 (1993)

4. Gilbert, E.W.: Pioneer Maps of Health and Disease in England. Geographical
Journal 124, 172–183 (1958)

5. Johnson, B., Shneiderman, B.: Tree-maps: a space-filling approach to the visu-
alization of hierarchical information structures. In: VIS ’91: Proceedings of the
2nd conference on Visualization ’91, Los Alamitos, CA, USA, pp. 284–291. IEEE
Computer Society Press, Los Alamitos (1991)

6. Keim, D., Andrienko, G., Fekete, J.-D., Görg, C., Kohlhammer, J., Melançon,
G.: Visual Analytics: Definition, Process, and Challenges. In: Kerren, A., Stasko,
J.T., Fekete, J.-D., North, C.J. (eds.) Information Visualization. LNCS, vol. 4950,
Springer, Heidelberg (2008)

7. Kerren, A., Stasko, J.T., Fekete, J.-D., North, C.J. (eds.): Information Visualiza-
tion. LNCS, vol. 4950. Springer, Heidelberg (2008)

8. Koedinger, K.R., Anderson, J.R.: Abstract planning and perceptual chunks: Ele-
ments of expertise in geometry. Cognitive Science 14(4), 511–550 (1990)

9. Koffa, K.: Principles of Gestalt Psychology. Routledge & Kegan Paul Ltd, London
(1935)

10. Larkin, J.H., Simon, H.A.: Why a diagram is (sometimes) worth 10,000 words.
Cognitive Science 11, 65–100 (1987)

11. Lin, X.: Map displays for information retrieval. Journal of the American Society
for Information Science 48(1), 40–54 (1997)

12. Marey, E.: La Méthode Graphique. Paris (1885)

13. McLachlan, P., Munzner, T., Koutsofios, E., North, S.: Liverac: Interactive visual
exploration of system management time-series data. In: SIGCHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI 2008), ACM Press, New York (2008)

14. Noack, A.: Energy-based clustering of graphs with nonuniform degrees. In: Healy,
P., Nikolov, N.S. (eds.) GD 2005. LNCS, vol. 3843, pp. 309–320. Springer, Hei-
delberg (2006)

15. Norman, D.A.: Things That Make Us Smart: Defending Human Attributes in
the Age of the Machine. Addison-Wesley Longman Publishing Co., Inc., Boston
(1993)

16. Perer, A., Shneiderman, B.: Integrating statistics and visualization: Case studies
of gaining clarity during exploratory data analysis. In: SIGCHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI 2008), ACM Press, New York (2008)

17. Plaisant, C.: The challenge of information visualization evaluation. In: AVI ’04:
Proceedings of the working conference on Advanced visual interfaces, pp. 109–116.
ACM Press, New York (2004)

18. Popper, K.R.: The Logic of Scientific Discovery. Basic Books, New York (1959)

19. Pousman, Z., Stasko, J., Mateas, M.: Casual information visualization: Depic-
tions of data in everyday life. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer
Graphics 13(6), 1145–1152 (2007)



18 J.-D. Fekete et al.

20. Saraiya, P., North, C., Lam, V., Duca, K.: An insight-based longitudinal study
of visual analytics. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graph-
ics 12(6), 1511–1522 (2006)

21. Shannon, C.E., Weaver, W.: A Mathematical Theory of Communication. Univer-
sity of Illinois Press, Champaign (1963)

22. Spence, I., Garrison, R.F.: A remarkable scatterplot. The American Statistician,
12–19 (1993)

23. Triesman, A.: Preattentive processing in vision. Computer Vision, Graphics, and
Image Processing 31(2), 156–177 (1985)

24. Tufte, E.R.: The Visual Display of Quantitative Information. Graphics Press,
Cheshire (1983)

25. Tufte, E.R.: Envisioning Information. Graphics Press, Cheshire (1990)
26. Tufte, E.R.: Visual Explanations: Images and Quantities, Evidence and Narrative.

Graphics Press, Cheshire (1997)
27. van Wijk, J.J.: The value of visualization. In: Proceedings IEEE Visualization

2005, pp. 79–86 (2005)
28. van Wijk, J.J., van de Wetering, H.: Cushion treemaps. In: Proceedings 1999

IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization (InfoVis’99), pp. 73–78. IEEE
Computer Society Press, Los Alamitos (1999)

29. Voorhees, E., Harman, D.: Overview of the sixth Text Retrieval Conference. In-
formation Processing and Management 36(1), 3–35 (2000)

30. Ware, C.: Information Visualization: Perception for Design. Morgan Kaufmann
Publishers Inc., San Francisco (2004)

31. Wattenberg, M., Kriss, J.: Designing for social data analysis. IEEE Transactions
on Visualization and Computer Graphics 12(4), 549–557 (2006)

32. Williamson, C., Shneiderman, B.: The dynamic homefinder: evaluating dynamic
queries in a real-estate information exploration system. In: SIGIR ’92: Proceed-
ings of the 15th annual international ACM SIGIR conference on Research and
development in information retrieval, pp. 338–346. ACM Press, New York (1992)


	The Value of Information Visualization
	Problems and Challenges
	Epistemological Issues
	Moving Forward

	Cognitive and Perceptual Arguments
	Cognitive Benefits
	Perceptual Support

	Success Stories
	Striking Examples
	Testimonials

	Information Visualization vs. Automatic Analysis
	Statistics
	Data Mining
	Automating or Not?

	An Economical Model of Value
	Conclusion


