





















































INF358 Seminar in Visualization (2010)
Ivan Viola and Július Parulek (Editors)

Comparison of protein surface visualization techniques in
different environments (tools)

XiaoZhong.Shen1

1Department of Biomedicine, University of Bergen

Abstract
This state-of-the-art report focuses on solvent excluded surface (SES) which one of the broadly used protein surface
representation for visualization. High quality visualization of protein is as an important role in various areas
such as pharmaceutical, biochemical and medical research. Many simulation tools for visualizing SES of protein
with different new approaches are presented. The author selected some popular tools which are used in some
latest papers or new visualization techniques are raised recently. Some features for protein surface visualization
techniques are analysed and compared. Finally, a summary table with the advantage and disadvantage of protein
surface visualization and suggestion depended on the comparison outcome are given.

1. Introduction

Today, there are over 60,000 high resolution protein struc-
tures available in the consolidated Worldwide Protein Data
Bank. At same time, a large number of visualization papers
are published with new visualization techniques, algorithms
and acceleration methods in real time interaction. In order
to use this information most effectively, related tools with
different visualization techniques are developed and are in-
creased to be used for scientists, researchers or other. Most
of these tools usually have a large set of features, which
include standard representations (such as space-filling, rib-
bon, ball-and-stick and so on) and coloring schemes (ele-
ment based coloring of atoms and so no). In the meantime,
each of them has its special feature.

The Solvent Excluded Surface (SES) is the most com-
monly used surface representation [Con83]. Focus on SES,
some popular tools in protein surface visualization will be
selected and be analyzed. They are (1) VMD (2) QuteMol
(3) PVM (4) Jmol (5) Pymol (6) Metamol (7) 3D-Surfer

The paper is organized in four sections. The first sec-
tion is introduction. In the following section, the author will
classify by the features of surface visualization in the tools.
After, the comparison of protein surface visualization tech-
niques in different environments (tools) will be analyzed. In
the lastly section, the outcome for comparison and summary
table is given.

2. Protein surface visualization tools classification

The tools can be classified in Stand-alone system and Web-
based systems. From the usage, the tools can be classified
which types of data can be visualized in each system. The
types of data are: Electron microscopy (EM); Molecular Dy-
namics (MD); Molecular modelling and molecular orbital
visualization (MM); Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI);
Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR); Optical microscopy
(Optical); X-ray crystallography data (XRC) such as elec-
tron density, etc.

Focus on the SES visualization features and techniques
use of tools, such as the visual pleasantness, technical
smoothness, geometric constraints or surface intrinsic prop-
erties are attention. The author will analyze and com-
pare the following points: molecular dynamics, GPU-based
ray-casting molecular surface construction and acceleration
techniques, measurement techniques, special surface visual-
ization methods, performance and real time interaction and
system requirement, special region in the protein surface vi-
sualization in next section.

c© The Eurographics Association 2010.



X.Z.Shen / Comparison of protein surface visualization techniques in different environments (tools)

Figure 1: A molecule of 1j4n: Rotation presentation

Figure 2: Metamol:animate deformations on a surface for small protein

3. Protein surface visualization techniques analysis and
comparision in different environments

3.1. Molecular dynamics

Molecular dynamics (MD) simulation is a time-dependent
molecular interactive visualization [KBE09]. MD is very im-
portant and is frequently used in the study of proteins surface
dynamics visualization. It depends on the data (atoms num-
ber) of molecular, presentation speed, and its structures and
animation of trajectories, and perception. Algorithms for ac-
celeration are usually adopted. All the listed tools have fea-
ture of MD, but they have different rendering performance
and visualization quality.

The same protein 1J4N is loaded and presented in the
tools, because it allows us to compare the results with pre-
vious results in [LBPH10]. PVM and VMD are most com-
mon used than other tools. Compared with them, VMD has
been designed with the strong ability to animate molecu-

lar dynamics (MD) simulation trajectories. An example for
molecule of 1j4n is Rotation presentation (cf. Fig. 1).

Based on the ray-casting algorithm, there is no mesh and
the precomputation time is reduced so that it is possible to
visualize real-time deformations on a surface. MetaMol can
animate deformations in a surface for small protein (cf. Fig.
2). At same time, it is possible to visualize movements of
small proteins in concatenated PDB file formats. According
to the MetaMol documentation, in the near future, MetaMol
will be able to read molecular dynamics trajectory files and
to display the associated moving surface in real time.

Effective visualization of molecular movements is also
an important feature to study the structural behavior of bi-
ological samples. Recently, Lampe et al. defined a two-level
approach to visualize protein dynamics [LVRH07]. But the
work used quite simple representation as "ball and stick" or
union of spheres. It didn’t involve the protein surface visual-
ization.

c© The Eurographics Association 2010.



X.Z.Shen / Comparison of protein surface visualization techniques in different environments (tools)

3.2. GPU-based ray-casting molecular surface
construction and acceleration techniques

With the development of technologies, the modern graphics
processing unit (GPU) is used. In the meantime, the avail-
ability of high-level shader languages, such as Cg, GLSL or
HLSL, ray casting on the GPU is becoming a serious alter-
native to traditional polygonal rendering. Good results have
been obtained for ray casting large numbers of quadrics on
the GPU [KSN08] [TLP07].

Several improvements to reduce the update times for
displaying molecular surfaces are proposed such that par-
allelized computation of the contour-buildup algorithm
[KBE09] [MA96] and Reduced surface (RS) algorithm
[SOS96] [LBPH10] are widely used. It is very efficient to
generate protein surface fastly.

GPU accelerated ray-casting algorithm is used in VMD,
QuteMol, PMV, Jmol and Metamol. Compared with them,
QuteMol adopts ambient occlusion a small set of GPU accel-
erated procedural impostors for space-fill and ball-and-stick
rendering, and novel edge-cueing techniques. It strongly in-
creases the user’s understanding of the three-dimensional
structure and Protein surface imaging presentation with real
time rendering [TCM06]. Metamol adopts GPU acceler-
ated ray-casting algorithm that directly uses the piecewise-
defined algebraic equation. The better performances and
more high quality can be obtained. [CLM08].

3.3. Measurement

Molecular geometric properties, such as volume, exposed
surface area, and occurrence of internal cavities, are im-
portant inputs to many applications in molecular modeling
[PGD∗10]. Sometimes we also need to know the lengths
of nitrogen-hydrogen bond and the carbon-carbon bonds in
the carbon-hydrogen bonds or the angle for different stoms.
Compared with the list of tools, PVM can be used in Pro-
tein Volume Calculate, Distance Measure and etc. Pymol and
Jmol have the measurement functions for distance, angle and
torsion angle. This feature for Jmol is shown in the example
(cf. Fig. 3). Pymol have the feature of quantitative electro-
statics calculations. This can help to answer the qualitative
question likely is this region of protein surface to be positive
or negative?

3.4. Special surface visualization methods

Compared with these tools, Qetamol with Ambient occlu-
sion is quite good for surface visualization. Ambient oc-
clusion is a shading method used in 3D computer graphics
which helps to add realism to local reflection models by tak-
ing into account attenuation of light due to occlusion. It at-
tempts to approximate the way light radiates in real life, es-
pecially off what are normally considered non-reflective sur-
faces. Unlike local methods like Phong shading, ambient oc-
clusion is a global method, meaning the illumination at each

point is a function of other geometry in the scene. However,
it is a very crude approximation to full global illumination.
The soft appearance achieved by ambient occlusion alone is
similar to the way an object appears on an overcast day.

Good molecular rendering can be more informative,
clearer, and more capable of communicating a shape when
it is the combined result of several effects and techniques,
base atom colors, direct Lambertian and Phong illumination,
self-shadowing, depth cueing, ambient occlusion, depth-
aware halos, depth-revealing contour lines, and intersection-
revealing contour lines. For example, the molecule of 1j4n
is for illustrative purposes, black halos alon are drawn with
different setting. (cf. Fig. 4)

Ambient Occlusion and Edge Cueing is better for visual-
ization of protein surface. [TCM06] PVM can using in Am-
bient Occlusion, et. For example, Antibody (1igt) with Am-
bient Occlusion using PMV. (cf. Fig. 5)(cf. Fig. 6)

Figure 5: 1. Antibody (1igt) with Ambient Occlusion from
PMV.

Figure 6: 2. Antibody 1igt with Ambient Occlusion from
PMV.

Metamol is based on GPU accelerated ray-casting algo-
rithm that uses the piecewise-defined algebraic equation, so
it can obtain much better performances and high quality in
Molecular Surface visualization. For example, it can obtain
smooth molecular surface.

c© The Eurographics Association 2010.



X.Z.Shen / Comparison of protein surface visualization techniques in different environments (tools)

Figure 3: Protein 1J4N: Measurement feature for protein analysis (measurement distance between atoms in Jmol)

Figure 4: Above: the molecule of 1j4n is for illustrative purposes, black halos alon are drawn with different setting

3.5. Performance and real time interaction and system
requirement

The author uses laptop with configuration (Intel-i3 CPU,
2.27GHz, 2 Core(s), 4 Logical Processor(s), Intel(R) Graph-
ics Media Accelerator HD (Core i3)). VMD, QuteMol, Jmol
and Pymol can be easily installed and rendering surface real
time. But PVM can not be installed because it needs high
hardware configuration for computer system, so the author
studies it via web and related documents. Metamol is not
available download and is studied via web also.

3.6. Special region in the protein surface visualization

Sometimes, protein surfaces are often particular interest.
Typical applications are docking the analysis of protein-
protein or protein-ligand interactions and assemblies and the
exploration of specific phenomena which occur at the sur-
face, like binding sites or hydrophobic and hydrophilic re-
gions. Surface representations can also be particularly help-
ful to identify cavities or channels accessible by the solvent

or other specific molecules, having an impact on the protein
characteristics.

Compared with other tools, 3D-SURFER integrates Vis-
Grid algorithm which facilitates the characterization of lo-
cal geometric features of protein surfaces in an interactive
manner. The visibility is defined as the fraction of visible
directions from a target position on a protein surface. Vis-
Grid focus on the dominant geometric features in the pro-
tein structure by identifying large cavities, hollow and flat
regions on the surface. Visualize the results in terms of the
list of the residues forming of the three largest groups. Areas
and volumes for these regions are also reported. An example
see (cf. Fig. 7).

4. Summary

A summary table with outstanding features or strengths for
each tool is created. See(cf. Fig. 8).

GPU ray casting approach can accelerate the construction

c© The Eurographics Association 2010.



X.Z.Shen / Comparison of protein surface visualization techniques in different environments (tools)

Figure 7: Protein 1J4N: example to show the three largest cavity parts in protein surface. Red, green and blue are 1st, 2nd and
3rd largest cavity respectively

and the rendering of Solvent Excluded Surface. It is using in
VMD, QuteMol, PMV, Jmol and Metamol. However, Qute-
Mol adopts ambient occlusion a small set of GPU acceler-
ated procedural impostors for space-fill and ball-and-stick
rendering, and novel edge-cueing techniques also. It strongly
increases the user’s understanding of the three-dimensional
structure and Protein surface imaging presentation with real
time rendering. Comparison the mentioned tools, It has bet-
ter performances and more high quality in surface visualiza-
tion. But for surface dynamic, no available tool can render
the Solvent Excluded Surface of large trajectories at interac-
tive frame rates with satisfying visual quality so far.

Here, because we just talk about the tool for protein SES
surface visualization techniques. The widely used tools with
almost features and high system requirement is not recom-
mended. Special tools like QuteMol or MetaMol with high
surface visualization performance are suggested to use. Re-
cent advances will chiefly focus on rendering performance
and visual enhancement.

References

[CLM08] CHAVENT M., LEVY B., MAIGRET B.: Meta-
mol: High-quality visualization of molecular skin surface.
Journal of Molecular Graphics and Modelling 27 (2008),
209–216. 3

[Con83] CONNOLLY M. L.: Analytical molecular sur-
face calculation. Journal of Applied Crystallography 16,
5 (1983), 548Ű 558. 16, 5 (1983), 548–558. 1

[KBE09] KRONE M., BIDMON K., ERTL T.: Inter-
active visualization of molecular surface dynamics. IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 15,
6 (2009), 1391–1398. 2, 3

[KSN08] KANAMORI Y., SZEGO Z., NISHITA T.: Gpu-
based fast ray casting for a large number of metaballs.
Computer Graphics 27, 3 (2008), 351–360. 3

[LBPH10] LINDOW N., BAUM D., PROHASKA S., HEGE
H.-C.: Accelerated visualization of dynamic molecular
surfaces. Eurographics 29, 3 (2010), 943–952. 2, 3

[LVRH07] LAMPE O., VIOLA I., REUTERM N.,
HAUSER H.: Two-level approach to efficient visu-
alization of protein dynamics. IEEE Transactions
on Visualization and Computer Graphics 13 (2007),
1616–1623. 2

[MA96] M.TOTROV, ABAGYAN R.: The contour-buildup
algorithm to calculate the analytical molecular surface.
Structural Biology 116, 1 (1996), 138–143. 3

[PGD∗10] PHILLIPS M., GEORGIEVY I., DEHOFZ
A. K., NICKELSZX S., MARSALEKY L., LENHOFZ H.-
P., HILDEBRANDTZ A., SLUSALLEK P.: Measuring
properties of molecular surfaces using ray casting. In Par-
allel & Distributed Processing, Workshops and Phd Fo-
rum (IPDPSW) (2010). 3

[SOS96] SANNER M. F., OLSON A. J., SPEHNER J.-C.:
Reduced surface: An efficientway to compute molecular
surfaces. Biopolymers 38, 3 (1996), 305–320. 3

[TCM06] TARINI M., CIGNONI P., MONTANI C.: Am-
bient occlusion and edge cueing for enhancing real time
molecular visualization. IEEE Transactions on Visualiza-
tion and Computer Graphics 12, 5 (2006), 1237–1244. 3

[TLP07] TOLEDO R. D., LÉVY B., PAUL J. C.: Itera-
tive methods for visualization of implicit surfaces on gpu.
In International Symposium on Visual Computing (ISVC)
-Lecture Notes in Computer Science (2007). 3

c© The Eurographics Association 2010.



X.Z.Shen / Comparison of protein surface visualization techniques in different environments (tools)

Figure 8: Summary for comparison of protein surface visualization techniques in different environments (tools)

c© The Eurographics Association 2010.


