

























































Sports Data Visualization STAR


              

City, University of London Institutional Repository

Citation: Perin, C. ORCID: 0000-0002-7324-9363, Vuillemot, R., Stolper, C., Stasko, J., 
Wood, J. ORCID: 0000-0001-9270-247X and Carpendale, S. (2018). State of the Art of 
Sports Data Visualization. Computer Graphics Forum, 37(3), pp. 663-686. doi: 
10.1111/cgf.13447 

This is the accepted version of the paper. 

This version of the publication may differ from the final published 
version. 

Permanent repository link:  http://openaccess.city.ac.uk/19857/

Link to published version: http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/cgf.13447

Copyright and reuse: City Research Online aims to make research 
outputs of City, University of London available to a wider audience. 
Copyright and Moral Rights remain with the author(s) and/or copyright 
holders. URLs from City Research Online may be freely distributed and 
linked to.

City Research Online:            http://openaccess.city.ac.uk/            publications@city.ac.uk

City Research Online

http://openaccess.city.ac.uk/
mailto:publications@city.ac.uk


State of the Art of Sports Data Visualization

C. Perin1,2, R. Vuillemot3, C. D. Stolper4, J. T. Stasko5, J. Wood1, and S. Carpendale2

1Department of Computer Science, City, University of London, UK
2Department of Computer Science, University of Calgary, Canada

3École Centrale de Lyon, Université de Lyon, France
4Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, Southwestern University, USA

5School of Interactive Computing, Georgia Institute of Technology, USA

Abstract
In this report, we organize and reflect on recent advances and challenges in the field of sports data visualization. The
exponentially-growing body of visualization research based on sports data is a prime indication of the importance and timeliness
of this report. Sports data visualization research encompasses the breadth of visualization tasks and goals: exploring the
design of new visualization techniques; adapting existing visualizations to a novel domain; and conducting design studies and
evaluations in close collaboration with experts, including practitioners, enthusiasts, and journalists. Frequently this research
has impact beyond sports in both academia and in industry because it is i) grounded in realistic, highly heterogeneous data,
ii) applied to real-world problems, and iii) designed in close collaboration with domain experts. In this report, we analyze
current research contributions through the lens of three categories of sports data: box score data (data containing statistical
summaries of a sport event such as a game), tracking data (data about in-game actions and trajectories), and meta-data (data
about the sport and its participants but not necessarily a given game). We conclude this report with a high-level discussion of
sports visualization research informed by our analysis—identifying critical research gaps and valuable opportunities for the
visualization community. More information is available at the STAR’s website: https://sportsdataviz.github.io/.

Sports visualization offers new approaches to exploring, making
sense of, and communicating sports data. As visualizations can be
more accessible and more meaningful than traditional statistical
analysis [Ber15, JSS∗14], the number of visualizations of sports
data has grown rapidly over the past decades. Print and online
media companies, including The New York Times (e.g., [QW14,
AQ16, AQ14, Tim07, DQ14, QR16a]), present sports data using
infographics and interactive visualizations. Dedicated blogs such as
FiveThirtyEight have become extremely popular for their analyses
of sports events, players, and economics using visualizations.
Television broadcast and betting websites increasingly use statistics
and graphics to evaluate and predict sports events.

In visualization research, there has been a similarly growing
interest in sports data over the past 20 years. The increasing
numbers of publications related to the field at leading conferences
such as IEEE VIS, EuroVis, and ACM CHI demonstrate this
interest. The MIT Sloan Sports Analytics Conference has been
gathering professionals and academics since 2007. In 2013, the
first workshop on sports data visualization was organized at the
IEEE VIS Conference [BCC∗13]. In 2016, an IEEE Computer
Graphics & Applications special issue was dedicated to sports
visualization [BS16]. Figure 1 shows the distribution, by year, of
published research articles on sports visualization we gathered.

1. Introduction

Sports have a long tradition of data collection and reporting. In the 
eighth century BCE, spectators recorded the results of the Ancient 
Olympic Games. In the 1870s, Henry Chadwick introduced the 
baseball scorecard for collecting statistical information about 
baseball games beyond simply team runs scored that is still in use 
(with some minor adjustments) today [Dic97].

There is ample evidence that successful analysis of sports data 
can result in better performances of a team [Lew04, MW12, 
Win12] and can have notable positive economic impact [OJK13]. 
Scouts use data to find t alented p layers; t rainers t o improve 
player performances; analysts to find even the slightest edge over 
their rivals. Journalists report on sports using data meticulously 
maintained by warehousers such as the Elias Sports Bureau, STATS 
LLC, and Opta. Their reporting in the past decade has included the 
design of intricate and informative infographics of this data. Fans 
follow their favorite teams and players using statistics, once using 
newspaper box scores and now utilizing free sources such as the 
Sports Reference family of sites [Spo16a] and Fangraphs [Fan16]. 
Beyond the realm of professional sports, individuals actively 
participate in a recreational facet of sports data by collecting 
statistics on their own activities to track, maintain, and improve 
their performance.

Author Version

https://sportsdataviz.github.io/


C. Perin & R. Vuillemot & C. D. Stolper & J. Stasko & J. Wood & S. Carpendale / Sports Data Visualization STAR

Figure 1: The 98 sports data visualization articles from both
academics and practitioners we collected, grouped by year. This
chart emphasizes the recent growth in research surrounding sports
data.

While many academic papers, including other state of the art
reports, include sports visualizations, sports as an application
domain has not yet been the subject of a review from a
visualization perspective. Visualization of team sports has recently
been surveyed [GH17], however, this previous survey focuses
solely on team sports and takes a fully spatio-temporal lens to
looking at visualizations used in this context. Our paper differs in
both aspects as we integrate both team sports and individual sports
and discuss box-score data and meta-data in addition to (spatio-
temporal) tracking data.

Existing sports visualization research stems from passionate,
often distributed, communities working on sports data analysis and
communication. With the increasing interest in sports visualization
from both sports practitioners and visualization researchers,
there is a need to document and analyze these efforts. In our
review we identify three types of sports data that are used in
sports visualizations: box score data (data containing statistical
summaries of a sport event such as a game), tracking data (data
about in-game actions and trajectories), and meta-data (data about
the sport and its participants but not necessarily a given game).
Using these three data types, we structure our collection of 98
works from both academics and practitioners in the space and
lay out the opportunities and challenges for the future of this
fascinating subfield.

We start by describing the methodology and scope of our review
in section 2. Then, in section 3, we introduce box-score data,
tracking data and meta-data, the three types of sports data we
extracted from analyzing the literature in sports data visualization.
Sections 4, 5, and 6 then organize the literature using these three
types of sports data. Finally, we reflect on our review to discuss
both core and under-explored topics in sports data visualization,
unveiling challenges for the area of sports visualization in particular
but also for information visualization in general.

2. Methodology and Scope

Before diving into the review of sports data visualization, in this
section we describe our methodology for building our collection of
related research papers and newspaper and blog articles. We then
explain the main dimensions that emerged from our analysis of the
literature and form the high-level structure of this report.

2.1. Building the Collection

To review the state of the art in sports data visualization, we started
with personal collections of seed papers and links to infographics.
Authors of this report had been building these collections over
several years, in some cases from their previous work on sports
data visualization or in others from their interest in a particular
sport or player. The duplicates that resulted from merging these
personal collections were important as these were cues of particular
relevance of the contribution, sport, or event.

The second step was to expand the collection in order to remove
biases on favorite sports and expand the scope of sports and events.
We primarily used Google Scholar, the ACM DL Library, and
IEEEXplore in this phase. We used keywords such as sports
visualization and sports data visualization to
search for recent papers that we did not know of and to reach other
communities.

We further reviewed hundreds of infographics as they are a
significant driver of advances in sports visualization. This review
made it possible to contrast the work in the research community and
the work from sports practitioners. For selecting these newspaper
and blog articles among the thousands that exist, we decided to go
for broadness and diversity and include any new visualization that
seemed to offer a new perspective on sports data visualization. We
also searched on the Web for non-research sports visualization that
already had a citation entry. Google Images was also helpful for
filtering out non-visual entries.

A third step was collection completion. As we identified
authoritative sources of publications and newspapers (e.g. New
York Times sports infographics), as well as the most prolific sports
data sources and tracking technologies, we visited websites to
browse complete collections of articles in conferences or tagged
articles on newspapers websites (e.g. data-visualization
on FiveFirthyEight and olympics on FlowingData).

The fourth and final step was to reduce the collection. In
this step, we discarded fringe articles and infographics whose
contribution was below average, such as by: not making a strong
contribution to sports data analysis; not providing a novel lens on
sports data (e.g., simply using standard charts and not providing
any particular insight); or not describing the underlying process
enough to understand the data or the context sufficiently. We also
discarded academic papers without a visual contribution (e.g., data
mining and algorithmic papers that are related to sports data but do
not contribute to visualization research). We also discarded papers
that are about a generic visualization technique and use a sport as
an example scenario (e.g., [JSSS16]).

This process resulted in 281 initial papers and articles, out of
which we selected 98 for review in this report.



C. Perin & R. Vuillemot & C. D. Stolper & J. Stasko & J. Wood & S. Carpendale / Sports Data Visualization STAR

year

2016Bes16
2015Woo15

2013Won13
2013CF13

2016PBV16
2014PVF14

2006CS06
1994Tur94

1997JB97
2014PYHZ14

2013OJK13

2013PVF13b

2013PVF13a
2016SJL*16
2011RSB11
2016SJB*16
2014JSS*14
2016AAB*16
2015SHJ*15
2016SSN*16

2014DKVS14
2013MB13
2007PM07
2013CM13
2012Gol12
2012MCHD12
2016CLX*16
2016BEA16

2016HZ16
2013Dem13
2002BJM02
2001POJC01

2014STS*14

2015LCN15

2010CMHD10

2016KYY*16
2013WWM13

2001MWA*01
2016BBW16

2012PSBS12

2012LCP*12
2016CPG*16

2010DWA10

2014BLC*14
2016VP16
2015FMBG15
2007TSLR07
2009STL09
2012DMS12

2015VP15

2006PM06

2017SJS*17

2016LOC*16

2016Met16

2017CEGH17

2017AAB*17

2017GH17

2015CLP*15

2018SJL*18

2017MLM*17
2017SAMS*17

2016LTB16

2018WLS*18

2014QW14

2015Lov15
2016Won16
2006CW06
2007Tim07
2011CQW11

2016AQ16
2013LSS13

2014AQ14

2016Con16
2014DQ14

2016QR16
2008CNW08

2006Sus06

2016Art16
2010RCW10

2013ySSS13

2016Mor16a

2016BC16
2016The16
2016Spo16b
2014Ais14

2016Sil16
2014Jos14

2005Fry05
2016Mor16b

2016MLBG16
2015NFL15

A
C
A
D
E
M
IC
S

P
R
A
C
T
IT
IO

N
E
R
S

DATA SPORT

CONTRIBUTION EVALUATION

Bo
x-s

co
re

 da
ta

Tr
ac

kin
g d

ata

Me
ta 

da
ta

So
cc

er

Te
nn

is
Ba

se
ba

ll

Ba
sk

etb
all

Ice
 ho

ck
ey

Fo
otb

all

Cy
cli

ng

Ru
gb

y
Ru

nn
ing

Ot
he

r
De

sig
n s

tud
y -

 in
vo

lve
s s

po
rts

 ac
tor

s

Ta
sk

s/R
eq

uir
em

en
ts 

an
aly

sis

Al
go

rith
m

Ta
xo

no
my

/m
od

el

Int
eg

ra
tio

n o
f v

is 
int

o t
he

 co
nte

xt 
of

    
    

    
    

    
    

    
    

    
    

    
    

us
e

Vi
su

ali
za

tio
n t

ec
hn

iqu
e

Int
er

ac
tio

n t
ec

hn
iqu

e

De
sig

n s
pa

ce
 ex

plo
ra

tio
n

Co
lla

bo
ra

tio
n w

ith
 sp

or
ts 

ac
tor

s 

Fie
ld 

stu
dy

Sc
en

ar
io 

(n
o s

po
rts

 ac
tor

s i
nv

olv
ed

)

Ca
se

 st
ud

y (
sp

or
ts 

ac
tor

s i
nv

olv
ed

)

Qu
an

tita
tiv

e S
tud

y

In rows the reviewed literature both from academics 
and practitioners, grouped by sports data type.

Black circles     indicate: 

- In DATA, which sports data section the work is 
discussed in, 

- In SPORT, which sport the work is about, 

- In CONTRIBUTION, if the work is academic, 
what are the main research contributions,

- In EVALUATION, if the work is academic,  which 
evaluation methods are reported.

Gol17b 2017

Pea17 2017
Gol17a 2017

Tim17 2017

Are17 2017
TKW*16 2016

Ais17 2017

Figure 2: The 98 articles we reviewed described in terms of sport, sports data type, contribution type and evaluation method.



C. Perin & R. Vuillemot & C. D. Stolper & J. Stasko & J. Wood & S. Carpendale / Sports Data Visualization STAR

2.2. Analyzing the Collection

Two researchers independently open-coded a dozen elements of the
collection with which they were the most familiar. After several
iterations and refinements, we identified three overarching sports
data types we review in this STAR and that we introduce in
section 3:

Box score data corresponds to discrete, in-game event data and
is detailed in section 4,
Tracking data corresponds to continuous spatio-temporal
motion data and is detailed in section 5, and
Meta-data corresponds to discrete data beyond a specific game
and is detailed in section 6.

In section 7 we further discuss trends that emerge from the
research papers we reviewed in terms of contribution type and
evaluation method. These descriptors make it possible to grasp
the breadth and depth of contributions that emerge from sports
data visualization, as well as extract the various strategies for
conducting research in this area.

Figure 2 presents a summary of the 98 articles and research
papers we analyzed in terms of the aforementioned descriptors.

3. Types of Sports Data

As explained in the previous section, we structure our survey based
on the three types of sports data we derived from related papers
analysis: box-score data, tracking data and meta-data.

One could apply almost any visualization to the sports domain,
and many visualization types (e.g., node-link diagrams, time series
line plots, and heatmaps) have been applied to sports. What makes
sports a unique domain of interest is the variety and specificity of
the data it generates. Thus, to discriminate the techniques used
to visualize sports data, we look into the types of data that are
visualized. In particular, while trajectory information and meta-
data are often of a similar nature across sports, box-score data
are highly sport-specific. The combination of these three types of
sports data results in a rich and wide space of sports visualization.

We note ahead of time that these three data types are not
perfectly orthogonal—the line between these data types is not
always completely clear. For example, some professional sports
leagues now use tracking data to compute box-score data and
meta-data usually requires box-score and/or tracking data to be
put in perspective. Manually collected event data with additional
qualitative descriptors (e.g. location and speed of a shot on goal)
could fit into either box-score data or the tracking data categories.
The height of a baseball player or soccer goalie, which we consider
to be meta-data, could also be considered tracking data as height
can affect the size of the batters’ box or the free space on goal.
However, most data falls squarely into one of the three categories.

3.1. Box-Score Data

Sports have a long and constant tradition of recording critical
observations. Spectators have been tracking the history of sports
dating to very early competitions, such as the Ancient Olympic
Games in 776 BCE. Since then, game results and details have been

Figure 3: Example of scorecard notation that captures events
(e.g. errors, hits) in baseball. By Synaptidude at English Wikipedia
[Public domain], via Wikimedia Commons.

tracked by sport officials, journalists, and fans, using scorecards
(see Figure 3). Such scorecards capture the structure of the game as
discrete events such as substitutions, hits, and fouls by players over
the course of the game.

The term box-score designates the statistical summary of a
game. Although this term was originally used in baseball, it has
been adopted by many sports including basketball and hockey. We
use the term to describe any discrete data referencing in-game
events. This can include both summary statistics (3 hits, 1 walk,
1 strikeout) as well as finer-grained event data (goal in the 83rd

minute). We mentioned that the line between categories can be
blurry. We tended to not consider any discrete data that had a spatio-
temporal aspect to it (such as where on a court a tennis shot landed)
as box-score data and instead categorized them as tracking data.
Note that despite advances in technology, as of today most of these
events and statistics are still generated by humans in sometimes
quite tedious processes.

3.2. Tracking Data

Recent development in tracking and sensing technologies now
enable collecting and analyzing new classes of data beyond the
traditional box-score.

This tracking data contrasts with the box-score approach as the
volume, variety, and precision grow exponentially and at cheaper
costs. Most tracking data is collected by utilizing machine vision



C. Perin & R. Vuillemot & C. D. Stolper & J. Stasko & J. Wood & S. Carpendale / Sports Data Visualization STAR

EventPlayer

EventPlayerAction
+outcome (0/1)

EventPlayerPosition
+x
+y

Pass Defensive ErrorOffensive

errorTypeID:

000: bad control
001: dispossessed
003: loose ball

+errorTypeID

defensiveTypeID:

000: tackle (0/1)
001: aerial (0/1)
002: interception
003: dribbled
004: touched the ball
005: clearance
006: ball out of field
007: blocked cross
008: blocked shot
009: corner given

+defensiveTypeID+offensiveTypeID

offensiveTypeID:

000: dribble (0/1)
001: aerial (0/1)
002: good skill

Shot
+passType1ID
+passType2ID
+passType3ID
+bodyPartID
+isOffside (0/1)

passType1ID:

000: short
001: long
002: cross
003: switch of play
004: through

bodyPartID:

000: right foot
001: left foot
002: right leg
003: left leg
004: head
005: chest
006: shoulder
007: back
008: right back heel
009: left back heel

+shotType1ID
+shotType2ID
+shotType3ID
+shotType4ID
+shotOriginX
+shotOriginY
+shotDestinationY
+shotDestinationZ
+bodyPartID
+isOwnGoal (0/1)
+strength [0,1]

passType2ID:

000: on air
001: on ground

passType3ID:

000: back
001: corner
002: free kick
003: throw in

shotType1ID:

000: free kick
001: penalty
002: direct corner
003: from corner
004: from free kick
005: from throw in
006: from GK release
007: from pass
008: from personal action
009: from cross
010: from scramble

shotType2ID:

000: volley
001: overhead
002: half volley
003: diving head

shotType3ID:

000: saved
001: post
002: missed
003: goal
004: post and goal
005: GK touch and goal
006: deflected
007: deflected and goal

shotType4ID:

000: rising
001: dipping
002: with bounces

+time

Figure 4: Taxonomy of detailed soccer data used to collect and structure spatio-temporal events [PVF13a], based on Opta’s data scheme.
Image courtesy of the authors, used with permission.

From an information visualization perspective, this type of data
is different from for example, spatial data, as it is usually more
abstract and strictly follows rules that define the types of events
and occurrences recorded during a sports events. Sports rules are
indeed the backbone of sports data, since tracking and meta-data (as
defined in this paper) may be considered, in a sense, independent
from the sport itself. Rules are, on the whole, stable over time
but do occasionally change slightly—often driven by needs from
media, TV broadcasting, and advertising—such as MLB’s changes
in 2015 [MLB15] to increase the pace of baseball games.

We separate the visualization of box-score data into two main
categories: time-evolving championship tables and rankings relate
to the explicit importance of time in sports and scores, goals, and
points relate to the general sports rules.

4.1. Time-Evolving Championship Tables and Rankings

Sport competitions can span over long periods of time. Typically,
team sports such as soccer, football, ice hockey, and basketball
are played in championships, or leagues, every year. Teams play
against each other two times or more over the course of several
months. In some leagues this is either the entire competition
(e.g., for European soccer championships) or the first phase of
the competition (e.g., for the NBA and the NHL). The results
of these games build standing tables, which determine who wins
the competition, who is demoted to a minor league, and/or who
progresses to a highly anticipated playoff stage.

Ranking (or standing) tables have been the standard way of
representing and analyzing championships. They typically consist
of vertical lists of teams’ names and indicators of success such as
wins and losses, points earned for victories, and/or the number of
goals scored and conceded. The teams are ordered by rank, which
is a derived index usually based on their number of points or ratio
of wins to games played.

to gather precise spatio-temporal information about the players and 
equipment in real-time during the course of play. A variety of 
multi-camera tracking systems such as Hawk-Eye, K2 Panoramic 
Video system, Sportvision RACEf/x [Spo16b], PITCHfx/Statcast, 
SportVU, SportsCode, Catapult Sports’ OptimEye S5 [Cat18], 
and Dartfish c ollect t his f orm o f d ata. ( See [ DKVS14] for 
a comprehensive list and comparison). A common underlying 
motivation for sports visualization research is to make use of the 
unprecedentedly detailed datasets generated by these technologies. 
Figure 4 demonstrates the complexity of the data with a taxonomy 
of soccer tracking data provided by one of the major sports data 
collection companies [PVF13a].

3.3. Meta-Data

Box-score and tracking data capture specific matches and events in 
those matches. Beyond this, there is additional data that surrounds 
sports that can add context to these events. Such data might concern 
rules, stadium capacities, physical characteristics of players, kit 
colors, team badges, and sponsor information to name a few. The 
data may also come from less sports-exclusive domains such as 
social media activity during a game.

Meta-data can also generate meta-data, for example correlations 
between box-score and tracking data or factors such as stadium 
formats (see Figure 5), players’ diets, or weather conditions.

4. Visualization by type: Box-Score Data

We start our review with box-score data. 26 / 98 articles in our 
review focus solely on this type of sports data. The popularity of 
box-score data, in particular among practitioners, can be explained 
by its cheap and technology-independent means of acquisition. 
Although box-score data is often simple and small-scale, it is 
diverse and results in a wide variety of visualization approaches.



C. Perin & R. Vuillemot & C. D. Stolper & J. Stasko & J. Wood & S. Carpendale / Sports Data Visualization STAR

Figure 5: Visual comparison of baseball stadium
dimensions [Lou15] is an example of using meta-data to
understand the influence of a baseball game’s environment on
teams’ play. Image courtesy of the author, used with permission.

Allowing to navigate in the time dimension of tables. Because
standard ranking tables do not convey the time-evolving aspect
of championships [PVF14], existing work has looked into ways
of combining the well-established and widely used ranking tables
with visualizations that convey the changes over time.

In a series of works, Perin and Vuillemot [PVF14, VP15]
explored new interaction techniques for navigating into the
temporal dimension of ranking tables. Based on an analysis of
tasks that soccer journalists and enthusiasts seek to perform, they
proposed a way of interacting with the rank domain (such as the
number of points of a team at a given time) to explore the time
domain. They also proposed integrating a line chart visualization
into the table and offered a way of transitioning between the two
views [PVF14]. The authors further refined the technique to make
it possible to navigate into ranking tables at different points in
time by navigating directly along the trajectory of the rank of a
team [VP15].

Showing relative gaps. Ranking tables have historically laid out
all teams of a championship on a linear scale, i.e. with rows (teams)
being simply ordered by rank. Showing rankings that evolve over

Figure 6: The second half of the 2013–2014 Spanish Liga,
visualized using GapChart [PBV16]. At each matchday, the lines
representing the teams do not overlap. Teams that have the same
number of points at a given time are shown with no white space
between them. Thin gray lines indicate 3-point differences between
two consecutively ranked teams. Image courtesy of the authors,
used with permission.

time with a line graph then results in either a rank chart—where
the y axis is an ordinal axis that conveys rank—or a score chart—
where the y axis is a quantitative axis that conveys the result of the
score function used to determine the rankings [PBV16].

While rank charts do not convey the magnitude of the gaps (or
score differences) between teams, score charts convey these scores
but result in overplotting and overlapping lines. A way of tackling
this issue is to change the mapping on the y axis to convey not the
rank or score of each team over time but the relative distances that
separate the teams. This is particularly important when looking at
championship data as the gaps between teams has more importance
than the absolute score a team has. This technique facilitates: more
accurate predicting of the final championship rankings; reflection
on the full course of the competition; and comparison between the
variability of different leagues. Both gap charts [PV13,PBV16] (see
Figure 6) and Standings Tracer [Won16] (see Figure 7) take the
approach of conveying the relative score differences between teams
over time (note that their formulae for determining the mapping
on the y axis differ slightly). Both techniques also feature a focus
interaction to select a team and explore that team within the broader
context of a season (see Figure 8).



C. Perin & R. Vuillemot & C. D. Stolper & J. Stasko & J. Wood & S. Carpendale / Sports Data Visualization STAR

Figure 7: Standings Tracer [Won16] showing the relative points
of all teams in a championship over time. Image courtesy of the
author, used with permission.

Many infographics from online newspapers create comparisons
of players and teams by using multiple line charts. This is the case
with The New York Times’ Peyton Manning’s touchdown passes
record [AQ14]; Paths to the Top of the Home Run Charts [Tim07];
comparison of baseball players who reached 3000 hits in their
career [CQW11] or of NBA players in terms of number of points
scored during playoffs [Pea17]; and with the comparison of NBA
players performances in terms of points, rebounds, and assists
per game over the season [Gol17a]. One notable example of this
technique is Five Thirty Eight’s sumo project [Con16], showing
the history of sumo from 1761 to 2017, using overplotting of
line graphs with color coding and annotations. The density of
information in those visualizations creates a baseline that usually
gathers the majority of players from which a select few top
performers visually stand out.

Other visualizations besides line charts make use of overplotting,
such as scatterplots. For example, by overplotting all swimming
world records over time [Are17] one can explore how swimming
world records evolved across history, paces of change, and outliers.
The Berlin 2016 marathon visualization [TKW∗16] is another
example that shows all the runners participating in the race on a
single map. It is also possible to establish a goal and see where in
the pack of runners one would need to be to achieve that goal.

Visualizing all statistics. In the visualization community, some
complex exploratory tools support the analysis of scores, goals,
and points in sports. SportsVis’s baseline bar display [CS06]
makes it possible to explore the performance of baseball teams
or players over the course of one season. NBAVis [LSS13]
consists of a scatterplot with multiple dimensions such as team,
rebounds, assists, points, and blocks to explore NBA data. With
Buckets [Bes16] and BKViz [LTB16], it is possible to explore
the points a basketball team scored against each other team in
the league, among many other facets of the data. Chung et al.’s
knowledge-based ranking system features multiple coordinated
views to explore the multiple facets of rugby games [CPG∗16].
These approaches result in powerful tools in which many
dimensions can be explored simultaneously—as opposed to more
static infographics—but at the cost of being more complex to use.

Laying out in context. Often, sports visualizations that show
scores, goals, or points show these values within the broader
context of sport events (e. g., full games). For example, some sports
like tennis have their scoring structured hierarchically. A tennis
match consists of several sets, each set consists of several games,
and each game consists of several points. The outcome of a game
(who wins and who loses) follows this hierarchy, and the player
who scored the most points is not guaranteed to win the match. To
convey the bigger picture in which points are scored, treemaps have
been used for visualizing this natural hierarchy [JB97].

As another example, Chris Love used Tableau to show all the
shots on goal for all games of a Premier League’s championship
day [Lov15] (see Figure 10). The visualization shows a bar chart
where the x axis represents time and each bar represents a 5 minute
interval. The y axis—the length of each bar—encodes the shots
on goal. This visualization conveys the dynamics of each game by
showing important events (shots and goals) in the context of the
timeline of the game.

Figure 8: Standings Tracer’s [Won16] focus interaction. Selecting 
a team shows details about each game the team played during the 
championship. Color indicates the outcome of the game (win, loss, 
draw) and vertical lines connect the focus team’s line graph to 
their opponent for each match day. This creates a fishbone of the 
team that shows the “gaps” between the focus team and each of its 
opponents. Image courtesy of the author, used with permission.

4.2. Scores, Goals, and Points

Whether or not sports are framed within competitions, they obey 
specific rules. In many sports, t eams or players participating in a 
game or competition need to score points to win each game (e.g., 
score goals in soccer, score points in tennis). Within a competition, 
points may be attributed according to their performance towards 
the competition (e.g., three points for a victory in most soccer 
championships and points given to each participant in a decathlon 
after each of ten events).

Contextualizing by overplotting. Many visualizations are 
dedicated to record-breaking points and scores. For example, 
Stephen Curry’s 3-point record was put in context in one of The 
New York Times’ infographics [AQ16]. This line chart shows one 
line for each of the 752 players who finished i n t he t op-20 i n 3-
point attempts at the end of each season between 1980 and 2016. 
This visualization clearly shows how Stephen Curry is an outlier 
compared to the rest of the players, as he goes “off the charts”. 
A similar and at least as famous infographic shows Barry Bonds’s 
progress towards breaking the career home run record [CW06].



C. Perin & R. Vuillemot & C. D. Stolper & J. Stasko & J. Wood & S. Carpendale / Sports Data Visualization STAR

Figure 9: A History of Sumo [Con16] is a stylized interactive
visualization that presents the history of sumo using storytelling
and exploration capabilities. Image courtesy of the author, used
with permission.

Showing relative differences rather than absolute values.
In sports such as skiing, running, and racing, time is what
matters most. The New York Times showed how close to
winning participants were for each final of alpine skiing [Bou47],
bobsled, luge, speed skating, and skeleton for the 2014 Winter
Olympics [DQ14]. Instead of showing the absolute times of
participants, they show the time difference relative to the winner.
Relative times are particularly important in such sports where
differences are often matters of milliseconds. For such short
intervals, a sonification approach was used in the 2010 Winter
Olympics to grasp the scale of infinitesimal differences between
finish times [Ama10].

The New York Times also created an image showing all fastest
men in the world by year, since 1896, with their position on
the track at the time of the current world record [QR16a]. By
representing each data point with a sprinter, the image looks like
a photograph from the top of the track and the differences in
performances are easily apparent to the reader.

Figure 10: Small multiples of football games putting the shots and
goals in the context of soccer game timelines [Lov15] (cropped).
Image courtesy of the author, used with permission.

Figure 11: Relative time differences between each cyclist
participating in the race and the top performer at that
moment [Woo15]. Red lines encode cyclists who did not finish the
race. Image courtesy of the author, used with permission.

In the context of golf, multiple Slope Graphs [Tuf01] have
been used to show Tiger Woods’s difference in performance
compared to the rest of the world’s top golfers in non-major and
major tournaments [CNW08]. Once again, what matters is the
relative difference between Woods and the other players rather than
absolute numbers of strokes.

In the context of cyclist group racing, Wood created graphs (such
as the one shown in Figure 11) showing the relative difference
between each cyclist and the top performer at each point in time
of the race [Woo15].

5. Visualization by type: Tracking Data

Sports tracking data is a natural evolution of box-score data that
has become increasingly available due to recent advances in sensor
and video motion detection technologies [GH17]. The majority



C. Perin & R. Vuillemot & C. D. Stolper & J. Stasko & J. Wood & S. Carpendale / Sports Data Visualization STAR

Figure 12: Shot distribution and density in CourtVision [Gol12]. Sweet spots usually are below the hoop or behind the 3-point line. Image
courtesy of the author, used with permission.

While these aggregations approximate otherwise accurate data
(e.g. shots), they have been used to identify players’ roles and
teams’ systems. For instance, “spray charts” [DKVS14] show
where balls have been hit to—creating spatial groupings of hits that
highlights areas of the field where events happen frequently.

Other variants of density maps include radial heatmaps to show
ice hockey shots [PSBS12]. Density maps are often decorated
with landmarks from the field of play—such as formalized line
schemes—to provide scale and contextualize the data within the
game’s rules. In some cases, landmarks visually emerge on their
own due to data distribution. In CourtVision [Gol12], the 3-point
line appears due to the lack of shots just inside it (see Figure 12).

Events representation. Despite events having strong ties with
their (x,y) position, they are often best represented with position
in the display encoding task-dependent attributes. For example,
baseball hit analysis has found that the combination of ball exit
velocity and launch angle determines whether a hit will likely be a
home run [Art16] (see Figure 13). A connected scatterplot by time
allows the visualization’s user to easily detect increases in average
kick distance and field-goal percentage of kickers in American
Football [Mor16a] (see Figure 14). GameFlow provides a grouping
of events over time [CLX∗16] to reveal patterns and similarities in
sequences and sub-sequences. Events can also be locally grouped,
such as using a K-means algorithm to group Rodger Federer’s
similar tennis shots [Dem13]. Passes can be represented as a
network such as for the 2012 NFL championship [Gol13]. Cycling
time trials have been represented using a matrix to visually compare
time series [BBW16].

Trajectories. Trajectories result from the connection of discrete
spatio-temporal events of the same entity. For instance, they might
represent the spatio-temporal movement of players, balls, or other
equipment during a game.

Trajectories are the second most frequent way of plotting raw
tracking data and conveying the temporal and sequential structure
of events [POJC01, MCHD12, SSN∗16, JSS∗14]. In their raw
format, players’ trajectories resemble random scribble. However,

of the articles we collected (55 / 98) make use of tracking data, 
for example to track player positions on a field, b all s peed, and 
path after a shot. Tracking data usually consists of series of 
spatio-temporal events at a very fine grain of detail, with multiple 
dimensions such as player identities and type of action. The data 
scales with the number of games or players or by adding more 
sensors and cameras.

Because the data is spatio-temporal, it is not necessarily directly 
governed by the rules of the game. This is the primary difference 
as compared with box-score data which are summaries of events 
dictated by sports rules. Notably, new box-score data metrics—
e. g., “Contested Points” and “Expected Goals”—can be derived 
from tracking data like shot attempts, player movements without 
the ball, or ball trajectories that did not result in a score change.

The richness and density of tracking data raises other challenges 
than the ones of box-score data, often involving some combination 
of algorithms, data mining, and visualization. In this section we 
separate general work in visualization of events and trajectories 
(often adopting a third-person perspective on the data) from work 
dedicated to representing the data from the players’ point of view 
(often adopting a first-person perspective on the data).

5.1. Events and Trajectories

Event density map. The most straightforward way to plot raw 
tracking data is as events on a dot map, such as hit balls on 
a baseball pitch [DKVS14, MB13, LOC∗16]. Although simple, 
dot maps provide enough details to characterize players’ abilities 
and are a natural representations of ball trajectory origins or 
targets. Interestingly, they are commonly used as a visual signature 
characterizing a player or a team [Bes16] for complex play 
analysis [DKVS14].

Variations of density maps include using spatial binning [Gol12] 
to generate discretized heat maps using a preset color scale. The 
field i s p artitioned i nto r egular a reas w hich a re e ach a ssigned a 
color according to the number of events that occurred in that area.



C. Perin & R. Vuillemot & C. D. Stolper & J. Stasko & J. Wood & S. Carpendale / Sports Data Visualization STAR

Figure 13: A sweet spot appears when coloring ball hits by scoring
value, which reveals the right trade off between ball velocity and
angle. From Five Thirty Eight [Art16]. Image courtesy of the
author, used with permission.

some specific events are already recognizable, such as corner
kicks in soccer [Sus06]. T-patterns [BJM02] aim at enhancing
the presentation of spatial events by grouping them as zones.
Interesting patterns are frequent connections of zones by the same
player. Shorter trajectories (trails) also aim at reducing visual
clutter, and are used in sports when entities are simultaneously
moving such as during boat races [BC16], soccer games [AAB∗16]
(see Figure 15), or swimming races [CM16]. Trajectories are often
used as visual signatures of phases of play [MLM∗17, PVF13b].
These small multiples can represent segmented and abstracted
sports events, such as football catches [Tim17], which then act as
small visual summaries of particular game events.

Trails can convey movement in motion charts [MMZ17], and
further be used as visual signatures of teams tactics [SJL∗16].
Based on these trajectories, it is possible to compute and visualize
new data such as players’ “interaction spaces”—“duel areas”

Figure 14: A connected scatterplot shows trends over time. In
this case, it emphasizes that kickers are taking longer attempts
than ever. From Five Thirty Eight [Mor16a]. Image courtesy of the
author, used with permission.

Figure 15: Soccer pressure is illustrated by trails showing the
pressure zone of the defense against the opponents [AAB∗16].
Image courtesy of the authors, used with permission.

between players of two opposite teams [SJB∗16] (see Figure 16)
and pressure against adversaries [AAB∗16, SJL∗18, AAB∗17]. It
also makes it possible to classify the types of passes that soccer
players make during a game [CEGH17].

A particular use of trajectories is for movement deconstruction,
following a step-by-step analysis of complex sequences of actions
such as those of a basketball rebound [MCHD12]. In a similar
fashion, trails can emphasize a single movement. During the



C. Perin & R. Vuillemot & C. D. Stolper & J. Stasko & J. Wood & S. Carpendale / Sports Data Visualization STAR

Figure 16: Each circle represents a player. The radius of a circle
represents the player’s “interaction space”, and the color of the
circle encodes the team of the player. Hatching patterns show the
potential “duel areas” of several players [SJB∗16]. Image courtesy
of the authors, used with permission.

levels of spatio-temporal abstraction to simplify smoothing the
trajectories [SAMS∗17] (see Figure 18).

Detailed events with context. Besides space and time data,
complex descriptors such as the ones listed in Figure 4 provide
hundreds of ways a ball can be kicked or a player can behave
with it. SoccerStories [PVF13b] (see Figure 19) represents complex
multivariate records of each time the ball is kicked. While most
visualizations apply the same representation to an entire dataset,
their approach is to simplify such data using visual aggregation,
where different visualizations are used piece-wise. Visualizations
are organized on a spatial layout, and are centered where actions
from the subsets spatially occur.

Real-time. As tracking technologies offer a real-time data feed,
player position tracking can be broadcasted and analyzed live.
Both Matchpad [LCP∗12] and the exploration of the design space
of glyphs in rubgy [CLP∗15] summarize players’ events in a
compact display using glyphs to track and categorize plays. Both
approaches provide a more effective sequence of events than the
more standard textual play-by-play sequences of game events. In
particular, it requires less attention when monitoring and provides
compact game summaries. Major League Baseball Advanced
Media’s Gameday technology [MLB17] allows fans to see the
trajectory and type of each pitch in real-time, and recent work
augments the video stream of a soccer game with visualizations
to convey the dynamics of the game [SJL∗18].

5.2. Players’ Point of View

First-person. While trajectories offer a bird’s eye view on players,
changing the point of view to the players’ one allows viewers
to understand the difficulty of a shot or a hit. A first-person
point of view—such as a soccer goalkeeper’s [RSB11], a baseball
hitter [RCW10], or a baseball catcher [MLB17]—changes the
camera and perspective on the data to orient the viewer to the
way players experience the event. Events appear either as animated
playback to re-create an actual play or as static heat maps
with shot distributions such as tennis ball trajectories [ySS13].
First-person points of view usually include 3D objects such
as a goalkeeper [RSB11] or a batter’s silhouette and stadium
features [MLB17] to suggest a more realistic environment.

Embedded tracking and visualization. Short feedback loops
are important during any learning process. Several efforts have
been made to provide those to players during training routines.
Kaplan et al. display pedal pressure on training bikes [KYY∗16]
to optimize effort and prevent injuries. Treadmill screens can also
provide real-time feedback to runners [CMHD10]. The use of
small, portable devices such as wrist-bands to detect activity in
basketball [BEA16] also provides individual feedback. Equipment
can also be used as a ubiquitous mechanism to broadcast game-
related data, such as heart rate data on a bicycle helmet [WWM13].
Most of these visualizations display data as numbers using no
encoding. Besides performance indicators, traditional events such
as scores on a display on a basketball hoop [CM13] or win/loss on
jerseys [PM07] have been shown to provide better competition and
engagement among players. GPS systems in racing cars [Spo16b]
now collect speed, acceleration, time behind leader, amongst other

Figure 17: A penalty shooter’s point of view is reconstructed 
in 3D, showing her favorite target areas around the 
goalkeeper [RSB11]. Image courtesy of the authors, used 
with permission.

2016 Olympics, Simone Biles’s complex and fast-paced gymnastic 
movements [The16] were highlighted using a trails overlay atop the 
original video footage enabling visual persistence of multiple parts 
of her body during her routine.

Finally, one of the challenges with spatio-temporal trajectories 
within a bounded area such as a pitch is that representing an 
entire game or even just a subset of a game quickly results in 
overplotting, or ‘spaghetti’ representations. Tackling this issue is a 
hot topic in sports visualization, in particular, but also in visualizing 
spatio-temporal trajectories in general. For example, using different



C. Perin & R. Vuillemot & C. D. Stolper & J. Stasko & J. Wood & S. Carpendale / Sports Data Visualization STAR

Figure 18: Representing spatio-temporal trajectories of soccer players in detail, after simplification and aggregation [SAMS∗17]. Image
courtesy of the authors, used with permission.

Figure 19: SoccerStories [PVF13b] is the spatial connection
of charts for the visual decomposition of a soccer phase. Image
courtesy of the authors, used with permission.

data that together provide monitoring data for mechanical assistants
to anticipate repairs and prevent accidents.

6. Visualization by Type: Meta-Data

Sports meta-data provides content and context details for the two
sports data types, box-score and tracking data. Meta-data can
be closely related to the sport event. This includes the physical
characteristics of players or the dimensions of the grounds. Meta-
data can also be loosely related to the main sport activity. This
includes Tweets or TV programs, which provide a proxy for sport
activities. Sports meta-data does not have a particular data type, but
has to be related to other data, which could include player identities,
time, or location.

Meta-data goes beyond just providing context: it is often
the object of research itself as it provides interesting data
structures (e. g., trees, graphs) that require new visualizations and
interactions. Meta-data can also be seen as an empty shell, similar
to an empty box score paper, that is filled with observed or
predicted data.

22 / 98 articles we collected visualize meta-data, making this

type of sports data the least represented among of the three.
However, because meta-data is also very diverse, visualizations
of meta-data vary a lot. We structure our discussion of sports
meta-data along three categories. First we discuss the visualization
of sports, players and games characteristics such as physical
landmarks on a pitch; then the visualization of players and teams
performance such as team tactics; and then the visualization of
competition structure and the thoroughly studied visualization of
tournament brackets, in particular.

6.1. Sports, Players, and Game Characteristics

Meta-data plays an important role to convey a sport’s identity and
rules. Such information is needed to understand the importance
of some events. For example, during a soccer game a foul in the
penalty area has the risk of resulting in a penalty shot for the other
team. Thus, such visual cues such as the boundaries of a field
that players experience in reality are often replicated within the
visualizations using the same codes.

Sport recognition. As we previously discussed, event data alone
is sometimes enough to distinguish the sport itself. For example,
this is the case for shots around a basketball hoop [Gol12]. The
background pitch with recognizable landmarks is probably the
most common way to tell which sport has been picked if this cannot
simply be inferred. Additional landmarks can be added, such as
those specific to sport events like a trophy showing for the UEFA
Champion’s League [Won13] or the FIFA World Cup [VP16].

Players and Teams Differentiation. Differentiating teams
and players is crucial. In sports with two opponents, a
differential color scheme can be used to differentiate entities.
When multiple teams or players are involved, teams’ semantic
colors [Won13, PVF14] are used. These semantic colors originate
from commonly associated colors (like the blues of Chelsea in
soccer) or as representative colors from the badges that are teams’
symbols [SM14]. Meta-data can also be used to critically discuss
a sport in the context of more general topics. For example,
showing the nationality of athletes for major sports league in North
America and Europe over time shows how the sports have evolved
throughout history [Ais17].

Game highlights. Sports events rarely are distributed uniformly



C. Perin & R. Vuillemot & C. D. Stolper & J. Stasko & J. Wood & S. Carpendale / Sports Data Visualization STAR

Figure 20: Breakthrough champions are getting older. From Five
Thirty Eight [Mor16b]. Image courtesy of the authors, used with
permission.

characteristic inside teams. However, these affinities may not only
stem from the team they are evolving, for example when players
evolve with their national team for international competitions but
with their club for the majority of their playing time [Ais14].
Further connections between teams’ popularity and spectators can
be deduced from which games are televised in prime time in which
locations [Gol15].

Expected performance. Meta-data include predictors of
someone’s ability to perform well at a given sport. Several
visualizations show how NFL teams perform in terms of draft
picking. Some compare the position in the draft (the earlier picked,
the most successful the player is expected to be) and actual
(subjective) career success estimation [MLBG16]. Others provide
means of discussing successes and failures using storytelling
strategies [Gol17b].

Players’ age is a powerful predictor of within what range players
will display their full abilities. Figure 20 shows the age of tennis
tournament winners in relation with expected performances for a
given age [Mor16b]. Salary is also an indicator of the magnitude of
expectation for a given team at a given time, as one might expect
the market value of a player or team to be proportional to their or
its current or potential performance [Fry05]. Surprisingly, although
betting is an important activity around sports, we did not find any
sports data visualization making use of betting picks to visually
track a player or a team outcome.

6.3. Competition Structure

Tournament trees describe competitions and are the second-most
widely used competition structure behind rankings. A tournament

over time, and not all events are of equal interest, or value. An 
important body of research, especially in computer vision, uses 
video footage to detect potentially interesting sequences or errors. 
These algorithms are based on action detection [HBC09]—which is 
classic tracking data—but also using other individuals than players 
such as the referee of a game [CVS16]. Twitter can also be a 
proxy to quantify excitement during soccer games [Won13]. Peaks 
on social media usually reflect i mportant events s uch a s s hots or 
missed shots. Using the volume of tweets over time has been 
used to plot sentiment changes in Tweets [HHEM∗16] or to create 
physical data sculptures to convey the popular response to Olympic 
Games in The Emoto exhibit [DMS12].

6.2. Players’ and Teams’ Performance

Meta-data may augment sports data with details that are not 
captured by collected data and that can be used to create 
performance indicators.

Player performances. A player’s physical abilities can be 
a predictor of performance for individual sports. However, 
team sports require additional skills such as synchronization, 
communication, and anticipation. The plus-minus indicator 
quantifies t he p ositive o r n egative i ntervention o n a  fi eld by 
visualizing the change of score when a player is in the game or 
not [Jos14]. Such indicator is helpful but requires alignment with 
other data sources such as game recaps to identify if the player is 
actually involved or not in the score change. A team’s performance 
versus adversaries can be represented as temporal glyphs in a 
soccer matrix [CF13], which is a permutation of all possible games 
showing both results and progress of a championship.

It is sometimes necessary to add an additional entity that was 
not directly involved in a game as baseline for comparison. For 
example, using an ordinary, non-professional human [NFL15] or 
animal for speed scale. While this scale anchoring mechanism 
is recommended to grasp magnitudes variations and complex 
units [CVG13], especially by using physical objects from a 
similar domain, in sport it can be confusing to scale one 
sport using elements from another. For example, basketball 
landmarks have been used for scale to compare men’s long jump 
medalists [QR16b]. This results in a confusing visualization as 
it makes it look like basketball shots are plotted and compared 
when this is not the case. Another type of baseline is referring 
to world-class sportsmen and sportswomen such as Stephen 
Curry [AQ16], Simone Biles [The16], Mariano Rivera [RCW10], 
or Tony Parker [Gol14] as ceilings or outliers for performance 
indicator values.

Team tactics and affinities. Each team has i ts own fashion of 
play. The most famous case is the Brazilian men’s national soccer 
team with high-skilled players who, without playing a particular 
system, have a unique and enjoyable play signature. Many efforts 
have been devoted to identifying team styles [BLC∗14] and 
spatial structures [FMBG15] using non-play events such as coach 
decisions, changes during games, and inter-individual patterns such 
as positioning or marking. Networks of passes [DWA10] also 
provide indicators on the team’s structure while also showing 
success probability. Affinities between players is an important



C. Perin & R. Vuillemot & C. D. Stolper & J. Stasko & J. Wood & S. Carpendale / Sports Data Visualization STAR

Figure 21: AdaptiviTree [TSLR07] for visualizing prediction
correctness on top of a tournament bracket using colored bars.
Image courtesy of the authors, used with permission.

(not a tournament tree) may start with a first phase, which is a mini-
championship where small numbers of teams play against each
other in a preliminary phase. In a tournament tree, or knock-out
phase, two teams face each other at each stage of the tournament
and only the winner progresses to the next stage.

Typical examples of tournament trees are tennis tournaments
and NBA playoffs. Note that while in tennis tournaments, players
play only one game to determine who progresses to the next stage,
other formats exist. For example, in the NBA playoffs, teams
face each other several times until one of the two teams wins a
pre-determined number of games. In the European Champions’
League, teams face twice—one home game and one away game for
each team—and a set of rules determines which team progresses to
the next stage.

Visualizing the tree structure of tournaments. Tournament
trees have historically been represented graphically in their
simplest form and printed on paper. While the structure is
not space-efficient, it makes it possible to show both the
individual games and the different stages of the tournament in one
visualization. This enables tracking the path of a specific player or
team.

Wongsuphasawat [Won13] designed a tree visualization of a
soccer tournament based on Twitter data (see Figure 22). The
New York Times infographics “Mapping Every Path to the NFL
Playoffs” [QW14] uses trees to show all the possible paths of
NFL teams that were in the race to the playoffs in 2014. This
infographics was used to explain the many ways a team can reach
the playoffs such as teams that get a week of rest and teams that
host the first of their playoff game.

Supporting tournament predictions. Tournament trees have
been used for supporting predictions. With iSee [STL09]
and AdaptiviTree [TSLR07], researchers have investigated
space-efficient tree visualizations for tournament-style brackets.
Figure 21 shows an AdaptiviTree of teams participating in
the NCAA men’s basketball tournament. This visualization was
designed to convey additional information on top of the tournament
bracket. Specifically, in the context of online pick’em games,
people predict the outcomes of games. AdaptiviTree shows the
correctness of the predictions with colored bars on top of a
tournament bracket.

Five Thirty Eight published an interactive visualization of
tournament brackets and forecast [Sil16] that shows the round-
by-round probabilities of teams to win the 2016 NCAA men’s
basketball tournament (see Figure 23).

Making tournament predictions has also been investigated from
an input perspective. Vuillemot and Perin [VP16] explored the
direct manipulation of tournament brackets to support people
making their predictions using a visualization interface (see
Figure 24). Instead of specifying with text or standard widgets
which team progresses to the next stage of the tournament, users
directly drag and drop teams to any stage of the tournament bracket.
The visualization also shows all the possible paths for each team in
the bracket.

7. Discussion and Perspectives

In addition to coding for the sports and data types, we identified
the types of contribution and the evaluation methods of research
papers. This provided a starting point for identifying emerging
trends. Further, we discuss points that are raised by our review
of the literature through the dual lens of sports data and research
contributions and evaluations. We go on to emphasize challenges
of sports data visualization, limitations in existing research, and
opportunities for future work for sports data visualization in
particular and for visualization in general.

7.1. Contributions and Evaluations

The research contribution columns of Figure 2 lists the types
of research contributions we found in the research papers, based
on the IEEE Infovis 2017 paper types [IEE17]. The evaluation
columns of Figure 2 lists all the evaluation methods we found
when reviewing the research literature. Note that the contribution
and evaluation categories are not mutually exclusive, as a
research paper in sports data visualization usually makes several
contributions and can contain several evaluation methods.

Maybe the most valuable aspect of sports data for the research



C. Perin & R. Vuillemot & C. D. Stolper & J. Stasko & J. Wood & S. Carpendale / Sports Data Visualization STAR

Figure 22: All the games of the UEFA Champion’s League visualized using the tree structure of the tournament. Individual games encode
Twitter data to convey the excitement at each time [Won13]. Image courtesy of the author, used with permission.

Figure 24: Tournament brackets are meta-data that can be used
to support an intuitive prediction-making process, by dragging
and dropping teams according to their expected performance in
the competition [VP16]. Image courtesy of the authors, used with
permission.

multiples and glyphs (e.g., [HZ16, LCP∗12, CPG∗16, CF13,
PYHZ14], treemaps (e.g., [JB97, CS06, Tur94], arc diagrams
(e.g., [OJK13]), parallel coordinates (e.g., [OJK13, CPG∗16],
and line charts (e.g., [Woo15, PBV16, Won16]). For the same
reasons, sports data visualization is also propitious to the
design of new interaction techniques. There has, for example,
been work on sketch and pattern recognition for querying
spatio-temporal trajectories [SSN∗16, MWA∗01] and interaction

Figure 23: 2016 March Madness Predictions [Sil16] showing 
the probability of teams to win the 2016 NCAA men’s basketball 
tournament. Probabilities are represented using the stroke width of 
the path that connects one team to the trophy. Image courtesy of the 
authors, used with permission.

community is its wide variety. Data varies across sports, may be 
incomplete and uncertain, and can come in few values or consist 
of billions of data points. Tasks that sports experts seek to perform 
are not straightforward and often require tailored designs that do 
not generalize to other sports or even other contexts within a same 
sport. As a result, with few exceptions (e.g., [PBV16, TSLR07, 
PYHZ14]), most of the research papers we surveyed do not 
contribute a new generic technique but instead a tailored adaptation 
of an existing one. The most frequent visualization technique 
extensions we found were of node-link graphs (e.g., [PVF13b]), 
heatmaps (e.g., [PSBS12, Gol12, Bes16, AAB∗16, MB13]), small



C. Perin & R. Vuillemot & C. D. Stolper & J. Stasko & J. Wood & S. Carpendale / Sports Data Visualization STAR

techniques were designed specifically for performing sports-
specific tasks (e.g., [PBV16, CS06, PVF14, VP15, VP16]).

The process of designing visualization and interaction
techniques for sports data requires a deep understanding of
sports. However, sports has the useful property that everyone
can be an expert, and academics conducting research in the area
are usually passionate and knowledgeable about sports. This
explains why we found several research papers that did not include
any collaboration with sports experts. Instead, researchers used
their own expertise to state required tasks or build scenarios to
demonstrate the soundness and usefulness of their approaches
(e.g., [Gol12, JB97, HZ16, Bes16, CLX∗16]). Figure 2 highlights
the variety of evaluation methods that can be employed in sports
data visualization. These range from collaborations with sports
actors to conduct case studies, to quantitative in-lab studies,
to ad-hoc scenarios that illustrate the value of a technique or
algorithm.

In our review, the most common method for evaluating
visualization and interaction techniques is by conducting case
studies that involve sports collaborators (e.g., [PVF13b, PYHZ14,
PSBS12, PM07, SJB∗16, WLS∗18, SAMS∗17]). This is usually
made possible when the research project involved sports
collaborators from the beginning. This type of process results in
a design study [SMM12] where typically sports professionals and
visualization researchers work together to understand a problem
and propose a possible visualization solution. Exploring the
problem space often involves a tasks and requirements analysis
to better understand what the coaches, supporters, journalists,
or analysts seek to achieve. Design studies and tasks and
requirements analyses are an important part of sports visualization
research. These contributions bring new knowledge to the field of
visualization as they provide a deep understanding of a domain.
This new knowledge then serves as a basis for the visualization
community to explore further research directions.

Though sometimes directly applying an existing visualization
technique or a slight variation of it is enough to address some needs,
the solution space can be much bigger. In this case, exploring the
design space of the particular problem or solution is a generative
approach that expands the knowledge in the field (e.g., [CLP∗15]).
This is particularly true when it comes to less explored areas of
visualization research. For example, when designing visualizations
that integrate into the context of use, researchers have explored
design spaces in the context of situated sports data collection
and visualization (e.g., [PM07, CM13, KYY∗16, WWM13]) and
of the creation of physical artifacts representing sports data
(e.g., [STS∗14, LCN15]). Design space explorations can involve a
wide variety of evaluation methods, including field studies [VP15,
STS∗14, LCN15, DMS12], scenarios [Gol12, MWA∗01], case
studies [PSBS12, VP15, CM13], and quantitative studies [PM07,
VP16].

Visualization techniques are the most frequent contributions,
yet there are other, equally important, facets to sports data
visualization. These include algorithms, which can help with
gathering new tracking data (e.g. [BEA16]), computing new meta-
data (e.g., [FMBG15, DWA10]), and more generally compute new
derived data by aggregating existing data (e.g., [AAB∗16, BJM02,

MCHD12]). Algorithms can also help model sports, usually by
leveraging expert knowledge (e.g., [CPG∗16, SHJ∗15]). We found
that the most common way of evaluating algorithms is through
scenarios based on real data but not involving sports actors
(e.g., [Dem13, BJM02, MCHD12, DWA10, BLC∗14]). We also
found a handful of papers that propose a taxonomy or model of a
particular aspect of sports (e.g., [JSS∗14,SHJ∗15,PM06,SJS∗17]).
These papers are less tailored to a specific type of data or sport and
tend to be more general.

7.2. The Role of Visualization in Sports

The two widely recognized uses of visualization are analytical (or
exploratory) and narrative (or communicative). When visualization
is used for analytical purposes, people typically seek to gain a
better understanding of the data and its characteristics, learn about
the phenomena modeled by the data, and gain insights about
events captured through the data. Ultimately, knowledge gained
from the data may be put to use for future decision-making and
modifying performance. Narrative uses of visualization revolve
around presenting data in a manner that is more easily understood
and communicated. An ideal narrative visualization quickly allows
the viewer to interpret the different cases and variables within a
data set to see how they relate and to comprehend potential bigger
picture messages. We find that visualizations of sports data are used
widely for both these high-level purposes, though perhaps more
commonly for communication and presentation.

Sports data visualizations used for analytical purposes focus
on understanding an individual’s or a team’s performance. If the
consumer of a visualization is a third-party analyst, then the
investigator may be seeking to learn why an individual is successful
in their sport or why a team has been losing so frequently. In some
cases, the analyst may have specific hypotheses about performance
and it may be possible to check them via statistical methods or data
mining. However, the analyst may not harbor any initial suspicions
about the data and may simply be seeking to explore it to discover
unexpected insights. If the consumer of a visualization is an athlete
or performer themself, then it is likely that the person is seeking to
improve their performance and ultimately win more.

For example, consider visualizations of teams’ shot patterns
in basketball [Gol12]. Visualizations can demonstrate teams’
tendencies and where the team is successful in shooting. Similarly,
in American football, in any particular situation a team has
hundreds of different plays to choose from and call. Very likely,
teams follow patterns and have “favorite” plays to call in specific
situations of field position and game score. Visualizations could
communicate tendencies and patterns in these play selections. In
tennis, what type of shot does a player typically hit given different
styles of opponent shots? In soccer, what style of build-up and
attack is more likely to lead to fruitful offensive possessions and,
ultimately, goals? Where on the field do these attacks originate and
flow and which players are involved [PVF13b, AAB∗16]?

Visualizations used in these ways are potentially beneficial in
scouting situations. A sports actor may be seeking to understand
an opponent’s tendencies and behaviors in order to develop their
own strategies for competing against those tendencies. Alternately,



C. Perin & R. Vuillemot & C. D. Stolper & J. Stasko & J. Wood & S. Carpendale / Sports Data Visualization STAR

this intersection. The velocity of the data and the many possibilities
result in keeping this area under-explored. Again, this is not
specific to sports (e. g., in economics countries can split, merge,
or disappear) but it does arise in this context.

7.4. Data Quality and Data Volume

A common theme in sports visualization research is that sports
data visualization suffers from many of the same challenges as
any other domain-focused visualization research. One of the ways
that this manifests itself is in the quality of the data available.
Box-score data is the gold standard as they officially track wins,
losses, and records in both professional and recreational leagues,
and therefore the data can be relied upon to be relatively accurate.
Similarly, sensor-derived tracking data can be considered accurate
within the limits the manufacturer specifies. In some cases this
tracking data is now used to derive box-score data. There are still
many challenges related to the accuracy of box-score data that still
involves subjective interpretation and to the accuracy of tracking
data that is collected from multiple, heterogeneous sources that is
sometimes difficult to combine.

One challenge beyond accuracy is in the wealth of data beyond
these two categories. We mentioned that tracking data produces
more accurate and higher-volume data at a lower cost than box-
score data. This is true for sensor-based tracking data (the majority
of tracking data) in the long run; however, these sensor systems
have a large upfront cost in purchasing and installing the systems.
Therefore, high-quality tracking data usually only exists for the
highest levels of professional sports. Recreational leagues and
lower-level professional leagues can buy access to the data on the
high-level leagues, but often do not have access to this same data for
their own athletes [LM16]. For example, as Pileggi et al. [PSBS12]
discuss, not all tracking data is sensor-derived. They dealt with a
tracking dataset that was derived from human inspection, rather
than from camera-based sensors. Thus, rather than the inches or
centimeter accuracy provided by camera-based sensors, accuracy
was at the foot granularity. Similarly, accurate meta-data, such
as stadium capacities or player weights, is sometimes harder to
acquire or will be at a coarser granularity than desired.

If and when tracking data is collected, there are still the
challenges that come from visualizing large volumes of data. The
work by the annual LDAV Symposium has worked to address
the challenges of visualizing massive data sets. These challenges
include accessing the data efficiently in a database, the additional
costs of preprocessing that are ignored with smaller data sets, and
handling noise in the sensor readings. Sports visualization can be
a useful testbed for these techniques as they are researched and
developed.

7.5. Missing Benchmark Datasets

A standard approach to demonstrating a research community
has reached a certain level of structure and gains in maturity
are reference data sets for comparison. For example, the Iris or
Cars data sets are often included with novel, general-purpose
visualization tools. These otherwise simple data sets have obvious

a performer may be self-scouting, that is, learning about their own 
behaviors and performance to optimize chances of success, move 
away from actions leading to failures, or to counter developing 
patterns that may be identified by opponents and used against them.

Sports data visualizations used for narrative purposes 
leverage the tremendous popularity of sports today. Billions of 
people worldwide likely have at least a passing interest in some 
sport, be it as a participant or spectator. Fans want to know why 
particular individuals and teams are successful, or, even more 
simply, they may seek to stay abreast of standings and performance. 
Statistics have played a huge role for this purpose in the past, 
but today’s information consumer is more sophisticated. Effective 
visualizations can communicate nuances of performance data that 
cannot be conveyed easily by statistics.

One common narrative sports visualization is the presentation 
of standings. Depicting teams’ positions in soccer leagues or 
tables [PBV16, VP16, Won16], bike racers positions at all the 
moments of a race [BW14, Woo15], or basketball teams’ progress 
through a bracket [Sil16] all have been explored using different 
visualization techniques. Visualization seems particularly well-
suited to communicating geographic-relevant aspects of sports 
data that are so common. Two- and three-dimensional diagrams 
correspond to the playing fields, pitches, courts, tracks, and courses 
that are pervasive in sports. Such visualizations are easy for 
consumers to interpret and understand, making the translation from 
data to representation especially meaningful.

7.3. Combining Data Types

In performing this first, detailed review of current work in sports 
data visualization, we arrived at a classification v ia t he data type 
itself. This stresses the fact that most work considers only one type 
of data, with only a few exceptions including more than one type 
of data. This is true for academic work as much as for practitioner 
work.

One major difference that we observed between practitioner and 
academic work is that while practitioners make use of box-score, 
tracking, and meta-data in comparable proportions, academics 
focus much more on tracking data (see Figure 1).

A possible explanation is that research is driven by newly 
available sources of data. Another explanation could be that box-
score data and meta-data are perceived as being more ‘solved’ 
issues than tracking data. There is, however, evidence from the 
works we reviewed that plenty of research on task analyses as well 
new visualization and interaction techniques has yet to conducted 
for both box-score and meta-data. Further, work combining all 
three data types is nearly non-existent, making this a promising 
avenue for the future of sports visualization.

Of particular note is the absence of box-score and tracking 
data being combined in a single visualization in our collection. 
There is, for instance, no work on time evolving detailed events 
(such as shots attempts in soccer) or how particular detailed 
events influenced t he o utcome o f a  g ame a nd e ven t he winner 
of a tournament. Changes in rules, personal, and/or league-
membership can also make it difficult to compare information at



C. Perin & R. Vuillemot & C. D. Stolper & J. Stasko & J. Wood & S. Carpendale / Sports Data Visualization STAR

Figure 25: Stylized and annotated cycling elevation map [Woo15]. Image courtesy of the author, used with permission.

characteristics a novel visualization should be able to communicate
and that experts know to look for.

With sports data, we have observed little use of similar datasets
across projects, besides by the same authors. It seems there is a
constant quest for most recent data. For instance, a ranking of 2012
soccer teams in the UK does not draw the same attention as a
ranking of 2018 teams. By using the most recent data, viewers are
more likely to contexualize the data with recent events and better
understand the visualization, rather than depending on memory
recall or additional resources. There is also a race for richer, more
complex data, which make retro-comparison nearly impossible as
both new attributes and higher detail usually cannot be acquired for
older datasets.

One root cause of this is that “Sports” is a multi-billion dollar
industry. While sports fans sometimes like to enjoy attending
games as a hobby, the amount of money in play means that
gaining a competitive advantage over rival teams or athletes can
be significantly financially beneficial. Conversely, giving away a
competitive advantage to a rival is financially detrimental. This has
some notable benefits, such as a better “product on the pitch” for the
fans and improved tracking technologies for teams. Unfortunately,
this same competition discourages creation of open data sets
or sharing of research findings, two cornerstones of academic
research. We have seen this already with high costs for accessing
relatively cheaply-obtained tracking data and limitations on sharing
that data. One exciting possibility, however, is to explore new
visualizations and algorithmic approaches to sports analytics using

e-sports data [May]. E-sports also gather millions of enthusiasts
and e-sports data shares the same characteristics as physical sports.
The main difference is that e-sports data is more complete, more
accurate, and easier to collect than sports data. This makes e-sports
not only a domain with a bright future for visualization and visual
analytics, but also a potential solution for bypassing the challenge
of benchmark datasets in sports, at least temporarily.

7.6. Beyond Competition

An often forgotten facet of sports is their enjoyable nature. Sports
are commonly practiced outside a competitive environment for
physical and mental wellness.

In the context of cycling events, Wood [Woo15] created stylized
and annotated elevation maps like the one shown in Figure 25.
These maps not only display the data objectively, they also
become artwork that reflect a personal experience. The annotations
reinforce this connection between the cyclist’s personal experience
of the race and the raw tracking data. In a personal context, Wood
highlights the need for both personal and synoptic visualization
design. Sports records are beaten every year as technology and
scientific advances progress; an individual performance is often
either emphasized or de-emphasized by the teammates of the
individual and the level of the opponents; geographic location
plays a crucial role in major sports events (e.g., who is hosting
the world cup will usually be among the favorites to win the
title). Designing visualizations that are simultaneously relatable to
individuals while still providing context around the individual—



C. Perin & R. Vuillemot & C. D. Stolper & J. Stasko & J. Wood & S. Carpendale / Sports Data Visualization STAR

exploration of the value of leveraging these data types in context
of each other.

Furthermore, our classifications of sports visualizations by the
type of research contribution they have made similarly provides
actionable insights on how the research in information visualization
can better be combined with sports data. For example, a clear
call for more interaction research, space for taxonomies of
sports visualizations, and for deploying field studies. The growing
challenges and opportunities we have described for collecting,
visualizing, and analyzing sports data, for both competitive and
recreational purposes, are some of the many avenues for future
work in sports visualization.

9. acknowledgements

We are grateful to all the authors who gave us permission to re-use
their images in this publication. We also thank the organizers of the
1st Workshop on Sports Data Visualization [BCC∗13]; the editors
of the Sports Data Visualization special issue [BS16]; and all
academics and practitioners who promote sports data visualization
in their practice. This work has been partially supported by program
“Investissements d’Avenir” from Université de Lyon program
(ANR-11-IDEX-0007).

References
[AAB∗16] ANDRIENKO G., ANDRIENKO N., BUDZIAK G., VON

LANDESBERGER T., WEBER H.: Exploring Pressure in Football. 10,
15, 16

[AAB∗17] ANDRIENKO G., ANDRIENKO N., BUDZIAK G., DYKES J.,
FUCHS G., VON LANDESBERGER T., WEBER H.: Visual analysis
of pressure in football. Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery 31, 6
(2017), 1793–1839. 10

[Ais14] AISCH G.: The Clubs That Connect The World Cup. The New
York Times (June 2014). 13

[Ais17] AISCH G.: Where Athletes in the Premier League, the N.B.A.
and Other Sports Leagues Come From, in 15 Charts. The New York
Times (Dec. 2017). 12

[Ama10] AMANDA COX: Fractions of a Second: An Olympic Musical -
Interactive Graphic - NYTimes.com, 2010. 8

[AQ14] AISCH G., QUEALY K.: Why Peyton Manning’s Record Will Be
Hard to Beat. The New York Times (Oct. 2014). 1, 7

[AQ16] AISCH G., QUEALY K.: Stephen Curry’s 3-Point Record in
Context: Off the Charts. The New York Times (Apr. 2016). 1, 7, 13

[Are17] ARENAS I. D. L. T.: Swimming World Records throughout
History, 2017. 7

[Art16] ARTHUR R.: The New Science Of Hitting, Apr. 2016. 9, 10

[BBW16] BECK F., BURCH M., WEISKOPF D.: A Matrix-Based Visual
Comparison of Time Series Sports Data. 9

[BC16] BOSTOCK M., CARTER S.: The America’s Cup Finale: Oracle’s
Path to Victory, 2016. 10

[BCC∗13] BASOLE R., CLARKSON E., COX A., HEALEY C., STASKO
J., STOLPER C.: What’s the score? The 1st Workshop on Sports Data
Visualization. Oct. 2013. http://workshop.sportvis.com/. 1, 19, 24

[BEA16] BAI L., EFSTRATIOU C., ANG C. S.: weSport: Utilising
wrist-band sensing to detect player activities in basketball games. In
2016 IEEE International Conference on Pervasive Computing and
Communication Workshops (PerCom Workshops) (Mar. 2016), pp. 1–6.
11, 16

typically other participants in a sport or competition—is an open 
challenge. In sports, it is particularly true that a performance does 
not mean anything without context.

The future is full of opportunities at the crossroads of 
sports data visualization, quantified-self, p ersonal informatics, 
ubiquitous computing and personal data visualization. As people 
are more and more equipped with personal sensors, they record 
vast amounts of personal running, gym, and recreational sports 
activity data. There is an increasing amount of research building 
around personal fitness a nd a ctivity t racking a nd visualization 
(e.g., [BPAC16, CMT∗08, LML∗06, STS∗14, LCN15, KHM14, 
DMS12]). Challenges in personal sports data visualization are 
certainly related, but different, from those of sports visualization. 
Making visualizations personable and relatable artifacts in digital 
as well as physical forms that favor self-reflection a re emerging 
topics in the visualization community (e.g., [LDF11, TBHC16, 
HTA∗15, TPWC17]). Combining these topics of research offers 
many opportunities for future work.

7.7. Ethical Considerations of Sports Data

Having discussed personal/recreational data collection and 
visualization and the research opportunities it offers, we now end 
with the flip-side t o t his f acet o f s ports d ata. S ports a re o ne of 
the few private enterprises where so much information is public 
knowledge. Consider how most private businesses keep data on 
individual employee performance internal and even then usually 
restricted to certain individuals. An employee looking for a new 
job can usually expect that his or her potential employers cannot 
see the raw results of past performance reviews. Equivalently, 
consider the rigorous protections on your personally-identifiable 
health information mandated by most countries. Your doctor would 
never be allowed to publicize that you had an injury that might, in 
the future, affect your ability to do your job.

In sports, this is not the case. Individual performance is tracked 
and measured constantly. While enthusiasts approach box-score 
data as a way to mentally recreate games, athletes and teams use 
that same information to negotiate salaries and contract lengths. 
When using sports data, researchers must consider the risks and 
benefits to not only t eams ( representing management) but a lso to 
players (representing labor). Karkazis and Fishman [KF17] provide 
a thorough discussion of the ethics of tracking athletes.

8. Conclusions

We have provided a first, d etailed r eview o f c urrent e fforts in 
sports data visualization. Examining all this sports visualization 
work, from both academics and practitioners, has resulted in a 
classification o f w hat i s t aking p lace i n t he c urrent s tate o f this 
domain, in particular the strong evidence that it all relies on 
three main data categories: box-score data, tracking data, and 
meta-data. These data types are distinct on several levels: the 
history from which they emerged, the reasons for which they have 
been collected, the purposes to which they are put, and people 
or audience who are interested in them. It is apparent that the 
work cleaves strongly along these lines—which both points to the 
strength of the classification and calls for an almost untouched



C. Perin & R. Vuillemot & C. D. Stolper & J. Stasko & J. Wood & S. Carpendale / Sports Data Visualization STAR

[Ber15] BERTIN M.: Why Soccer’s Most Popular Advanced Stat Kind
Of Sucks, 2015. 1

[Bes16] BESHAI P.: Buckets: Basketball Shot Visualization. 7, 9, 15, 16

[BJM02] BORRIE A., JONSSON G. K., MAGNUSSON M. S.: Temporal
pattern analysis and its applicability in sport: an explanation and
exemplar data. Journal of Sports Sciences 20, 10 (Jan. 2002), 845–852.
10, 16

[BLC∗14] BIALKOWSKI A., LUCEY P., CARR P., YUE Y., SRIDHARAN
S., MATTHEWS I.: Identifying Team Style in Soccer Using
Formations Learned from Spatiotemporal Tracking Data. In 2014 IEEE
International Conference on Data Mining Workshop (Dec. 2014), pp. 9–
14. 13, 16

[Bou47] BOUCHER, PIERRE: How to ski by the French method, 1947. 8

[BPAC16] BOTROS F., PERIN C., ASENIERO B. A., CARPENDALE S.:
Go and Grow: Mapping Personal Data to a Living Plant. In Proceedings
of the International Working Conference on Advanced Visual Interfaces
(2016), ACM, pp. 112–119. 19

[BS16] BASOLE R. C., SAUPE D.: Sports Data Visualization [Guest
editors’ introduction]. IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications 36, 5
(Sept. 2016), 24–26. 1, 19

[BW14] BEECHAM R., WOOD J.: Characterising group-cycling journeys
using interactive graphics. Transportation Research Part C: Emerging
Technologies 47, Part 2 (2014), 194 – 206. Special Issue: Emerging
Technologies Special Issue of {ICTIS}. 17, 24

[Cat18] CATAPULT SPORTS: World Leader in Sport Technology for Elite
Sports, 2018. 5

[CEGH17] CHAWLA S., ESTEPHAN J., GUDMUNDSSON J., HORTON
M.: Classification of Passes in Football Matches Using Spatiotemporal
Data. ACM Transactions on Spatial Algorithms and Systems (TSAS) 3, 2
(2017), 6. 10

[CF13] CAVA R., FREITAS C. D. S.: Glyphs in matrix representation
of graphs for displaying soccer games results. In The 1st Workshop on
Sports Data Visualization. IEEE (2013). 13, 15

[CLP∗15] CHUNG D. H., LEGG P. A., PARRY M. L., BOWN R.,
GRIFFITHS I. W., LARAMEE R. S., CHEN M.: Glyph sorting:
Interactive visualization for multi-dimensional data. Information
Visualization 14, 1 (2015), 76–90. 11, 16

[CLX∗16] CHEN W., LAO T., XIA J., HUANG X., ZHU B., HU W.,
GUAN H.: GameFlow: Narrative Visualization of NBA Basketball
Games. IEEE Transactions on Multimedia 18, 11 (Nov. 2016), 2247–
2256. 9, 16

[CM13] CHATHAM A., MUELLER F. F.: Adding an Interactive
Display to a Public Basketball Hoop Can Motivate Players and Foster
Community. In Proceedings of the 2013 ACM International Joint
Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing (New York, NY,
USA, 2013), UbiComp ’13, ACM, pp. 667–676. 11, 16

[CM16] CROUSE K., MILLS D.: Katie Ledecky Smashes Her Own
World Record in 400 Freestyle. The New York Times (Aug. 2016). 10

[CMHD10] CROWELL H. P., MILNER C. E., HAMILL J., DAVIS I. S.:
Reducing impact loading during running with the use of real-time visual
feedback. journal of orthopaedic & sports physical therapy 40, 4 (2010),
206–213. 11

[CMT∗08] CONSOLVO S., MCDONALD D. W., TOSCOS T., CHEN
M. Y., FROEHLICH J., HARRISON B., KLASNJA P., LAMARCA A.,
LEGRAND L., LIBBY R., OTHERS: Activity sensing in the wild: a
field trial of ubifit garden. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems (2008), ACM, pp. 1797–1806.
19

[CNW08] COX A., NGUYEN V., WARD J.: How Woods Wins a Major.
The New York Times (May 2008). 8

[Con16] CONLEN M.: A History Of Sumo, May 2016. 7, 8

[CPG∗16] CHUNG D. H. S., PARRY M. L., GRIFFITHS I. W.,
LARAMEE R. S., BOWN R., LEGG P. A., CHEN M.: Knowledge-
Assisted Ranking: A Visual Analytic Application for Sports Event Data.
IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications 36, 3 (May 2016), 72–82. 7,
15, 16

[CQW11] CARTER S., QUEALY K., WARD J.: Derek Jeter Joins an
Exclusive Club, June 2011. 7

[CS06] COX A., STASKO J.: Sportsvis: Discovering meaning in
sports statistics through information visualization. In Compendium of
Symposium on Information Visualization (2006), Citeseer, pp. 114–115.
7, 15, 16, 24

[CVG13] CHEVALIER F., VUILLEMOT R., GALI G.: Using Concrete
Scales: A Practical Framework for Effective Visual Depiction of
Complex Measures. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer
Graphics 19, 12 (Dec. 2013), 2426–2435. 13

[CVS16] CARBOCH J., VEJVODOVA K., SUSS V.: Analysis of errors
made by line umpires on ATP tournaments. International Journal of
Performance Analysis in Sport 16, 1 (Apr. 2016), 264–275. 13

[CW06] COX A., WARD J.: Steroids or Not, the Pursuit is On. The New
York Times (2006). 7

[Dem13] DEMAJ D.: Geovisualizing spatio-temporal patterns in tennis:
An alternative approach to post-match analysis. In Proceedings of the
26th International Cartographic Conference (2013). 9, 16

[Dic97] DICKSON P.: The Joy of Keeping Score: How Scoring the Game
Has Influenced and Enhanced the History of Baseball. Harcourt Brace,
Feb. 1997. 1

[DKVS14] DIETRICH C., KOOP D., VO H. T., SILVA C. T.: Baseball4d:
A tool for baseball game reconstruction amp; visualization. In 2014
IEEE Conference on Visual Analytics Science and Technology (VAST)
(Oct. 2014), pp. 23–32. 5, 9

[DMS12] DREW HEMMENT, MORITZ STEFANER, STUDIO NAND:
Emoto - Installation * Studio NAND, 2012. 13, 16, 19

[DQ14] DANIEL JENNIFER S. C., QUEALY K.: How Close They Came
to Winning. The New York Times (Feb. 2014). 1, 8

[DWA10] DUCH J., WAITZMAN J. S., AMARAL L. A. N.: Quantifying
the Performance of Individual Players in a Team Activity. PLOS ONE 5,
6 (June 2010), e10937. 13, 16

[Fan16] FAN GRAPHS: Baseball Statistics and Analysis | FanGraphs
Baseball, 2016. 1

[FMBG15] FRANKS A., MILLER A., BORNN L., GOLDSBERRY K.:
Characterizing the spatial structure of defensive skill in professional
basketball. The Annals of Applied Statistics 9, 1 (Mar. 2015), 94–121.
arXiv: 1405.0231. 13, 16

[Fry05] FRY B.: Salary vs. Performance, 2005. 13

[GH17] GUDMUNDSSON J., HORTON M.: Spatio-temporal analysis of
team sports. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR) 50, 2 (2017), 22. 2, 8

[Gol12] GOLDSBERRY K.: Courtvision: New visual and spatial analytics
for the nba. In 2012 MIT Sloan Sports Analytics Conference (2012). 9,
12, 15, 16

[Gol13] GOLDSBERRY K.: Pass Atlas: A Map of Where NFL
Quarterbacks Throw the Ball, Sept. 2013. 9

[Gol14] GOLDSBERRY K.: DataBall, 2014. 13

[Gol15] GOLDSBERRY K.: Which NFL Team Are You Stuck Watching
Every Sunday?, Oct. 2015. 13

[Gol17a] GOLDENBERG R.: How Russell Westbrook can Average a
Triple-Double, 2017. 7

[Gol17b] GOLDENBERG R.: Twenty Years of the NBA Redrafted, 2017.
13

[HBC09] HERVIEU A., BOUTHEMY P., CADRE J.-P. L.: Trajectory-
based Handball Video Understanding. In Proceedings of the ACM 
International Conference on Image and Video Retrieval (New York, NY, 
USA, 2009), CIVR ’09, ACM, pp. 43:1–43:8. 13



C. Perin & R. Vuillemot & C. D. Stolper & J. Stasko & J. Wood & S. Carpendale / Sports Data Visualization STAR

[HHEM∗16] HOEBER O., HOEBER L., EL MESEERY M., ODOH K.,
GOPI R.: Visual Twitter Analytics (Vista): Temporally changing
sentiment and the discovery of emergent themes within sport event
tweets. Online Information Review 40, 1 (Feb. 2016), 25–41. 13

[HTA∗15] HUANG D., TORY M., ASENIERO B. A., BARTRAM L.,
BATEMAN S., CARPENDALE S., TANG A., WOODBURY R.: Personal
visualization and personal visual analytics. IEEE Transactions on
Visualization and Computer Graphics 21, 3 (2015), 420–433. 19

[HZ16] HE X., ZHU Y.: TennisMatchViz: A Tennis Match Visualization
System. Electronic Imaging 2016, 1 (Feb. 2016), 1–7. 15, 16

[IEE17] IEEE: IEEE InfoVis 2017 - Topics and Paper Types, 2017. 14

[JB97] JIN L., BANKS D. G.: TennisViewer: a browser for competition
trees. IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications 17, 4 (July 1997), 63–
65. 7, 15, 16

[Jos14] JOSE L.: Game on!, 2014. 13

[JSS∗14] JANETZKO H., SACHA D., STEIN M., SCHRECK T., KEIM
D. A., DEUSSEN O.: Feature-driven visual analytics of soccer data.
In 2014 IEEE Conference on Visual Analytics Science and Technology
(VAST) (Oct. 2014), pp. 13–22. 1, 9, 16

[JSSS16] JANETZKO H., STEIN M., SACHA D., SCHRECK T.:
Enhancing Parallel Coordinates: Statistical Visualizations for Analyzing
Soccer Data. Electronic Imaging 2016, 1 (2016), 1–8. 2

[KF17] KARKAZIS K., FISHMAN J. R.: Tracking U.S. Professional
Athletes: The Ethics of Biometric Technologies. The American Journal
of Bioethics 17, 1 (Jan. 2017), 45–60. 19

[KHM14] KHOT R. A., HJORTH L., MUELLER F.: Understanding
physical activity through 3d printed material artifacts. In Proceedings
of the 32nd annual ACM conference on Human factors in computing
systems (2014), ACM, pp. 3835–3844. 19

[KYY∗16] KAPLAN O., YAMAMOTO G., YOSHITAKE Y., TAKETOMI
T., SANDOR C., KATO H.: In-Situ Visualization of Pedaling Forces on
Cycling Training Videos. 11, 16

[LCN15] LEE M.-H., CHA S., NAM T.-J.: Patina Engraver: Visualizing
Activity Logs As Patina in Fashionable Trackers. In Proceedings of the
33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(New York, NY, USA, 2015), CHI ’15, ACM, pp. 1173–1182. 16, 19

[LCP∗12] LEGG P. A., CHUNG D. H. S., PARRY M. L., JONES
M. W., LONG R., GRIFFITHS I. W., CHEN M.: MatchPad: Interactive
Glyph-Based Visualization for Real-Time Sports Performance Analysis.
Computer Graphics Forum 31, 3pt4 (June 2012), 1255–1264. 11, 15

[LDF11] LI I., DEY A. K., FORLIZZI J.: Understanding my
data, myself: supporting self-reflection with ubicomp technologies.
In Proceedings of the 13th international conference on Ubiquitous
computing (2011), ACM, pp. 405–414. 19

[Lew04] LEWIS M.: Moneyball: The art of winning an unfair game. WW
Norton & Company, 2004. 1

[LM16] LINDBERGH B., MILLER S.: The Only Rule Is It Has to
Work: Our Wild Experiment Building a New Kind of Baseball Team, 1st
edition ed. Henry Holt and Co., New York, May 2016. 17

[LML∗06] LIN J. J., MAMYKINA L., LINDTNER S., DELAJOUX G.,
STRUB H. B.: Fish’n’Steps: Encouraging physical activity with an
interactive computer game. In International Conference on Ubiquitous
Computing (2006), Springer, pp. 261–278. 19

[LOC∗16] LAGE M., ONO J. P., CERVONE D., CHIANG J., DIETRICH
C., SILVA C. T.: StatCast Dashboard: Exploration of Spatiotemporal
Baseball Data. IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications 36, 5 (Sept.
2016), 28–37. 9

[Lou15] LOU SPIRITO: The Differing Dimensions of Every Stadium in
Baseball, Oct. 2015. 6

[Lov15] LOVE C.: Football Shots Timeline, 2015. 7, 8

[LSS13] LI F., STASKO J., STOLPER C. D.: NBAVis: Exploring 2012-13
NBA Season Data, 2013. 7

[LTB16] LOSADA A. G., THERON R., BENITO A.: BKViz: A Basketball
Visual Analysis Tool. IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications 36, 6
(Nov. 2016), 58–68. 7

[May] MAYMIN P.: An Open-Sourced Optical Tracking and Advanced
eSports Analytics Platform for League of Legends. In 2018 MIT Sloan
Sports Analytics Conference. 18

[MB13] MOON B., BRATH R.: Bloomberg sports visualization for pitch
analysis. In The 1st Workshop on Sports Data Visualization. IEEE
(2013). 9, 15

[MCHD12] MAHESWARAN R., CHANG Y.-H., HENEHAN A.,
DANESIS S.: Deconstructing the rebound with optical tracking data.
In Proc. 6th Annual MIT Sloan Sports Analytics Conference (2012),
pp. 1–7. 9, 10, 16

[MLB15] MLBPA/MLB NEWS RELEASE: MLBPA, MLB announce
pace-of-game initiatives, replay modifications, 2015. 5

[MLB17] MLB: MLB.com, 2017. 11

[MLBG16] MEKO T., LU D., BERKOWITZ B., GAMIO L.: Legendary?
Lousy? How your team has fared in the NFL draft, 2016. 13

[MLM∗17] MACHADO V., LEITE R., MOURA F., CUNHA S., SADLO
F., COMBA J. L.: Visual soccer match analysis using spatiotemporal
positions of players. Computers & Graphics 68 (2017), 84–95. 10

[MMZ17] METULINI R., MARISERA M., ZUCCOLOTTO P.: Space-
Time Analysis of Movements in Basketball using Sensor Data. In
Statistics and Data Science: New Challenges, New Generations (Apr.
2017). 10

[Mor16a] MORRIS B.: The Haters Are Losing The War On Kickers, Jan.
2016. 9, 10

[Mor16b] MORRIS B.: In Tennis, Even The Breakout Stars Are Veterans,
Sept. 2016. 13

[MW12] MOSKOWITZ T., WERTHEIM L. J.: Scorecasting: The hidden
influences behind how sports are played and games are won. Three
Rivers Press, 2012. 1

[MWA∗01] MOORE A., WHIGHAM P., ALDRIDGE C., HOLT A.,
HODGE K.: Rugby:(a) union of space and time. In Proceedings of
the 13th Annual Colloquium of the Spatial Information Research Centre
(2001), pp. 183–194. 15, 16

[NFL15] NFL: ’Run Rich Run’: Rich Eisen vs. top prospects, 2015. 13

[OJK13] OWENS S. G., JANKUN-KELLY T. J.: Visualizations for
exploration of american football season and play data. In The 1st
Workshop on Sports Data Visualization. IEEE (2013). 1, 15

[PBV16] PERIN C., BOY J., VERNIER F.: Using Gap Charts to Visualize
the Temporal Evolution of Ranks and Scores. IEEE Computer Graphics
and Applications 36, 5 (Sept. 2016), 38–49. 6, 15, 16, 17, 24

[Pea17] PEARCE A.: LeBron James Scores 5,995th Playoff Point, Taking
the Record From Michael Jordan. The New York Times (May 2017). 7

[PM06] PAGE M., MOERE A. V.: Towards Classifying Visualization
in Team Sports. In International Conference on Computer Graphics,
Imaging and Visualisation (CGIV’06) (July 2006), pp. 24–29. 16

[PM07] PAGE M., MOERE A. V.: Evaluating a Wearable Display Jersey
for Augmenting Team Sports Awareness. In Pervasive Computing (May
2007), LaMarca A., Langheinrich M., Truong K. N., (Eds.), Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, pp. 91–108. 11,
16

[POJC01] PINGALI G., OPALACH A., JEAN Y., CARLBOM I.:
Visualization of Sports Using Motion Trajectories: Providing Insights
into Performance, Style, and Strategy. In Proceedings of the Conference
on Visualization ’01 (Washington, DC, USA, 2001), VIS ’01, IEEE
Computer Society, pp. 75–82. 9

[PSBS12] PILEGGI H., STOLPER C. D., BOYLE J. M., STASKO
J. T.: SnapShot: Visualization to Propel Ice Hockey Analytics. IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 18, 12 (Dec.
2012), 2819–2828. 9, 15, 16, 17, 24



C. Perin & R. Vuillemot & C. D. Stolper & J. Stasko & J. Wood & S. Carpendale / Sports Data Visualization STAR

[PV13] PERIN C., VERNIER F.: R2s2: A hybrid technique to visualize
sport ranking evolution. In What’s the score? The 1st Workshop on Sports
Data Visualization, IEEE VIS (2013). 6, 24

[PVF13a] PERIN C., VUILLEMOT R., FEKETE J.-D.: Real-Time
Crowdsourcing of Detailed Soccer Data. 5, 24

[PVF13b] PERIN C., VUILLEMOT R., FEKETE J.-D.: SoccerStories: A
Kick-off for Visual Soccer Analysis. IEEE Transactions on Visualization
and Computer Graphics 19, 12 (Dec. 2013), 2506–2515. 10, 11, 12, 15,
16, 24

[PVF14] PERIN C., VUILLEMOT R., FEKETE J.-D.: A Table!:
Improving Temporal Navigation in Soccer Ranking Tables. In
Proceedings of the 32Nd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors
in Computing Systems (New York, NY, USA, 2014), CHI ’14, ACM,
pp. 887–896. 6, 12, 16, 24

[PYHZ14] POLK T., YANG J., HU Y., ZHAO Y.: TenniVis: Visualization
for Tennis Match Analysis. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics 20, 12 (Dec. 2014), 2339–2348. 15, 16

[QR16a] QUEALY KEVIN E. G., ROBERTS G.: Usain Bolt and the
Fastest Men in the World Since 1896 - on the Same Track. The New
York Times (Aug. 2016). 1, 8

[QR16b] QUEALY K., ROBERTS G.: Bob Beamon’s Long Olympic
Shadow, 2016. 13

[QW14] QUEALY KEVIN M. B., WARD J.: Mapping Every Path to the
N.F.L. Playoffs. The New York Times (Dec. 2014). 1, 14

[RCW10] ROBERTS G., CARTER S., WARD J.: How Mariano Rivera
Dominates Hitters, 2010. 11, 13

[RSB11] RUSU A., STOICA D., BURNS E.: Analyzing Soccer
Goalkeeper Performance Using a Metaphor-Based Visualization. In
2011 15th International Conference on Information Visualisation (July
2011), pp. 194–199. 11

[SAMS∗17] SACHA D., AL-MASOUDI F., STEIN M., SCHRECK T.,
KEIM D. A., ANDRIENKO G., JANETZKO H.: Dynamic visual
abstraction of soccer movement. In Computer Graphics Forum (2017),
vol. 36, Wiley Online Library, pp. 305–315. 11, 12, 16

[SHJ∗15] STEIN M., HAUBLER J., JACKLE D., JANETZKO H.,
SCHRECK T., KEIM D. A.: Visual Soccer Analytics: Understanding
the Characteristics of Collective Team Movement Based on Feature-
Driven Analysis and Abstraction. ISPRS International Journal of Geo-
Information 4, 4 (2015), 2159–2184. 16

[Sil16] SILVER REUBEN FISCHER-BAUM AND NATE J. B.: 2016 March
Madness Predictions, Mar. 2016. 14, 15, 17

[SJB∗16] STEIN M., JANETZKO H., BREITKREUTZ T., SEEBACHER
D., SCHRECK T., GROSSNIKLAUS M., COUZIN I. D., KEIM D. A.:
Director’s Cut: Analysis and Annotation of Soccer Matches. IEEE
Computer Graphics and Applications 36, 5 (Sept. 2016), 50–60. 10,
11, 16

[SJL∗16] STEIN M., JANETZKO H., LAMPRECHT A., SEEBACHER D.,
SCHRECK T., KEIM D. A., GROSSNIKLAUS M.: From Game Events
to Team Tactics: Visual Analysis of Dangerous Situations in Multi-
Match Data. In International Conference on Technology and Innovation
in Sports, Health and Wellbeing, Special Track "High level Sports in
the XXI Century: contribution from Industry and University to the
performance optimization" (2016). 10

[SJL∗18] STEIN M., JANETZKO H., LAMPRECHT A., BREITKREUTZ
T., ZIMMERMANN P., GOLDLUCKE B., SCHRECK T., ANDRIENKO
G., GROSSNIKLAUS M., KEIM D. A.: Bring it to the Pitch: Combining
Video and Movement Data to Enhance Team Sport Analysis. IEEE
transactions on visualization and computer graphics 24, 1 (2018), 13–
22. 10, 11

[SJS∗17] STEIN M., JANETZKO H., SEEBACHER D., JAGER A.,
NAGEL M., HOLSCH J., KOSUB S., SCHRECK T., KEIM D. A.,
GROSSNIKLAUS M.: How to Make Sense of Team Sport Data: From
Acquisition to Data Modeling and Research Aspects. Data 2, 1 (Jan.
2017), 2. 16

[SM14] SETLUR V., MACKINLAY J. D.: Automatic Generation of
Semantic Icon Encodings for Visualizations. In Proceedings of the
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (New
York, NY, USA, 2014), CHI ’14, ACM, pp. 541–550. 12

[SMM12] SEDLMAIR M., MEYER M., MUNZNER T.: Design Study
Methodology: Reflections from the Trenches and the Stacks. IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 18, 12 (Dec.
2012), 2431–2440. 16

[Spo16a] SPORTS REFERENCE: Sports Reference | Sports Stats, fast,
easy, and up-to-date, 2016. 1

[Spo16b] SPORTVISION: RACEF/X Technology, 2016. 5, 11

[SSN∗16] SHAO L., SACHA D., NELDNER B., STEIN M., SCHRECK T.:
Visual-Interactive Search for Soccer Trajectories to Identify Interesting
Game Situations. Electronic Imaging 2016, 1 (Feb. 2016), 1–10. 9, 15

[STL09] SMITH G., TAN D., LEE B.: iSee: Interactive Scenario Explorer
for Online Tournament Games. In Proceedings of the International
Conference on Advances in Computer Enterntainment Technology (New
York, NY, USA, 2009), ACE ’09, ACM, pp. 190–197. 14

[STS∗14] STUSAK S., TABARD A., SAUKA F., KHOT R. A., BUTZ A.:
Activity Sculptures: Exploring the Impact of Physical Visualizations on
Running Activity. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer
Graphics 20, 12 (Dec. 2014), 2201–2210. 16, 19

[Sus06] SUSKEN ROSENTHAL: Football Drawings Live, 2006. 10

[TBHC16] THUDT A., BAUR D., HURON S., CARPENDALE S.: Visual
mementos: Reflecting memories with personal data. IEEE transactions
on visualization and computer graphics 22, 1 (2016), 369–378. 19

[The16] THE NEW YORK TIMES: The Fine Line: What Makes Simone
Biles the World’s Best Gymnast. The New York Times (Aug. 2016). 11,
13

[Tim07] TIMES T. N. Y.: Paths to the Top of the Home Run Charts. The
New York Times (July 2007). 1, 7

[Tim17] TIMES T. N. Y.: Odell Beckham’s Hands Are Great, But His
Feet Are Lethal. The New York Times (Jan. 2017). 10

[TKW∗16] TROGER J., KLACK M., WENDLER D., PATZOLD A.,
MOLLER C., TIMCKE M.-L.: Berlin-Marathon 2016 - So schnell lauft
Ihre Stadt, 2016. 7

[TPWC17] THUDT A., PERIN C., WILLETT W., CARPENDALE S.:
Subjectivity in personal storytelling with visualization. Information
Design Journal 23, 1 (July 2017), 48–64. 19

[TSLR07] TAN D., SMITH G., LEE B., ROBERTSON G.: AdaptiviTree:
Adaptive Tree Visualization for Tournament-Style Brackets. IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 13, 6 (Nov. 2007),
1113–1120. 14, 15

[Tuf01] TUFTE E. R.: The Visual Display of Quantitative Information,
2nd edition edition ed. Graphics Press USA, Cheshire, Conn, Jan. 2001.
8

[Tur94] TURO D.: Hierarchical Visualization with Treemaps: Making
Sense of Pro Basketball Data. In Conference Companion on Human
Factors in Computing Systems (New York, NY, USA, 1994), CHI ’94,
ACM, pp. 441–442. 15

[VP15] VUILLEMOT R., PERIN C.: Investigating the Direct
Manipulation of Ranking Tables for Time Navigation. In Proceedings
of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems (New York, NY, USA, 2015), CHI ’15, ACM, pp. 2703–2706.
6, 16, 24

[VP16] VUILLEMOT R., PERIN C.: Sports Tournament Predictions
Using Direct Manipulation. IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications
36, 5 (Sept. 2016), 62–71. 12, 14, 15, 16, 17, 24

[Win12] WINSTON W. L.: Mathletics: How gamblers, managers, and
sports enthusiasts use mathematics in baseball, basketball, and football. 
Princeton University Press, 2012. 1



C. Perin & R. Vuillemot & C. D. Stolper & J. Stasko & J. Wood & S. Carpendale / Sports Data Visualization STAR

[WLS∗18] WU Y., LAN J., SHU X., JI C., ZHAO K., WANG J., ZHANG
H.: iTTVis: Interactive Visualization of Table Tennis Data. IEEE
transactions on visualization and computer graphics 24, 1 (2018), 709–
718. 16

[Won13] WONGSUPHASAWAT K.: A Narrative Display for Sports
Tournament Recap. In 1st Workshop on Sports Data Visualization, IEEE
VIS (2013). 12, 13, 14, 15

[Won16] WONGSUPHASAWAT K.: Standings Tracer, 2016. 6, 7, 15, 17

[Woo15] WOOD J.: Visualizing Personal Progress in Participatory Sports
Cycling Events. IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications 35, 4 (July
2015), 73–81. 8, 15, 17, 18, 24

[WWM13] WALMINK W., WILDE D., MUELLER F. F.: Displaying
Heart Rate Data on a Bicycle Helmet to Support Social Exertion
Experiences. In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on
Tangible, Embedded and Embodied Interaction (New York, NY, USA,
2013), TEI ’14, ACM, pp. 97–104. 11, 16

[ySS13] Y SANTACRUZ STUDIO E.: Corona Perspectives Tennis, 2013.
11



C. Perin & R. Vuillemot & C. D. Stolper & J. Stasko & J. Wood & S. Carpendale / Sports Data Visualization STAR

Biographies of Authors

Charles Perin is a Lecturer (eq. Assistant Professor) in the
department of Computer Science at City, University of London,
United Kingdom and part of the giCentre. His research interests
include the design and study of new interactions for information
visualization, understanding how people use and interact with
visualizations in their everyday lives, and human-centered design
for specific applications such as sports and health. Perin has
a PhD in computer science from Inria and CNRS-LIMSI at
the University of Paris-Sud. Perin’s strong personal interest in
sports has led him to conduct cutting-edge research in sports
visualization published at IEEE VIS, ACM CHI and IEEE CG&A.
This includes publishing a design study in collaboration with
soccer experts [PVF13b], improving the reading of ranks and
scores in ranking charts [PBV16, PV13], and using sports as an
application domain for designing new interaction techniques for
sports enthusiasts [PVF14, VP15, VP16]. Perin participated in the
1st Workshop on Sports Data Visualization [BCC∗13] at VIS 2013
and in the Data Technologies Workshop hosted by the U.S. Soccer
Federation in 2015.

Romain Vuillemot is an Assistant Professor of computer science at
École Centrale de Lyon, Université de Lyon, France. His research
spans over the fields of information visualization, visual analytics,
and human-computer interaction, with a focus on advanced
interaction techniques to include humans in the loop of complex
predictive analytics processes. Vuillemot has a PhD in computer
science from INSA de Lyon and CNRS-LIRIS at the Université
de Lyon. Vuillemot’s connection to sport data lies in his interest
in spatial and temporal data visualization, which naturally led
him to design and implement novel techniques for sport data
collection [PVF13a] and communication [PVF13b]. He recently
focused on using direct manipulation for soccer ranking tables
navigation [VP15], exploration [PVF14] and prediction [VP16].

Charles D. (Chad) Stolper is an Assistant Professor of
Computer Science at Southwestern University in Georgetown,
TX, USA. He received his PhD in Computer Science from
the Georgia Institute of Technology in Atlanta, GA, USA. An
avid sports fan his whole life, he has been an active member
of the sports visualization community. At IEEE InfoVis 2012,
he presented his work as part of the team that designed,
developed, and evaluated the SnapShot ice hockey visualization
system [PSBS12]. At IEEE VIS 2013, he co-organized the 1st
Workshop on Sports Data Visualization [BCC∗13] that brought
together visualization researchers, visualization practitioners, and
sports team executives to discuss the growing subfield. In 2015,

he participated in the Data Technologies Workshop hosted by the
U.S. Soccer Federation, which provided a forum for conversations
between visualization researchers and soccer coaches, trainers, and
executives. In addition to his work in sports visualization and visual
analytics, he researches graph visualization and visualization-
enabled storytelling.

John Stasko is a Professor in the School of Interactive Computing
(IC) at the Georgia Institute of Technology, GA, USA. He is a
widely published and internationally recognized researcher in the
areas of information visualization and visual analytics, approaching
each from a human-computer interaction perspective. He is a
member of the ACM CHI Academy, and is an ACM Distinguished
Scientist and an IEEE Fellow. Stasko is an avid sports fan and has
co-authored prior sports data visualization papers [CS06,PSBS12].
Additionally, he was Co-Chair for the 1st IEEE Workshop on
Sports Data Visualization [BCC∗13] at IEEE VIS 2013 in Atlanta
and was an invited speaker at the Data Technologies Workshop
hosted by the U.S. Soccer Federation.

Jo Wood is a Professor of Visual Analytics and head of the
department of Computer Science at City, University of London,
United Kingdom. He is co-director of the giCentre, dedicated
to visualization design and analytics. Starting in the fields of
Geographic Information Systems and Cartography, he has 25
years of experience in visualization and geographic analysis
with particular interests in visualization design for storytelling,
personal visualization [Woo15] and geographic and movement
analysis [BW14]. He is author of over 100 peer-reviewed
publications including several IEEE best paper and honorable
mention papers.

Sheelagh Carpendale is a Professor at the University of
Calgary, Canada where she holds a Canada Research Chair
in Information Visualization and the NSERC/AITF/SMART
Industrial Research Chair in Interactive Technologies. She is the
recipient of many awards including the NSERC Steacie and
the British BAFTA. Her research draws upon her combined
backgrounds in computer science and visual arts, benefiting from
the interdisciplinary cross-fertilization to enable the design of
innovative, people-centred information technologies. By studying
how people interact with information both in work and social
practices, she works towards designing more natural, accessible
and understandable interactive visual representations of data. She
combines information visualization, visual analytics and human-
computer interaction with innovative interaction techniques to
better support the everyday practices of people who are viewing,
representing, and interacting with information.


