























































CityScope Andorra: A Multi-level Interactive and Tangible Agent-based Visualization


CityScope Andorra: A Multi-level Interactive and Tangible
Agent-based Visualization

Extended Abstract

Arnaud Grignard
MIT Media Lab - City Science
Cambridge, Massachussets

Núria Macià
Universitat d’Andorra

Sant Julià de Lòria, Andorra

Luis Alonso Pastor
MIT Media Lab - City Science
Cambridge, Massachussets

Ariel Noyman
MIT Media Lab - City Science
Cambridge, Massachussets

Yan Zhang
MIT Media Lab - City Science
Cambridge, Massachussets

Kent Larson
MIT Media Lab - City Science
Cambridge, Massachussets

ABSTRACT
This study proposes a novel information visualization approach
developed and deployed in the state of Andorra. We present a
framework to analyze and represent the flow of people through a
multi-level interactive and tangible agent-based visualization. The
presented framework, developed to understand Andorra visitor
behavior, is embedded in the MIT CityScope framework used for
civic engagement, urban development, and decision making.

KEYWORDS
Agent-based Modelling; Tangible User Interface; Civic Engagement
ACM Reference Format:
Arnaud Grignard, Núria Macià, Luis Alonso Pastor, Ariel Noyman, Yan
Zhang, and Kent Larson. 2018. CityScope Andorra: A Multi-level Interactive
and Tangible Agent-based Visualization. In Proc. of the 17th International
Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems (AAMAS 2018),
Stockholm, Sweden, July 10–15, 2018, IFAAMAS, 3 pages.

1 INTRODUCTION
Contemporary paradigms in urban planning and architecture aim
to converge temporal and spatial data to enhance the well-being of
urban dwellers and visitors. Traditional approaches usually consist
of collecting a limited amount of data from surveys and statistically
generalizing their results. However, these methods have shown lim-
itations due to the exponential growth and incurred complexity of
urban centers [2]. One alternative is to combine telecommunication
data with geospatial information to improve the comprehension of
human behavior [1]. By coupling telecommunication data with a
spatially explicit agent-based model [3], our approach allows for
better insights into local interactions, variability among entities,
adaptive behaviors, and environmental states. This work has been
implemented in an open and generic platform called CityScope and
in the following, we describe the deployment of the Andorra case
study.

2 CITYSCOPE PLATFORM
Andorra has a population of nearly eighty thousand people and
hosts more than eight million visitors a year. As part of a research

Proc. of the 17th International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems
(AAMAS 2018), M. Dastani, G. Sukthankar, E. André, S. Koenig (eds.), July 10–15, 2018,
Stockholm, Sweden. © 2018 International Foundation for Autonomous Agents and
Multiagent Systems (www.ifaamas.org). All rights reserved.

Figure 1: CityScope platform framework.

collaboration between MIT and Andorra, the CityScope platform
was suggested as a tool for both analyzing visitors’ behavioral
patterns and displaying them to the relevant stakeholders. The
CityScope (CS) is an ongoing research theme at the MIT Media Lab
City Science group. CS projects are either demos (experiments and
research done at MIT Media Lab, usually in the form of generic
and scalable tools [5]) or deployments, as active tools in local plan-
ning processes [6]. CityScope platform helps non-experts engage in
conversations through visualizations that synthesize data analyses
in a coherent manner in the context of their cities. The platform
can (i) visualize and understand the meaning of complex urban
data and its inter-relationships, (ii) simulate the impact of mul-
tiple, real-time interventions, and (iii) support decision making
through a dynamic, iterative, and evidence-based process. A com-
mon CityScope platform is described in figure 1. On top of running
a real time simulation, the computational analysis unit has sensors
or cameras and computers for real-time scanning of the scene. User
feedback is made through display screens, projectors and other AR
representation tools.

Main Track Extended Abstract AAMAS 2018, July 10-15, 2018, Stockholm, Sweden

1939



2.1 Computational Layer
The computational layer includes the abstract elements of the plat-
form: data and computational models to perform data analyses
and visualizations. The computational layer is projected onto the
CityScope table and uses different data sources as a baseline for sim-
ulation. It has been implemented using the GAMA platform [4] and
Processing [8] 1. GAMA is a modeling and simulation-development
environment for building spatially explicit agent-based simulations.

2.2 Tangible Layer
The tangible layer has three components which enable the user to
interact with the platform in different ways: the physical table, a
tangible interface and an augmented reality module.

Physical Table. CityScope Andorra table is a 3D topographical
model of the two main cities of Andorra—Andorra la Vella and
Escaldes-Engordany and the rest of the territory is conceptually
represented by visual clusters, giving an abstract country-level
view.

Tangible Interface. CityMatrix [9] is a TUI that allows the user
to modify the city’s structure by manipulating predefined physical
pieces . It gives real-time feedback to users for facilitating rapid,
collaborative, informative decision-making. Users can reshape the
design of the urban area under study and the ABM then takes into
account (via CityI/O server) this modification and updates the agent
behavior accordingly.

Augmented Reality. CityI/O [7] extends the physical confines
of CityScope providing an AR tool for remote participation, data
sharing, and high-end realistic visualization. In this case, CityI/O
provides the following data layer: (1) telecom data origins, (2) ex-
isting built environment, (3) real-time 3D representation of design
iterations, and (4) mobility analysis.

3 ANDORRA CASE STUDY
3.1 Model Description
CityScope Andorra ABM provides a dynamic simulation in which
users can instantly identify three main elements: (i) clear represen-
tation of the cityscape defined by geography, buildings, amenities,
cell towers, and roads, (ii) people’s movement defined by dynamic
agents, and (iii) amenities’ popularity and density.

Agents. State. The set of variables is composed of (1) agent’s
country of residence, (2) origin location—defined using telecom
data—, (3) preferred destination—generated by a decision making
submodule—, (4) distance traveled, (5) speed of movement, and (6)
passable streets. Behavior. The agent’s trajectory is determined by
the Origin-Destination matrix computed from the CDR2 data and
constrained to the local weighted road network. Agent behavior
will slightly evolved according to traffic congestion (recomputing
path in case of high congestion) and amenities occupancy (choosing
another amenity if the current amenity is full).

1A release of the ABM model can be downloaded here github.com/CityScope.
2Call Detail Records (CDR) are digital records gathered by the mobile network operator
containing spatial-temporal information. Andorra Telecom privately (anonymized
using SHA-512 Algorithm) released three years of CDR data sets (2014-2016).

3.2 Results
Results focus on two major aspects: visitors’ attendance at certain
events held annually in the country and traffic congestion levels
caused by these events. The two events analyzed—(i) Cirque du
Soleil: VISION and (ii) Le Tour de France—occurred in 2016.

Visitors’ Flow and Impact. People are represented by solid
circles and vehicles by stroke circles. Their colors vary according to
the country of residence. The number of people present in the city’s
amenities evolves during the simulation. The amenity size increases
(or decreases) according to the number of agents currently in the
location.

Heatmaps. Aggregated data can be visualized onto the CityScope
platform, resulting in graphic heatmaps that summarize global ac-
tivity in the city and provide geo-located attendance estimates.

Online Media.
• ABM visualization: youtu.be/fLikAuFvVyg.
• Smart City ExpoWorld Congress 2016: youtu.be/hdL0aundHL4
• Andorra Deployment youtu.be/42hfpzJXhhU

4 CONCLUSION
In this article we presented a version of the CityScope Andorra
that, after being developed and tested at the MIT Media Lab City
Science group and Barcelona Smart City Expo World Congress
(2016 - 2017) was finally deployed in Andorra in Aug. 2017. During
this period, dozen of workshops, classes, and more than a hundred
public-private demonstrations have been successfully conducted,
supporting the performance of the CityScopeAndorra as an efficient
civic engagement tool. Finally, we hope to have contribute to the
spreading of ABM by democratizing the usage of ABM into new
fields, using new methods and to the broad non-expert community.

REFERENCES
[1] Julián Candia, Marta C González, Pu Wang, Timothy Schoenharl, Greg Madey,

and Albert-László Barabási. 2008. Uncovering individual and collective human
dynamics from mobile phone records. Journal of physics A: mathematical and
theoretical 41, 22 (2008), 224015.

[2] Andrew Crooks, Christian Castle, and Michael Batty. 2008. Key challenges in
agent-based modelling for geo-spatial simulation. Computers, Environment and
Urban Systems 32, 6 (2008), 417–430.

[3] Arnaud Grignard. 2015. Modèles de visualisation à base d’agents. Ph.D. Disserta-
tion. Paris 6.

[4] Arnaud Grignard, Patrick Taillandier, Benoit Gaudou, Duc An Vo, Nghi Quang
Huynh, and Alexis Drogoul. 2013. GAMA 1.6: Advancing the art of complex
agent-based modeling and simulation. In International Conference on Principles
and Practice of Multi-Agent Systems. Springer, 117–131.

[5] Mohammad Hadhrawi and Kent Larson. 2016. Illuminating LEGOs with Digital
Information to Create Urban Data Observatory and Intervention Simulator. In
Proceedings of the 2016 ACM Conference Companion Publication on Designing
Interactive Systems. ACM, 105–108.

[6] Ariel Noyman, Tobias Holtz, Johannes Kröger, Jörg Rainer Noennig, and Kent
Larson. 2017. Finding Places: HCI Platform for Public Participation in Refugees
Accommodation Process. Procedia Computer Science 112 (2017), 2463–2472.

[7] Ariel Noyman and Yasushi Sakai. 2018. CityScopeAR: Urban Design and Crowd-
sourced Engagement Platform. Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference Extended
Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems (2018).

[8] Casey Reas and Ben Fry. 2007. Processing: a programming handbook for visual
designers and artists. Number 6812. Mit Press.

[9] Yan Zhang. 2017. CityMatrix - An Urban Decision Support System Augmented by
Artificial Intelligence. Master’s thesis. Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

Main Track Extended Abstract AAMAS 2018, July 10-15, 2018, Stockholm, Sweden

1940

https://github.com/ChangingPlaces/Andorra/releases/tag/1.1
https://youtu.be/fLikAuFvVyg
https://youtu.be/hdL0aundHL4
https://youtu.be/42hfpzJXhhU

	Abstract
	1 Introduction
	2 CityScope Platform
	2.1 Computational Layer
	2.2 Tangible Layer

	3 Andorra Case Study
	3.1 Model Description
	3.2 Results

	4 Conclusion
	References



