































































SnapShot: Visualization to Propel Ice Hockey Analytics


SnapShot: Visualization to Propel Ice Hockey Analytics

Hannah Pileggi, Charles D. Stolper, J. Michael Boyle, and John T. Stasko, Senior Member, IEEE

Fig. 1. Small multiples created by Analyst A of eight radial heat maps displaying patterns of shot lengths at each of the indicated rinks
during the 2010-2011 NHL Regular Season.

Abstract—Sports analysts live in a world of dynamic games flattened into tables of numbers, divorced from the rinks, pitches, and
courts where they were generated. Currently, these professional analysts use R, Stata, SAS, and other statistical software packages
for uncovering insights from game data. Quantitative sports consultants seek a competitive advantage both for their clients and
for themselves as analytics becomes increasingly valued by teams, clubs, and squads. In order for the information visualization
community to support the members of this blossoming industry, it must recognize where and how visualization can enhance the
existing analytical workflow. In this paper, we identify three primary stages of today’s sports analyst’s routine where visualization
can be beneficially integrated: 1) exploring a dataspace; 2) sharing hypotheses with internal colleagues; and 3) communicating
findings to stakeholders.Working closely with professional ice hockey analysts, we designed and built SnapShot, a system to integrate
visualization into the hockey intelligence gathering process. SnapShot employs a variety of information visualization techniques to
display shot data, yet given the importance of a specific hockey statistic, shot length, we introduce a technique, the radial heat
map. Through a user study, we received encouraging feedback from several professional analysts, both independent consultants and
professional team personnel.

Index Terms—Visual knowledge discovery, visual knowledge representation, hypothesis testing, visual evidence, human computer
interaction.

1 INTRODUCTION
Sports are inherently competitive. Teams seek championships in their
leagues and players strive to be the highest ranking athlete at their
positions. In professional sports, the money flows to those who win.
Winning dictates player salaries, team salary caps, and prioritizes tele-
vision airtime.

In sports such as baseball, game data has both been collected and
studied for over a century. An increasing number of professional
sports teams are incorporating statistical analysis of game data into
their organizations’ strategies. The use of analytics is cited as a major
factor in the American League record 20-game win streak of the 2002
Oakland Athletics of Major League Baseball and the National Basket-
ball Association Championship of the 2011 Dallas Mavericks [12, 9].

Although data analytics are becoming much more prevalent
throughout sports, data visualization is still relatively unexplored. This
surprises us because sports data lends itself well to visualization. A
timeless example is Baseball Hall of Famer Ted Williams’s and John

• Hannah Pileggi, Charles D. Stolper, and John T. Stasko are with the
School of Interactive Computing and the GVU Center at the Georgia
Institute of Technology, e-mail:
{hannah.pileggi,charles.stolper,stasko}@cc.gatech.edu.

• J. Michael Boyle is with the Sports Analytics Institute, LLC, e-mail:
mike@sportsanalyticsinstitute.com.

Manuscript received 31 March 2012; accepted 1 August 2012; posted online
14 October 2012; mailed on 5 October 2012.
For information on obtaining reprints of this article, please send
e-mail to: tvcg@computer.org.

Underwood’s 1969 strike-zone graphic accompanying the Sports Illus-
trated article “The Science of Batting” [28]. The iconic graphic places
Williams himself next to a theorized map of pitch locations, colored
according to his perceived success in hitting a pitch in that location.

A few teams in the National Hockey League, the highest league
of professional ice hockey in North America, have begun to utilize
analytics, but not visualization. There is evidence that visualization
could be embraced by these teams. As Dan McKinnon, Director of
Personnel for the Pittsburgh Penguins, shared with us, “We are always
seeking out advantages to improve our strategy and thus our perfor-
mance.”

In cooperation with a professional hockey analyst, we have began to
explore whether visualization could be advantageous for competitive
hockey strategy. We utilized a user-centered methodology for design-
ing a system, with our consulting analyst representing the “user”. As
a group, we focused our efforts on three potential stages where visual-
ization could integrate into the analyst’s workflow:

1. Exploration of a dataspace.
2. Discussion of hypotheses amongst analysts.
3. Presentation of findings to stakeholders

To support these three tasks, we have designed and built SnapShot, a
system for exploring, discussing, and presenting hypotheses and find-
ings using National Hockey League shot data. SnapShot displays the
72,926 regular-season, regulation-time shots that were taken during
the 2010-2011 season. Our professional analyst identified the five
most crucial variables of the available data to his investigations: the
length of the shot, whether the shot was a goal or not, whether the

2819

        1077-2626/12/$31.00 © 2012 IEEE       Published by the IEEE Computer Society

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VISUALIZATION AND COMPUTER GRAPHICS, VOL. 18, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2012

Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITAT POLITECNICA DE CATALUNYA. Downloaded on October 05,2020 at 18:47:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 



shooter was on the home team or the away team, the shooter’s team,
and the location the shot was taken from on the ice. SnapShot’s vi-
sualizations allow an analyst to flexibly explore these variables on the
entire data set or a subset of it.

We conducted an evaluation of SnapShot with three professional
hockey analysts. Two were partners for independent consulting firms
and the third was the Director of Team Personnel for a National
Hockey League team. These evaluations captured valuable case stud-
ies of hockey analysts’ exploration processes. Feedback from each
session also provided encouraging feedback that there is interest in
capitalizing on visualization in this domain-specific dataspace.

The contributions of this paper are as follows:

• An analysis and description of a professional sports analyst’s
workflow to inform sports visualization system design,

• The SnapShot system for visualizing hockey shots taken during
the 2010-2011 National Hockey League season,

• Three case studies of professional ice hockey analysts incorpo-
rating visualization into their analysis.

2 RELATED WORK

The use of visualization to help fans, team officials, and analysts bet-
ter understand sports data has grown in popularity recently. Many
static infographics about sports data can be found on various websites
and in sport publications. More comprehensive interactive visualiza-
tion systems are less common, however. In the information visual-
ization community, a few projects and systems have been developed
including the use of treemaps to summarize tennis match results [11],
sparkline-style visualizations to show baseball [25] team performance
with different pitchers [5], and flexible representations of tournament
brackets/ladders [22].

Major League Baseball (MLB) and the National Basketball Associ-
ation (NBA) have pioneered the gathering, analysis, and visualization
of game data acquired through computer vision technologies applied
to video. Sportvision’s PITCHf/x [19] is a system for automatic sta-
tistical collection in baseball parks using two cameras mounted in the
stadium to track the speed and location of a pitched baseball. Using
PITCHf/x, statistics such as the pitcher with the fastest fastball or the
pitcher with the sharpest-breaking curve can be analyzed.

A well-known example of baseball data visualization utilizing the
PITCHf/x data is a video from the New York Times New Media Desk
highlighting the pitching tendencies of Mariano Rivera, one of the best
closing pitchers due to his “signature cutter” [4]. The NY Times video
uses heat maps of Rivera’s pitch locations to explain why his pitches
are so difficult to hit and why he is such a successful pitcher.

Fig. 2. Frame captured from “How Mariano Rivera Dominates Hitters”
featuring a heat map of a his “signature cutter.” Image: The New York
Times, June 29, 2010 c© 2010 The New York Times. Used under li-
cense.

The company Stats LLC is using computer vision technology called
SportVU [20] to capture movement and game action data from the Na-
tional Basketball Association (NBA). Using this data, Goldsberry [7]
created an application for visualizing several seasons worth of NBA
data as a complex heat map called CourtVision (Figure 3). The heat

map regions are sized by shot attempts and colored by points per at-
tempt, resulting in a series of court heat maps that help compare dif-
ferent teams and explore conventional wisdom about the teams.

Fig. 3. Goldsberry’s heat map of NBA field goal attempts over a five year
span [7]. Glyph size represents the number of shot attempts and color
represents points per shot attempt. Image courtesy of Kirk Goldsberry.

Another basketball project [13], built with Pat Summitt’s mantra
that “Rebounding wins championships” in mind, utilizes the SportVU
optical tracking data in a multi-view system. Figure 4 shows two of
the views, pairing scatterplot and heat map visualizations of the spatial
distribution data for on-court rebounding.

Fig. 4. Two sample views from Maheswaran et al.’s system for visual-
izing basketball rebound data [13]. The left window displays the spatial
distributions of rebounds and the right window displays a heatmap of
offensive rebound rates. Image courtesy of Rajiv Maheswaran.

Soccer (called Football by most countries other than the United
States) is similar to ice hockey in terms of game structure and style.
Games in both sports have a continuous flow with passing and player
position structured by physical aspects of the pitch (or rink). Because
soccer is so popular in Europe, it has garnered significant analytical
exploration and a growing body of work has been published regard-
ing performance improvement systems, many including visualization.
One such example is a system called Soccer Scoop [15] [16] (Fig-
ure 5), which pairs a statistical tool with the ability to visualize goal-
keepers through glyphs. Team managers can use the tool to visualize
one goalie between games, or compare two separate goalies to find
opportunities for improvement.

The Attribute Explorer [18], a well-known general purpose infor-
mation visualization system, was adapted in 2008 to display soccer
game events[1] (Figure 6). The tool was used for observing single
matches and for collecting game events cumulatively for later analysis
through coordinated views.

Most of the analytics work being done for ice hockey does not in-
clude visualization capabilities. A few hockey analysts have used sys-
tems such as Tableau [21] and Spotfire [23] for selected presentations
of analysis data. Such visualizations obviously are general purpose,
however, and do not show the data in the context of a rink.

Beyond in-house team analytics and hired consultants, news out-
lets and their web affiliates provide visual game data for consumption

2820 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VISUALIZATION AND COMPUTER GRAPHICS, VOL. 18, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2012

Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITAT POLITECNICA DE CATALUNYA. Downloaded on October 05,2020 at 18:47:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 



Fig. 5. Output image from Soccer Scoop comparing a goalkeeper’s per-
formance at home (left) versus away (right) games [15] [16]. Image
courtesy of the Adrian Rusu.

Fig. 6. Screenshot of soccer data in Attribute Explorer with bar charts
on the left corresponding to (top to bottom) player, action, and time, with
the pitch represented on the right with each instance plotted as a dot [1].
Image courtesy of Sage Journals.

by fans and viewers. The two most relevant examples of such web-
based NHL data sharing are NHL.com’s Ice Tracker (Figure 7) and
ESPN.com’s GameCast (Figure 8).

The National Hockey League created the Ice Tracker visualization
system [14] for displaying events as they occur in real-time throughout
a hockey game, displaying each event as a small glyph on a rink as
well as on a timeline. If the event has a film clip associated with it,
the glyph reflects this and allows the user to view the clip. The system
provides filtering to display shots, goals, hits, penalties, and fights on
the ice.

Fig. 7. The NHL.com’s Ice Tracker system visualizes a recent game
featuring the Colorado Avalanche at the New Jersey Devils. Image from
http://www.nhl.com/ice/icetracker.htm?id=20110206151.

ESPN hosts a similar visualization system called GameCast [6].
GameCast differs from Ice Tracker in that it normalizes events on the
ice so that the away team’s events are on the left end and the home
team’s events are on the right end and the glyphs displayed are in the

relevant team’s color scheme. Like Ice Tracker, GameCast can run in
real-time during games or display a recap of a game.

Fig. 8. The ESPN.com’s GameCast system visualizes a recent game
featuring the Pittsburgh Penguins at the New York Rangers. Image from
http://scores.espn.go.com/nhl/gamecast?gameId=400047896.

The audience for both Ice Tracker and GameCast is not a team or
organization, but rather the public at large. While the full visualization
of a single game is available after it has concluded, neither system al-
lows games to be combined for longer-term analysis, and thus neither
are utilized by professional analysts in the course of their work.

3 UNDERSTANDING THE PROBLEM
Every strategical advantage increases a professional hockey team’s
chances of winning. In order for visualization to be one of these ad-
vantages, we set out to understand how analysts offer value to teams
and where visualization can augment their workflow.

3.1 Ice Hockey
Ice hockey is a sport played on an ice rink by two teams with two
nets, a single puck and three or more referees. The objective of the
game is for a team to score more goals than their opponent. Players
are equipped with protective gear, skates and a hockey stick and score
goals by shooting the puck into the opposing team’s net using their
sticks. A team is required to have six players on the playing surface
at all times with the exception of when certain types of penalties are
being served. At most times during the game a team has a one goal-
tender, two defensemen and three forwards on the ice. The forward
positions subdivide into left wing, right wing and center. The rink it-
self (Figure 9) is divided into three zones: the offensive zone, neutral
zone, and defensive zone. The zones are divided by blue lines, and
there are also red lines at each goal and a center line at middle-ice in
the center of the neutral zone.

Fig. 9. Mandatory NHL rink markings.

Games consist of three 20-minute periods. When the score is tied
at the end of regulation time, it is typical to have one or more sud-
den death overtime periods to decide the winner of the game. In
some leagues/tournaments, there is a limit to the amount of over-
time played before the game is decided in a shootout during which
teams trade penalty shots until a winner is decided. Alternatively,
some leagues/tournaments do not require an outright winner and leave
games tied after regulation time and a set amount of overtime.

There are several elite hockey leagues in a handful of re-
gions/countries. In North America, the most elite professional league

2821PILEGGI ET AL: SNAPSHOT: VISUALIZATION TO PROPEL ICE HOCKEY ANALYTICS

Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITAT POLITECNICA DE CATALUNYA. Downloaded on October 05,2020 at 18:47:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 



is the National Hockey League (NHL). In Eurasia, the most elite pro-
fessional league is the Kontinental Hockey League (KHL). At a na-
tional level, there are several elite professional leagues including but
not limited to the Elitserien (Sweden) and SM-liiga (Finland). Each of
these top leagues has a network of minor professional and elite ama-
teur leagues (for example, the CHL in Canada, and the NCAA in the
United States).

3.2 NHL Hockey Data
The analyst with whom we developed SnapShot was specifically fo-
cused on the North American National Hockey League shot data.
Hockey information has quirks. Some of these quirks are pervasive in
all most competitive team sports: teams swapping ends of the rink each
period and the importance of whether a team was home or away. Some
of these quirks are more pronounced in hockey data. Hockey shots are
taken on a rink with fixed dimensions and standardized reference lines
which factor heavily into the game rules. Non-overtime rules, regu-
lar season overtime rules, and overtime playoff rules all differ from
each other. The rules change during play based how many men are
off the ice when the shot was taken due to penalties. Finally, while
every team plays the same number of regular season games, sixteen of
the thirty teams in the league also play in the postseason, each round
of which can be up to seven games. (In 2011, the champion Boston
Bruins and runners-up Vancouver Canucks each played in twenty-five
more games than the playoff-missing Columbus Blue Jackets.)

The data set our analyst provided consists of 81,158 data points,
representing each shot officially recorded by the NHL’s stat keepers
during the 2010-2011 season and distributed by the NHL to analysts.
Shots are a specific instance of what the NHL refers to as events, which
also includes but is not limited to hits, penalties, and faceoffs. Cur-
rently, events recorded in NHL games are not collected using com-
puter vision (as is the case with Major League Baseball). Instead,
small groups of 3-5 men and women are employed to manually record
events of interest that occur during the game using a custom software
interface. The recorder clicks on the location of the event on a dis-
play of the rink and then selects the player and the event. The result
of this process is that for each shot we are provided with the season
identifier (first year of the season), the official game number, whether
the game was during the regular season or postseason, the date of the
game, the home team, the away team, the period and the number of
seconds into the period that the shot was taken, what advantage type
the shooter’s team had (even-handed, short-handed, power-play), the
shooter’s name, team, and position, what type of shot was taken (wrist-
shot, backhand, tip-in, etc.), the zone in which the shot was taken (of-
fensive, neutral, defensive), the (x,y) coordinate of the shot in feet
relative to center ice, and a precomputed length of the shot.

Due to the manner in which the data are recorded, it is not as pre-
cise as in some other professional sports. For example, while Major
League Baseball tracks pitches to within one inch using Sportvision’s
PITCHf/x, the official NHL records concerning shots are to the near-
est foot. This includes both the x,y coordinate data of the shot as well
as the length of the shot. There is no data about the path of the puck
including where (if anywhere) on the net the shot ended or how fast
the puck was travelling. Additionally, 1,292 of the 81,158 data points
provided to us do not have x,y coordinate data associated with them.
Each of these data points is the result of one of two cases:

Null– the NHL did not provide coordinate information for the events
(0.20% of the total event data falls into this case)

Multiple– the NHL provided information on these events, but multi-
ple events occurred at the same time so it cannot be determined
which of the events belongs to each coordinate pair (1.66% of
the total event data falls into this case).

3.3 The Sports Analysts’ Workflow
The term “sports analysts” describes those economists, statisticians,
computer scientists, and mathematicians who perform analysis on
data derived from sports. These individuals use a variety of tools
in the course of their work, including scripting languages, relational

Fig. 10. Prototypical work flow of a sports analyst. The tasks on which
we have focused the design efforts of SnapShot are: Exploration, Brain-
storming, and Presentation of Findings.

databases, and statistical programs such as Excel, Stata, R, SPSS, and
SAS. They draw upon statistics, econometrics, operations research,
information systems, and applied mathematics during the course of
their work. Analysts can be amateur fans, professional consultants,
employees of a team, or employees a league. The analyst we worked
with is employed by a small consulting firm. This allowed us to adopt
an iterative, user-centered design process.

Our team member describes working as a hockey analyst in two
modes: reactive and proactive. Reactive consultation occurs when a
client, often a team, poses a question for which they desire an answer.
Proactive consulting occurs when an analyst initiates and implements
a new business intelligence feature to present to a client. Example
business intelligence features include:

Player Productivity Models to inform lineup changes.

Player Contribution to Winning Models to inform contract re-
newals and player transactions.

Team Performance Models to track performance in key areas over
various time intervals.

Video Analysis Preprocessing to prepare answers for questions that
may arise during video analysis.

Dataset Preparation for stakeholders that request subsets of data to
use for their own “in-house” analysis.

Our team member helped us generate a model of his typical work-
flow (Figure 10) to demonstrate and highlight the order in which these
features may occur. Throughout the workflow he interacts with indi-
viduals he describes as stakeholders– those who are counting on an-
alytics to inform their decisions. Stakeholders can be league officials
or general managers, personnel officers, or coaches of teams. Usually
these stakeholders will provide the raw data to our analyst, though the
NHL or an authorized third party may also distribute data. Sometimes
our analyst must extract raw data from multiple sources, such as offi-
cial records and proprietary data.

Once he has the raw data, he must transform it into a form readable
by his tools. He will also calculate derived attributes of the data at this
stage. Once he has accomplished all of this, he is ready to begin his
exploration (top of the blue box in Figure 10).

During initial exploration, he utilizes tools such as Excel, R, and
SAS. He typically compiles tables of data subsets and creates static
figures such as bar charts and scatterplot matrices. He uses these to
quickly recognize correlated statistics or overwhelming outliers. Ex-
ploration will often include running simple macros and becoming fa-
miliarized with the data. He indicated that the five most crucial vari-
ables of the available data to him were the length of the shot, whether
the shot was a goal or not, whether the shooter was on the home team

2822 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VISUALIZATION AND COMPUTER GRAPHICS, VOL. 18, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2012

Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITAT POLITECNICA DE CATALUNYA. Downloaded on October 05,2020 at 18:47:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 



or the away team, the shooter’s team, and the location the shot was
taken from on the ice.

Our analyst uses the foundational work created through such explo-
ration as a starting point for brainstorming. He most often brainstorms
independently or with his fellow consulting partners. This brainstorm-
ing process can include whiteboarding or video, telephone, and/or
email communication amongst participants. Occasionally he brain-
storms with outside analysts such as fellow attendees of the annual
Sloan Sports Analytics Conference. The result of a brainstorming ses-
sion is a set of hypotheses of varying levels of abstraction.

Once numerous hypotheses are generated, some are taken back to
the exploratory stage. Our analyst creates summary tables or custom
models using a quantitative tool. Despite the fact that this cycle (explo-
ration, brainstorming, hypothesis generation) can iterate many times,
our analyst can only pursue a finite number of hypotheses. Uncon-
ventional and complex hypotheses can drain precious time, money,
and manpower because they are not easily proven or refuted. Further,
these theories tend to return few beneficial findings to the stakeholder.
Thus, he must ignore many potentially radical theories. Findings are
those hypotheses that survive both brainstorming and statistical con-
firmation to become theories or models.

Finally, our analyst presents these findings to the project’s stake-
holders. He accomplishes this through either a periodic report of a
business intelligence feature or a PowerPoint presentation of recom-
mendations.

We believe that visualization can enhance this prototypical sports
analytics workflow as several of its components have been addressed
by the information visualization research community. Tukey [26] and
Inselberg [10] describe exploring data sets using visualization. Viegas
and Wattenberg [27] and Heer et al. [8] outline how sharing of visual-
izations can encourage discussion. Segel and Heer [17] discuss using
visualization to present findings.

4 SNAPSHOT SYSTEM
4.1 Design Rationale
Reflecting upon our discussions with the hockey analyst and our own
experiences and research about the sport, we developed a set of design
objectives for a visualization system. Below, we list important nuances
of the problem space (in bold) along with how we address each in our
system design.

Location and distance from the net is crucial to shot data.
We chose to use the ice hockey rink as a backdrop to our visual-
izations, allowing for an analyst to translate real-world context
to the data in a system.

Key facets of hockey data are categorical.
We allow for mapping categorical variables to colors and divid-
ing by categories into separate views.

Open-ended exploration should allow for selection of both each
individual shot or a defined subset of shots.

We designed for analysis of subsets of data through universal
transparent filtering. We allowed for the full range of data gran-
ularity: from one single shot to all 72,926 shots at once.

Every analyst’s investigative lens is unique.
We created an environment with multiple views to provide the
flexibility that the variety in analytical approaches requires.

The ability to record and revisit promising ideas encourages
alternative exploration.

With a single click, the system saves the current exploration
state to a new browser tab or window. We termed this process
SnapShotting.

Collaboration strengthens hypotheses.
Every view has a unique, sharable URL for enabling discussions
amongst analysts to include visual evidence.

Table 1. Summary of data selection process.

81,158 Data points in 2010-2011 season
↪→ 5,551 Post-season data points
↪→ 75,607 Regular season data points

↪→ 2,192 Overtime data points
↪→ 73,415 Regulation data points

↪→ 463 No coordinates
↪→ 107 null condition
↪→ 356 multiple condition

↪→ 72,952 With coordinates
↪→ 26 Penalty shots
↪→ 72,926 Non-penalty shots

Comparisons drive insights.
We implemented small multiples views, SnapShotting, and con-
current, multi-technique displays to compare different parti-
tions, selections, and representations of data.

Ultimately, stakeholders expect a presentation of findings.
We enabled the system to export high-resolution images that can
easily be incorporated into presentation materials.

These design choices led to the creation of an interactive visualiza-
tion system, which we named SnapShot.

4.2 Data Pre-processing
SnapShot contains shots that occurred during regulation time during
the regular season. Shot location is necessary for capitalizing on the
contextual display of data and thus the system does not include data
points lacking coordinate data due to either the null or multiple condi-
tions. Discarding shots recorded more than once was a basic integrity
issue. Removing null shots was a decision made at our discretion
based on feedback from the analysts. When they run their statisti-
cal analyses they ignore these shots. Building a system attempting to
conform to their current behavioral patterns and treatment of data, we
chose to follow suit. This left our focus data set containing 72,926
regular-season, regulation-time shots. Table 1 summarizes this pro-
cess.

NHL rules dictate that teams alternate which of the two ends of
the rink each team attacks. While this both lowers any bias from any
one rink end and allows fans at the arena to see both teams from two
angles, it introduces unpredictability in the records concerning which
end a given shot was taken against. SnapShot thus pre-processes the
data to normalize all shots as if they were taken against the right end
of the rink.

4.3 User Interface and Visualizations
SnapShot supports visualization through a consistent user interface.
The canvas is in the upper lefthand corner of the window (Figure 12
(1)). For all non-small multiple visualizations this canvas size is fixed
and features a hockey rink outline. Data can be filtered in the lower
half of the system (Figure 11) through a series of interactions.

Fig. 11. Filtering widgets. The selected filters limit the data to only
even-strength, away goals taken at the Minnesota rink, by left and right
wingers.

SnapShot provides a rich set of filter controls: checkboxes and
toggle-buttons for turning on and off shots, goals, shots by each po-
sition, and relative strength on the ice; drop-down selectors for teams

2823PILEGGI ET AL: SNAPSHOT: VISUALIZATION TO PROPEL ICE HOCKEY ANALYTICS

Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITAT POLITECNICA DE CATALUNYA. Downloaded on October 05,2020 at 18:47:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 



Fig. 12. Full view of the SnapShot system displaying a traditional heat map of shots and goals by home teams. The user interface includes: (1)
Canvas where each visualization is drawn; (2) Data filtering widgets; (3) View selector drop-down menu; (4) View-specific settings; (5) SnapShot
widget; (6) View and data export links.

and rinks (which also handle home and away) as well as players; a
double-ended slider for time during the game; and a calendar for dates
during the season. The filter controls are consistent across all views to
highlight that the data behind different visualizations remains constant
and provides the added benefit of minimizing context-switch disso-
nance between views.

The right side-bar of the system includes several important features.
Navigation between visualization techniques is controlled by the up-
per right drop-down menu (Figure 12 (3)). Each active visualization
displayed on the canvas has a corresponding group of settings (Figure
12 (4)). The text and filters in this area will change for each of the
three view techniques in order to remain relevant to the current visu-
alization. SnapShotting is conducted through the text box and button
located on the right side. Below SnapShotting are the links for image
(PNG) and data (CSV) exporting.

Earlier, we identified the five most important variables in the data
to the analysts: shot length, shot/goal, shot location, shooter team, and
home/away. SnapShot provides three visualization techniques (Shot
Map, Traditional Heat Map, and Radial Heat Map) that highlight these
facets, especially shot location and shot length. Each view is drawn
using Data-Driven Documents (D3) javascript library [2] on an ab-
stracted hockey rink including the border of the rink, the red, blue,
and center lines, and the goals.

Here we describe each of the three techniques in detail.

4.3.1 Shot Map
The shot map (Figure 13) primarily highlights shot location and secon-
darily the shot/goal, home/away, and shooter team distinctions. Snap-
Shot represents every shot as a small SVG circle element with an
opacity property of 0.1 drawn at the location where the shot origi-
nated. SnapShot colors each circle according to a categorical variable
selected by the user from the available variable schemes of shot/goal,
home/away, shooter’s team, rink, period, shooter position, and advan-
tage. Thus, the color of any given pixel is the alpha-blend of the col-
ors of the last ten shots rendered at that position. SnapShot renders
shots in the following order: shots then goals, each in reverse chrono-
logical order. Because the number of short-handed shots � number
of power-play� even-strength shots, the rendering order when under

Fig. 13. Shot map of all 2010-2011 regular-season, regulation-time
shots using the advantage type color scheme. The black arrow tooltip
has selected a grid of the shot map and the open overlay windows are
displaying every shot at that location (top) and the details of one partic-
ular shot selected at the point (bottom).

the advantage-type color scheme is: even-strength shots, even-strength
goals, power-play shots, power-play goals, short-handed shots, short-
handed goals.

The NHL records shot coordinates to the nearest foot. So for any
given coordinate there are often multiple shots assigned to that loca-
tion, even with filtered data. To still allow the user to see every shot,
SnapShot allows the user to click on any coordinate and a black arrow
tooltip will appear and pop up a details window displaying all shots
taken from that coordinate as linearly-arrayed circles (Figure 13). The
details pop-up displays circles arranged according to the standard ren-
dering scheme (all shots followed by all goals), regardless of color
scheme (in other words, for any color scheme with the same filters,
a shot’s circle will be in the same location in the tooltip for its coor-
dinate). The user may click any of these circles to see the respective
shot’s full details. SnapShot also displays a legend of the currently
selected color scheme on top of the defensive (left) end of the rink.

4.3.2 Traditional Heat Map
The traditional heat map view (Figure 14) is designed primarily to
highlight patterns of shot location density. SnapShot’s heat map is a
mono-chromatic grid, with each cell representing a fixed region on
the ice. SnapShot draws each region as a black SVG rect element

2824 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VISUALIZATION AND COMPUTER GRAPHICS, VOL. 18, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2012

Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITAT POLITECNICA DE CATALUNYA. Downloaded on October 05,2020 at 18:47:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 



Fig. 14. In this traditional heat map, SnapShot displays all 2010-2011
regular-season, regulation-time shots using 3 foot by 3 foot squares.

with a set opacity. The opacity of the element is a function of the
number of shots in the region, the natural log of the total number of
shots corresponding to the selected filters, and the size of the region
(opacitysquare←

shotssquare
lnshots f ilter ·sidelength3

). This formula allows the analyst
to identify patterns at scales from a single team at a single rink to
every team at every rink. An analyst has the ability to adjust the size
of cumulation regions to see the data at higher or lower granularities.
At its finest granularity the traditional heat map can display grids of
one-square foot of shots. Clicking on a cell opens a tooltip displaying
the number of shots taken from within a respective region.

4.3.3 Radial Heat Map

Fig. 15. Radial heat map of all 2010-2011 regular-season, regulation-
time shots using 3-foot-wide rings.

SnapShot’s radial heat maps (Figure 15) convey information about
shot length, the statistic identified as most interesting by the analysts
we worked with. SnapShot visualizes the distance of shots from the
net using a series of concentric rings surrounding the attacking (right-
hand) goal representing cumulative bins of shots. Each ring represents
a defined segment of the ice. SnapShot colors each ring based on the
number of shots taken from its respective segment, normalized by the
densest segment. The darkest red ring rgb(165,15,21) represents the
densest segment. Using D3’s scale.linear interpolation function, Snap-
Shot assigns colors to the remaining rings according to the normalized
number of shots ([0..1]→ [rgb(255,245,240)..rgb(165,15,21)]). Fi-
nally, SnapShot recolors empty segments’ rings white. The user can
adjust the view’s granularity by modifying the width of the segments.
Clicking on a ring displays a tooltip containing the number of shots
taken from within its respective segment.

4.4 Comparison Capabilities

4.4.1 Small Multiples

In order to highlight the shot/goal, home/away, and shooter team dis-
tinctions, SnapShot allows an analyst to view small multiples [24] of
a given visualization (Figure 1), partitioned based on one of these
variables. SnapShot supports displaying small multiples of each of
the three visualization styles, partitioning the data based on not just
shots/goals, home/away, and shooter’s team, but also rink, period,
shooter position, and advantage type.

4.4.2 Multi-Technique Display

The initial display of SnapShot consists of all three views tiled. The
user may adjust the filters on the data and the results will be shown in
all three views. This facilitates the analyst identifying patterns that ap-
pear throughout multiple visualization techniques and allows the user
to compare between visualizations of the same partition, rather than
between partitions of data.

4.4.3 SnapShotting

As shown in Figure 12 (5), SnapShot supports comparing arbitrary
subsets of data and arbitrary view techniques through SnapShotting,
duplicating the current view to a new tab with an optional user-defined
title. The user can toggle between these tabs as he or she wishes, and
because all three views occupy the same space on a given tab, this
toggling allows the user to compare two visualizations as if on top
of each other, much like a flip chart. The analyst can thus visually
identify the often subtle differences between two views.

4.5 Supporting Sharing

4.5.1 Web Deployability and Bookmarking

In order to support teams of analysts, we have hosted SnapShot on a
private web server. This allows team members to both access their
views from any modern browser, as well as supporting the ability to
share the visualization within the context of the tool used to build it.
ShapShot’s views have uniquely identifiable URLs, allowing an ana-
lyst to bookmark a view in the browser or pass the view on to a col-
league.

4.5.2 Exporting

While bookmarking supports collaboration, it is less effective for sup-
porting exploration or presentation. Analysts exploring the data using
a visual tool will still want to confirm their findings in a statistical
package. To facilitate this capability, SnapShot allows the user to ex-
port the currently displayed data which then can be imported into the
analyst’s tool of choice (Figure 12 (6)). Analysts creating visualiza-
tions to enhance their communications with stakeholders rarely need
the data itself. Instead, they prefer to have static images which can be
placed in a slide deck, in a whitepaper, or on a webpage. SnapShot
supports this use by allowing the user to export his or her current view
as an image, including any tooltips currently displayed.

4.6 Implementation

SnapShot is written entirely in Javascript, making use of the jQuery
toolkit1. The interactive visualizations are made up of SVG elements
generated using the D32, which also handles the data importing. The
toggle buttons, calendar widget, and slider widget are all from the
jQueryUI widget library3 and the remaining widgets are native html.
The exporting feature makes use of the canvg package4, which allows
for converting SVG elements to PNG images. The GET-based book-
marking code is greatly simplified by Stephen Morley’s QueryData.js
scripts5. The radial heat map colorscale and a selection of the categor-
ical color schemes were chosen using ColorBrewer2 [3].

5 CASE STUDIES

To evaluate SnapShot, we worked with three professional hockey an-
alysts. Two of the evaluators were consultant analysts and one was an
internal analyst for an NHL team. We conducted one-hour sessions
with each analyst remotely using screen-sharing software. For each
session, we recorded both the screen activity and the participant’s com-
ments. A SnapShot designer was present for each of the three study

1http://www.jquery.com
2http://mbostock.github.com/d3/
3http://www.jqueryui.com
4http://code.google.com/p/canvg/
5http://code.stephenmorley.org/javascript/parsing-query-strings-for-get-

data/

2825PILEGGI ET AL: SNAPSHOT: VISUALIZATION TO PROPEL ICE HOCKEY ANALYTICS

Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITAT POLITECNICA DE CATALUNYA. Downloaded on October 05,2020 at 18:47:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 



sessions but only as technical support. No design guidance or collab-
oration was present between the SnapShot creators and the case study
analysts.

5.1 Analyst A: “Is This Rink Different Than Others?”

Fig. 16. Small multiples of radial heat maps for each of the thirty NHL
teams at home created by the Analyst A. The analyst’s initial team of
interest, the New York Rangers, is indicated by the green box.

Our first analyst (A) had been investigating shot lengths at a specific
hockey arena, Madison Square Garden in New York. He had been do-
ing so by studying raw data and game footage. He began his visual
exploration with SnapShot by creating small multiples of each rink in
the league (Figure 1) then increased the band-width to 10-feet (Fig-
ure 16). He remarked, “I will be able to see right away if this rink
really is different than others.” As evidenced in the figure, he found
that NYR (Madison Square Garden) does show a different pattern of
shots than any of the other rinks.

He next filtered down to just shots by home teams, and he noted that
patterns appeared in several other rinks that surprised him. Rinks such
as Minnesota, Nashville, and Philadelphia were all recording high shot
counts uniformly across the entire offensive side of the ice (from the
right blue line to the net). This did not match his working knowledge
of those teams, and he commented that Minnesota should look dif-
ferent from Nashville and Philadelphia due to their relatively weaker
offense.

While the Rangers were his starting point, he put them on hold
to explore the other three rinks. He SnapShotted six traditional heat
maps: home shots only and away shots only for each of the three rinks.
He told us that he was only concerned with even strength shots and fil-
tered out power play shots and short handed shots. After studying the
relative differences in shot patterns for the three teams, he changed the
views to shot maps so that he could color shots by player position. He
was interested in identifying which positions might be contributing to
the atypical shot patterns.

Upon completion of the session, he mentioned that he was eager to
investigate the three teams that SnapShot highlighted as similar (but
should have been more dissimilar) and that he would use the image
from Figure 16 to share his findings with interested parties.

5.2 Analyst B: “Animals Defend Their Homes”
Analyst B began the session by declaring, “Animals defend their
homes”. He was interested in observing if hockey teams follow this
‘rule of nature’: do they play more defensively at home and offen-
sively on the road? He hypothesized that “playing defensively” would

Fig. 17. Radial heat maps created by Analyst B. Top row showing shots
and goals, bottom row showing only goals. Left heat maps are for home
teams and right are for away teams. Black arrows indicate a shot dis-
tance density present in both the home (left) and away (right) radial heat
map. The green arrow points to a region of longer distance shots that
was of interest to the analyst.

imply longer even-strength shooting, because “the home team is not
willing to give up any ground by over-attacking on offense”.

As his hypothesis was a high-level generalization, he chose to keep
each filter at the highest level, and never drilled down to any specific
teams, rinks, or times. Furthermore, because shot length was far more
important to him than specific locations, he chose to explore exclu-
sively using radial heat maps. He SnapShotted two radial heat maps
(Figure 17, top row): home shots and goals and away shots and goals,
each at a two foot granularity. Because the views included all thirty
teams, he mentioned that there may be several teams skewing the dis-
tribution of shot lengths, but that he still expected to find slight differ-
ences in shooting patterns.

By toggling back and forth between the two radial heat maps, the
analyst noticed and pointed out two rings on the ice that interested
him. While both heat maps had a red ring around the thirty foot shoot-
ing mark, the ring is comparatively darker on the visitor team map
(each ring indicated with a arrow arrow in the top row of Figure 17).
Additionally, the dark ring fifty feet from the net on the home map
(green arrow in Figure 17) was not as pronounced on the away map.
These two insights caused the analyst to theorize out loud, “More long
shots from home teams and less of those thirty footers, I wonder which
of these are actually goals?” This query led him to SnapShot two ad-
ditional radial heat maps (Figure 17, bottom row): one of home goals
and one of away goals. The distributions appeared to be nearly iden-
tical. This excited the analyst. He concluded that “They are shooting
differently at home but they aren’t scoring differently!” As he ended
his evaluation, the analyst asked if he could access the system in a non-
evaluation capacity and use these visualizations in a client presentation
about the “Animals defend their home” theory.

5.3 Analyst C: “Sweet Spots”
The third evaluator, Analyst C, chose to use SnapShot to investigate
potential “sweet spot” areas on the ice, those areas with a high conver-
sion rate of shots to goals. He commented, “Since most goalies have
their stick in their right hand and glove in their left, I am wondering
if they struggle to move left to right, and if shooters are capitalizing
on this.” Essentially, he was hypothesizing that more goals result from
shots on the goalie’s right side than left side.

To explore this possible phenomenon, the analyst created a shot
map colored by shots and goals. He quickly turned off the blue (failed)
shots and displayed only the red goals (Figure 18, top left). His ini-
tial impression was that there was little evidence that goals came from
non-symmetrical locations on the ice so he created several shot maps
based on his domain knowledge of hockey dynamics. One displayed

2826 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VISUALIZATION AND COMPUTER GRAPHICS, VOL. 18, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2012

Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITAT POLITECNICA DE CATALUNYA. Downloaded on October 05,2020 at 18:47:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 



Fig. 18. Analyst C’s four shot maps of goals during the season. The
maps depict, clockwise from top left: all goals, left and right winger only,
goals made from January onwards, and goals during the 3rd period.

goals by just left and right wingers (Figure 18, top right); one dis-
played goals during the third period (Figure 18, bottom left); and one
displayed only goals scored from January onward (Figure 18, bottom
right). As he explored each image, he talked about theories common
amongst NHL coaches such as “intuition says that a shot has a bigger
advantage if the goalie isn’t set yet”.

None of the four shot maps that he created (and the corresponding
traditional heat maps he created later) supported his hypothesis that
players scored more goals shooting from the goalie’s right side. How-
ever, this dead end only intrigued the analyst more. In his words, “I
like to feel that I’m being pushed to think more creatively. This was
my first opportunity to explore these theories.” He mentioned that he
would like to continue to search for “soft spots” using the system in
the future, particularly areas outside of “the house”, the term he used
to describe the high-trafficked pentagon defined by the net, faceoff cir-
cles, and the blue line.

6 DISCUSSION

In order to offer hockey analysts effective visualization capabilities,
we designed the SnapShot system around nuances of their data and
three stages of their existing workflow: exploration, collaboration, and
presentation.

The case studies demonstrate SnapShot effectively allowing for vi-
sual exploration of data. As Analyst B explained, “I like that this al-
lows me to go from abstract thoughts to specific images very quickly.
Sometimes I don’t know what it is telling me initially, but I like the
possibilities.”

During the evaluation of SnapShot, two participating analysts pre-
ferred radial heat maps because the view visualizes the variable they
were most interested in, shot length. Analyst B told us in his closing
comments,“I was suspicious at first, but I’ve fallen for it.” The Analyst
C preferred shot maps because that view visualizes the variable he was
most interested in, shot locations.

The analysts utilized small multiples representations, despite ini-
tial reservations. Upon his first encounter of them, Analyst A re-
marked, “I have to tell you, I am overwhelmed and very impressed
all at once.” Yet because many of hockey’s statistics are categorical,
the view proved its utility over the course of his investigation. By the
end of his session, Analyst A was constantly referring back to it.

Analyst C shared promising evidence that SnapShot may provide
the presentation capabilities for which it was designed, “I know many
traditionalists in our sport who resist analytics, but maybe wouldn’t
with more pictures involved.”

We were surprised that none of the evaluation participants ex-
pressed interest in sharing their visual findings with their peers, de-
spite collaboration being a main design goal of SnapShot. However,

this does align with the initial exploration stage of the model work-
flow being an individual process, in contrast to the collaborative brain-
storming exploration stage.

7 CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK

In our introduction, we explained that in hockey, winning on the ice
starts with strong strategies and that hockey analysts contribute to
these strategies through statistical analysis. In our related work, we de-
scribed the current state of sports visualization. Through interactions
with a professional hockey analyst, we developed and modelled a typ-
ical sports analyst workflow and we identified those areas where visu-
alization can add value. We presented a hockey visualization system,
SnapShot, designed to augment this workflow. Finally, we outlined
and discussed three case studies of domain experts using SnapShot and
the effectiveness of visualization for enhancing analysts’ exploration
process and business intelligence features.

To the information visualization community, this paper contributes:
a model workflow of a sports analyst, the SnapShot system for visu-
alizing 2010-2011 National Hockey League shot data, and three case
studies of hockey analysts exploring their data visually.

We propose several areas of future work for ourselves and the vi-
sualization community as a whole. We hope to expand the number
of event types that SnapShot supports to include events such as hits,
passes, and penalties. SnapShot only visualizes the data provided; we
would like to add analytic capacity to the system in order to support
visual analytics methods. Our second analyst expressed a desire to fil-
ter based on whether a shooter’s team is winning or losing, so we plan
to accommodate this and other such analytic functions in later ver-
sions of SnapShot. We hope our documentation of a sports analysts’
workflow will inform future sports visualization system design. Our
workflow model provides a foundation for designing systems to sup-
port sports analysts. There is opportunity to refine this model through
investigation of the exploration stage collaboration amongst sports an-
alysts. Finally, we intend for our case studies to highlight the potential
for incorporating visualization into the growing ice hockey analytics
community.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors wish to thank the study participants for giving their time
to evaluate the system and the Information Interfaces Group, Yi Han,
and the reviewers for their invaluable feedback on drafts. This work
was supported in part by the National Science Foundation via Award
CCF-0808863.

REFERENCES
[1] P.-A. Albinsson and D. Andersson. Extending the attribute explorer

to support professional team-sport analysis. Information Visualization,
7(2):163–169, 2008.

[2] M. Bostock, V. Ogievetsky, and J. Heer. D3: Data-driven documents.
IEEE Trans. Visualization & Comp. Graphics (Proc. InfoVis), 2011.

[3] C. Brewer and M. Harrower. Colorbrewer 2.0. http://www.
colorbrewer2.org.

[4] S. Carter, G. Roberts, and J. Ward. How mariano rivera dominates
hitters. New York Times Magazine http://www.nytimes.com/
interactive/2010/06/29/magazine/rivera-pitches.
html, June 2010.

[5] A. Cox and J. Stasko. Sportsvis: Discovering meaning in sports statis-
tics through information visualization. Compendium of Symposium on
Information Visualization, pages 114–115, 2006.

[6] ESPN. GameCast. http://scores.espn.go.com/nhl/
gamecast?gameId=400047896, 2012.

[7] K. Goldsberry. CourtVision: New Visual and Spatial Analytics for the
NBA. MIT Sloan Sports Analytics Conference, 2012.

[8] J. Heer, F. Viegas, and M. Wattenberg. Voyagers and voyeurs: support-
ing asynchronous collaborative information visualization. Proceedings of
the SIGCHI conference on Human Factors in computing systems, pages
1029–1038, 2007.

[9] J. Hollinger. Carlisle pushes all of the right buttons. ESPN NBA, June
2011.

2827PILEGGI ET AL: SNAPSHOT: VISUALIZATION TO PROPEL ICE HOCKEY ANALYTICS

Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITAT POLITECNICA DE CATALUNYA. Downloaded on October 05,2020 at 18:47:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 



[10] A. Inselberg. Multidimensional detective. In Information Visualization,
1997. Proceedings., IEEE Symposium on, pages 100–107, 1997.

[11] L. Jin and D. C. Banks. Visualizing a tennis match. In INFOVIS ’96:
Proceedings of the 1996 IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization
(INFOVIS ’96. IEEE Computer Society, Oct. 1996.

[12] M. Lewis. Moneyball: the art of winning an unfair game. W.W. Norton,
2003.

[13] R. Maheswaran, Y.-H. Chang, A. Henehan, and S. Danesis. Deconstruct-
ing the Rebound with Optical Tracking Data. MIT Sloan Sports Analytics
Conference, pages 1–7, Feb. 2012.

[14] NHL. Ice Tracker. http://www.nhl.com/ice/icetracker.
htm?id=2011020615l.

[15] A. Rusu, D. Stoica, and E. Burns. Analyzing Soccer Goalkeeper Per-
formance using a Metaphor-Based Visualization. In 15th International
Conference Information Visualisation (IV), pages 194–199. IEEE, 2011.

[16] A. Rusu, D. Stoica, E. Burns, B. Hample, K. McGarry, and R. Russell.
Dynamic visualizations for soccer statistical analysis. International Con-
ference on Information Visualisation, pages 207–212, 2010.

[17] E. Segel and J. Heer. Narrative Visualization: Telling Stories with
Data. Visualization and Computer Graphics, IEEE Transactions on,
16(6):1139–1148, 2010.

[18] R. Spence and L. Tweedie. The attribute explorer: information synthesis
via exploration. Interacting with Computers, 11:137–146, 1998.

[19] SportsVision. PITCHf/x. http://www.sportvision.com/
base-pitchfx.html.

[20] Stats LLC. SportVu Data Visualization Suite. http://www.
sportvu.com/.

[21] Tableau Software. Tableau. http://www.tableausoftware.
com.

[22] D. Tan, G. Smith, B. Lee, and G. Robertson. AdaptiviTree: Adaptive tree
visualization for tournament-style brackets. Visualization and Computer
Graphics, IEEE Transactions on, 13(6):1113–1120, 2007.

[23] Tibco. Spotfire. http://www.spotfire.tibco.com.
[24] E. Tufte. Envisioning information. Graphics Press, 1990.
[25] E. Tufte. Beautiful evidence. Graphics Press, 2006.
[26] J. Tukey. Exploratory Data Analysis. Addison-Wesley Series in Behav-

ioral Science. Addison-Wesley Pub. Co., 1977.
[27] F. Viegas, M. Wattenberg, F. van Ham, J. Kriss, and M. McKeon.

Manyeyes: a site for visualization at internet scale. Visualization and
Computer Graphics, IEEE Transactions on, 13(6):1121–1128, 2007.

[28] T. Williams and J. Underwood. Science of Batting. Sports Illustrated,
pages 34–47, July 1968.

2828 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VISUALIZATION AND COMPUTER GRAPHICS, VOL. 18, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2012

Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITAT POLITECNICA DE CATALUNYA. Downloaded on October 05,2020 at 18:47:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


