






































Microsoft Word - spiral-080698c.doc


Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not
made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear
this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee.
UIST ’98. San Francisco, CA
 1998 ACM 0-58113-034-1/98/11... $5.00

29

Interactive Visualization of Serial Periodic Data

John V. Carlis and Joseph A. Konstan
Department of Computer Science and Engineering

University of Minnesota
Minneapolis, MN 55455 USA

+1 612 625-4002
{carlis,konstan}@cs.umn.edu

ABSTRACT
Serial periodic data exhibit both serial and periodic
properties.  For example, time continues forward serially,
but weeks, months, and years are periods that recur.
While there are extensive visualization techniques for
exploring serial data, and a few for exploring periodic
data, no existing technique simultaneously displays serial
and periodic attributes of a data set.  We introduce a spiral
visualization technique, which displays data along a spiral
to highlight serial attributes along the spiral axis and
periodic ones along the radii.  We show several
applications of the spiral visualization to data exploration
tasks, present our implementation, discuss the capacity for
data analysis, and present findings of our informal study
with users in data-rich scientific domains.

Keywords
Information Visualization, Spiral, Data Visualization,
Interactive Data Exploration, Serial Periodic Data.

INTRODUCTION
Information visualization is the practice of mapping data
sets into visual media for the purposes of assisting users in
exploring these data sets or communicating about them to
others.  As a practiced discipline, information
visualization dates back over two centuries, as documented
in [27].  More recently, the visual display ability of
computers has allowed more extensive interactive
visualization, from the constrained drawings of Sketchpad
[26], to representations of hierarchical data [23], large
documents [22], and time-sequenced data [19].  While the
visualization of many data types has been explored,
including fairly specialized cases such as citation tracking
[15] and document tree usage tracking [5], none of the
existing visualization techniques adequately support the
exploration of serial periodic data.

Serial periodic data has a serial (continuous) dimension
that exhibits periodicity.  The most common example is

temporal data that exhibits seasonality.  A tree’s growth,
for example, continues serially from day to day, month to
month, and year to year.  At the same time, looking only at
the serial dimension hides important information.  The
tree may grow more extensively each spring, and may
cease growing altogether each winter.

Serial periodic data must be examined both serially and
periodically at the same time to discover certain patterns.
Consider a tree for which we have size information
measured daily for several years.  Neither the serial (day to
day) nor the periodic (winter to winter) dimension alone
would help us discover whether trees exhibit later growing
seasons as they age, or perhaps after each year of floods.
(This simple example is contrived, but we discuss below
several more complex real examples including patterns in
chimpanzee feeding behaviors and film release dates.)

Other examples of serial periodic data include experience
and frequency.  Experience can be thought of as a measure
of age within a system.  Students, for example, may find
that their distribution of time spent on various activities
progresses serially as they gain experience in time
management, but has periodic properties that reflect the
beginning of each academic year, midterms, and holiday
jobs.  An example of serial periodic frequency data is
musical notes.  An increase of one octave from middle C is
another C note (in this case, the serial dimension is
transformed logarithmically).

The examples presented here illustrate pure serial periodic
data.  Pure data has a single, continuous dimension in
which each period has equal duration.  By contrast, many
phenomena, including temporal phenomena, are better
modeled as event-anchored serial periodic data.  Event-
anchored data has periods with different durations; the
start of a new period is indicated by an event.  Examples of
this type of data include multi-day racing data and project-
based time tracking.  Multi-day races such as the Tour de
France have stages that each take a different amount of
time; the data set as a whole has a serial dimension--the
end of one lap precedes the start of the next--along with a
periodic one.  We may choose to examine these together to
discover whether a particular racer is improving his starts
or finishes as the race progresses, or whether he peaks



30

more rapidly after long stages than after short ones.
Project-based time tracking looks at the use of time over
the course of projects, from start to finish and onto the
next one.  We can again explore both serial and periodic
trends by examining how a person’s efficiency at a
particular phase of each project is affected by the pattern
and number of prior projects.  While there are many
exciting problems involved in event-anchored data, this
paper focuses on pure data, except for some discussion of
on-going work.

Despite the wide prevalence of serial periodic data, few
interfaces support exploring it.  This owes, in part, to the
propensity to use tabular layouts that visually exaggerate
distances across the period boundary.  For example, our
calendars visually separate the 31st of December from the
very next day—the 1st of January.  Similarly, in music,
high and low C notes appear far apart on the staff, hiding
the fact that, when sung, they are heard as the “same”
note.

This paper presents a visualization technique and tool for
exploring serial periodic data through a spiral data layout
that maps the serial dimension to the spiral in a manner
such that each period fills 360 degrees (one lap).  In this
visualization, serial data is explored by viewing along the
spiral and periodic data is explored along the radii.  Before
presenting our design, we evaluate the appropriateness of
existing visualization techniques.

Motivation and Related Work
This work is motivated by the fact that current
visualization tools do not support users in simultaneously
exploring serial and periodic attributes of serial periodic
data.  We do not make this claim lightly; it is rarely
worthwhile to develop new visualization techniques since
so many useful ones already exist.  This section provides a
brief survey of the techniques we explored as alternatives
to developing our own.

One well-established set of techniques involves tabular
display of data.  A range of spreadsheets, from commercial
products such as Excel to research visualization
spreadsheets [4] provide the ability to arrange data in
tabular form.  More sophisticated tools such as the Table
Lens [20] and FOCUS table browser [25] provide greater
exploration support through interactive manipulation of
the table view.  Unfortunately, it is very difficult to view
data serially and periodically in a table or spreadsheet.
Laying data out with one period per row (or column) can
allow some periodic exploration (but only for a single
datum per time unit, except for the visualization
spreadsheet).  While it is possible to augment this with
replication to give a limited ability to view data serially,
we found this interface to be awkward and unsatisfying.

A variety of linear displays exist that use a timeline as the
basis for representation.  Many useful interactive tools

using timelines have been created specifically for temporal
data:
• Multimedia presentation authoring tools often show

multiple "tracks" of data in parallel along a timeline
[e.g., 6].

• The LifeLines [19] visualization tool shows different
categories and incidents of events (in criminal justice
history and medical record applications) laid out along
a zoomable, browsable timeline.

None of these timeline systems, however, provide any
support for viewing the periodic aspects of the data.

Other visualizations use angles and radii for display.
Circular line graphs [8] map two different variables onto
the radius (r) and angle (Θ) dimensions, whereas spirals
map one variable and use r and Θ to explore its serial and
periodic nature.  Similarly, wind rose graphs [8] map
compass direction to Θ and duration to r.

A wide range of interactive data exploration is supported
by tools employing dynamic query and focus+context
interface techniques.

Dynamic query systems, such as the FilmFinder and
HomeFinder applications using starfield displays, allow
users to rapidly explore large data sets through convenient
interfaces to range and join queries [1].  This technique is
particularly appealing for our scientific applications, such
as chimpanzee feeding behavior, because of the large
volume of data available for exploration.  Unfortunately,
while starfield displays easily can show two independent
dimensions (e.g., longitude and latitude in the
HomeFinder, or length and release date in the
FilmFinder), they do not support display of periodic and
serial attributes of the same data dimension.  We have
incorporated a limited set of dynamic query capabilities
into our spiral visualization tool, have found them to be
useful, and expect to incorporate more of them as
applications demand.

Focus+context interfaces provide users with a view on the
details of a small part of a data set while using area,
perspective, or volume to show the surrounding context in
reduced detail.  A variety of these techniques has been
shown to be suitable for different data types.  Examples
include hyperbolic browsers for trees [12], a perspective
wall for linear documents [16], a document lens for
documents organized in pages [22], and a variety of
special lenses for viewing maps and graphs [e.g., 24].  Of
these, the one with the most promise was the document
lens, since pages have a periodic component.  We found,
however, that the document lens, while very good for
helping users manage serial exploration of pages, was not
particularly useful for exploring periodic patterns.  We still
find focus+context techniques interesting, but have not yet
determined how they can be applied to the spiral.



31

One additional general visualization technique that has
been explored recently is the zooming interface [18, 3, and
21]. This technique allows users to see an overview of
data, or to zoom into a subset of the data with greater
detail.  Unlike focus+context interfaces, the context is
generally not immediately visible, but can be accessed by
zooming back out.  The data analysis tasks we have,
however, require extensive manipulation and exploration
at full scale.  Zooming does not help users explore periodic
and serial trends.  Accordingly, we provide zooming to
help users focus on a smaller or larger number of periods,
but otherwise have not found zooming to be particularly
useful.

Finally, there are a number of special-purpose interfaces
that have been developed to solve data exploration and
navigation problems.  The cone tree [23] for tree or
hierarchical data and the butterfly [15] for citation links
both support well-structured navigation tasks, but do not
match our data sets.  The calendar visualization [17] has a
periodic temporal aspect to it, but it does not directly
support viewing data in serial fashion, watching a value
increase as it progresses from day to day across weeks.1

Perhaps the closest match is the use of a helix to represent
an instant in music; indeed musical representation
provided some motivation for this work.  The helix,
however, showed only a single time instant, whereas the
planar nature of the spiral allows us to represent music
over time.

The rest of this paper presents the spiral visualization
concept, walks through several examples of using spiral
visualizations to explore data and communicate about data,
and presents our implementation, evaluation, and ongoing

                                                       
1 The calendar visualizer refers to a spiral calendar, but that

spiral is a receding stack of increasingly coarser calendars that
bears little resemblance to our spiral work in goals or methods.

work.

CONCEPTUAL BACKGROUND:  WHY A SPIRAL?
The term “spiral” can be used generally or specifically.  In
the dictionary, spiral as a noun means “the path of a point
in a plane moving around a central point while
continuously receding from or approaching it,” or “a three-
dimensional curve (as a helix) with one or more turns
about.”  A helix is “a coil formed by winding wire around
a uniform tube.”  In mathematics, spirals have been
studied for millennia and there are dozens of variations
[e.g., 7, 11, 13, and 14], some of which do not look like
common spirals.  For example, a Cornu spiral looks like a
fancy “S” and a spherical spiral looks like a helix drawn
on a ball instead of a cylinder. For the visualization of
serial-periodic data, we use only planar spirals, both
because planar spirals leave an additional dimension for
visualizing data attributes and because, so far, non-planar
spirals have not given us any useful displays.  Recently,
Keim [10] uses a spiral-like space-filling curve for serial
pixel data, and Hascoet [9] uses spirals to compactly
display lists of rank-scale document similarity data.

The most common planar spirals are the spiral of
Archimedes [2], the hyperbolic spiral and the logarithmic
spiral.  The line of the latter two moves rapidly away from
the origin.  We use the spiral of Archimedes, because it
moves away from the origin at a constant rate and,
therefore, is more compact.  For the rest of this paper when
we use “spiral” we mean the spiral of Archimedes.

An Archimedean spiral (see figure 1) is expressed in a
polar equation:

r = αΘ

where

x = r cos Θ  y = r sinΘ
r = sqrt (x2 + y2) Θ = tan–1 (y/x)

We think in terms of a “spiral axis,” where we wind an
axis for a serial-periodic variable into a spiral so that the
periods align as we want them to. If T is an axis and c is a
sizing constant then for t, a point on T, its position in the
plane can be found using:

x = c * t * cos(t * 2 * Π)

y = c* t * sin(t * 2 * Π);

We have found the beginning of the spiral too crowded for
displays and offset t by a user-supplied indenting value.
That is, t = t +indent.

To understand a spiral display of serial - periodic data
consider the example shown in figure 2:

• This spiral contains data on the consumption of
Baphia Capparidifolia by chimpanzees in the Gombe
preserve in Tanzania for the years 1980 through 1988.

Figure 1.  A Spiral of Archimedes. (for color figures see the
electronic proceedings or www.cs.umn.edu/~carlis)



32

• There is one lap of the spiral for each year and one
month for each spoke.  The spiral and spokes are
displayed to help the user identify years and months.
January is at 3 o’clock, April at 12 o’clock, etc.  Since
the data set has monthly values, we do not represent
the differences in the number of days in each month.

• For many months, a blot is displayed.  The area of the
blot is proportional to the observed consumption
percentage during that month of that year.

• The primatologists2 studying this display readily saw
and explained patterns, e.g., chimpanzees eat new
leaves of this plant, which are produced at the
beginning and the end of the rainy season which is
approximately October – April, and, more
particularly, late rainy season consumption was
steadier than that in early season.

• They also saw and sought explanations for anomalies,
e.g., in 1984, which was a drought year, consumption
was considerably lower in the early rainy season, and
high consumption in August 1983 occurred when the
rainy season came early.

Figure 2 also illustrates some of the properties of the spiral
display, including:

                                                       
2 We have been working with Prof. Anne Pusey, Director of the

University of Minnesota’s Jane Goodall Institute--Center for
Primate Study, Jane Goodall and other scholars to computerize
and analyze the field notes from Goodall’s famous decades-
long field study. The initial impetus for the spiral work
reported here came from their frustrations in analyzing
seasonal variations in chimpanzee behaviors.

• We have chosen an “elevation” view of the spiral with
a viewpoint so that the spiral centers on and fills the
square-viewing window.

• To help orient the user, we display both the spiral line
and spokes emanating from the origin.  These can be
hidden when the nature of the data display makes
them more distracting than useful.

• The spiral is indented 2 laps and has 9 laps drawn.
Since a lap is once around the spiral, an extra,
harmless lap was drawn.

• The inner laps are shorter than the outer ones. You
can think of the T axis being stretched as it is wound
around the origin.

• The spiral and blots are scaled so that no blots
overlap.

Notice that the region surrounding each blot contains its
serial and periodic neighbors.  It is visually easy to look at
what happened the month prior or following (counter-
clockwise or clockwise) or at this season in years past
(inward) or future (outward).

For this data set all blots appear at a spiral-spoke

Figure 2. An indented spiral, with spokes, showing monthly
consumption percentages for Baphia Capparidifolia during the
period 1980 – 1988.

Figure 3.  A spiral display of monthly consumption percentages
for all 112 foods during the period 1980 – 1988.



33

intersection.  Other data sets have data appearing at any
point along the spiral, and some use radius offsets from the
spiral to organize multiple data points or highlight data
attributes.

With a spiral one can display large amounts of data at
once. For example, figure 2 shows only a small subset of
the consumption data for chimpanzees; figure 3 shows all
112 foods.  In this spiral:

• Each food appears in its own z range above the
spiral’s x-y plane.

• The foods appear in order by their names; there is no
quantitative meaning to a high or low z.

• Each food has been assigned one of twelve colors. A
panel (described below) shows the matching of names
and colors.

• Rather than use blots, here we use lidless, hollow
“cans,” where the volume of a can is proportional to
consumption.

• The figure’s viewpoint is above the spiral plane, off to
the side, and zoomed out.

• The viewpoint and the relative scales of the height of a
can, a can’s area, and the spiral’s size were chosen to
allow a considerable amount of data to be notable and,
at the same time, to have little data obscured.
However, some distortion occurs.

This figure is just one of many views we explored when
looking at this data with primatologists.  The user controls
rotation, zoom, pan, and tilt along with the set of data to
be displayed and the mapping between data and visual
form.  From this view, we can readily see which foods are
eaten most and least, either overall or at different times of
the year.  We can then explore those foods in more detail
individually or in smaller sets.

Together, these examples illustrate most of the idea behind
spiral visualization.  We hasten to point out that, at least
for now, the spiral is a visualization model that requires
exploration.  For users exploring data sets, it is valuable
and often necessary to view the data in different ways to
reveal different patterns.  For users seeking to
communicate to others, it is often useful to explore
different viewpoints and mappings before settling on a
small number of still images that highlight the patterns of
interest.

To support these exploration and communication tasks, we
provide a number of annotation features not shown in
these brief examples. They include the ability to align
different spirals vertically (similar to the model of the web
ecology visualization tool [5]) and the ability to define
data-derived border lines to illustrate phenomena external
to the data set (e.g., the start of the rainy season or a period
of drought).

EXAMPLE USES OF SPIRAL VISUALIZATION
The two examples shown above illustrate the basic use of
the spiral.  This section presents a set of examples from
our work with primatologists, along with some
experimental visualization of sound and movie data.
Through these examples, we illustrate other useful features
of the spiral, and demonstrate ways in which spiral

visualizations can reveal interesting attributes of data.

Chimpanzee Food Consumption
The next two examples show how a plain spiral can be
augmented to show several data sets simultaneously.
Figure 4 shows the twelve most commonly eaten foods
with additional “boundary lines" showing the onset of the
rainy season for each year.  This figure illustrates several
additional visual mappings:

• Consumption values for each month appear as
"spikes" with a length proportional to the
consumption level.  The height scale and fixed width
value can be adjusted by the user.  Here, each spike is
four pixels wide.

• Each food has its own color.  Since several spikes
appear at each month, they are arranged in a
consistent order and form a "flag."  Users can choose
to keep flags oriented perpendicular to the sight line to
improve visibility.

• A boundary line, a long black line, is drawn to show
the beginning and end of the season of interest.  They
allow the user to focus on a period of interest.  For
different data, tick marks, short black lines drawn
perpendicular to the spiral, are used.  Tick marks
provide a visually distinct appearance that supports
comparison with irregularly occurring events.
Accordingly, a user can observe that the consumption
of a particular food is late one year, but that the
lateness is consistent with a late rainy season.

Figure 4.  A spiral display of year-month consumption
percentages for 12 highly consumed foods during the period
1980 – 1988.  Rotated and zoomed in to show one season and
boundary lines.



34

Figure 5 shows data about the group sizes in which two
different chimps (red and blue) travel.  This example
illustrates the use of multiple, linked spirals:

• The upper spiral shows the average group size, while
the lower shows the maximum group size.  Each
spiral is assigned a z-value that can be controlled by
the user.

• The spirals rotate, zoom, pan and tilt together.
• The z values and scales have been chosen so that as

we explore the data (notably with tilt) the two spirals

and their data are close but do not mingle.

Neuron Firing Data
In our exploration of chimpanzee data, we have found
several techniques to be useful.  Because of the volume of
data collected, we often wish to scan through the data in
an organized manner, either one food at a time or
seasonally, one spoke at a time.  Figure 2 shows a single-
food view, which can be animated to step through a set of
different foods.  While exploring a different data set--
neuron-firing activity--we found it particularly useful to
step through the individual spokes.  Figure 6 shows a set of
neuron cell firing data for a particular part of the stimulus
cycle.  In this spoke of the spiral (the spiral line itself
disappears since it is orthogonal to the display), we see the
firing rates, relative to normal, for different cells:

• Each cell is assigned a color.  The spikes have positive
or negative value to reflect the deviation of firing rate
from normal.

• From left to right, we move from the inside of the
spiral outward.  Each flag displays the firing rate of
each cell of interest.  This view made it easier to
detect cells that lost sensitivity when "fatigued" by
repeated stimulation.

In general, it is often useful to focus in on a set of data,
and then move back to the whole data set, very much in
the way users do with dynamic queries.

Sound
In several cases, we have found it useful to explore
different lap rates.  For example, changing a lap from one
year to two years helps explore biennial cycles.  Even more
exciting, however, is exploring data where the periodicity
is unknown.  Figure 7 shows a set of quantized sound data.
This data comes from research conducted by colleagues
interested in finding the formants of a recording to allow
them to shorten or lengthen it while preserving quality.
To help them discover periodicity, we tighten the spiral,
changing the time per lap looking for values where the
data lines up.  Figure 7 shows three different views based
on different time per lap values.  The data comes from a
compact disc recording of five instruments.

This figure is the first example we provide of interval data.
Interval data occurs between two points on the spiral axis
rather than at a point.  More specifically:

• Each interval with sound appears as a rectangle of
height 1 (on) that is bent around the spiral.  White
space means either that no sound occurs or that
sounds cancel out.

• Scale values were chosen to fill out the spiral. No
white space is left between the outer bent rectangle
and the next spiral lap line.

• The angle that a blue bent rectangle fills is important.
Its actual length depends in part on which lap it is in.

Figure 5.  A spiral display of average and maximum groups
sizes for two chimpanzees.

Figure 6.  A single spoke of a spiral
display of neuron firing frequencies.
The user can animate this display to step
forward through the spokes.



35

Increasing the spiral’s indent would lessen the

difference in displayed length of equal-time intervals
and give the display more of a donut appearance.

• The three snapshots in the figure only weakly indicate
the emergence of organization in the data as the time
per lap parameter lessens.  The dynamic display at
first (left) appeared disorganized, then (center) some
wilted stalks emerged, and then (right) they
straightened.

• The right snapshot shows several straight stalks, some
of which are missing some values.

Movie Data
Finally, we were interested in exploring the value of spiral
visualization on data sets used by other interactive
visualization researchers.  We decided to look at movie
data to explore the seasonality and change in seasonality of
movie releases over time.  We use a subset of the

FilmFinder data [1], augmented by release dates obtained

from the Internet Movie Database (www.imdb.com).
Figure 8 shows blots for movie releases with colors
corresponding to genre.  Figure 9 looks at horror movies in
greater detail.  From this simple example, we learn that:

• Historically, very few movies have been released in
December.

• After 1985, there was a significant increase in the
number of July movie releases.

• Horror movies are disproportionately released in the
weeks preceding Halloween.

With up-to-date data plus data on box office sales and
academy award nominations, we could proceed to explore
the hypothesis that films released early in the year are less
likely to be nominated for an academy award, or the
hypothesis that big-budget films are released at specific
times of the year.

Figure 7.  Tightening a spiral view of sound data from five instruments.  From left to right the structure of the sound reveals itself.

Figure 8.  A display of movie data by release date (1930 - 1996).
Color is movie genre and blot diameter is movie popularity.
Square blocks mark five-year intervals.

Figure 9.  Spiral display of horror movies shows a
disproportionate number released just before Halloween.



36

BASIC IMPLEMENTATION AND PROTOTYPE
In this section we give details of the prototype
implementation and its user interface.

Our prototype program is written in Tcl (about 4,000 lines)
and C (about 7,000 lines).  It uses the Mesa
implementation of OpenGL for its graphics. We run it on
Sun Sparc workstations under the Solaris operating
system.

The spiral rendering code follows the equations presented
above.  The interesting prototyping challenge has been
providing extensive control to the visualization operator to
allow effective exploration.  We use the term visualization
operator because the model of usage has been for a content
expert (e.g., a primatologist) to work together with a tool
expert (i.e., one of our group) to explore the data together.
We discuss this design decision in more detail below.

Figure 10 shows a reduced main window with a set of the
most frequently used control panels.  The main interface
window is a graphics window augmented with buttons that
bring up additional control panels, change the display
style, save the configuration, or quit.  Display styles
include the can, spike, and blot shown above; the episode
display shown in the sound example; a dot, which displays
a unit-sized icosahedron at the position where the top of a
spike would appear; and a ball which displays an
icosahedron with volume proportional to the data value.

Like cans and blots, balls can be offset in the z-dimension
to provide additional data display.

The toolbar controls the viewpoint on what is being
displayed. Viewpoint controls are straightforward: pan,
tilt, zoom and rotate.  Clicking on one of these buttons
moves the viewpoint a user-set amount.  A sliders
subordinate window has slider controls for these 4
viewpoint functions.  Extra controls allow one to quickly
get a plan, an elevation, or a “home” (above the spiral
plane, off to the side, somewhat zoomed out), or to mark
an interesting viewpoint and return to it.

The settings window contains one line for each variable3 in
a scrollable frame plus a number of other controls.  Each
variable has a number, a color, a name, a name change
field, a position/position change field, a variable scale
value, a variable scale change field, a z-offset and a z-
offset change field.  We chose to have display/new value
pairs, rather than editable fields, because of the common
case where the new values for a set of variables each

                                                       
3 In the interface, we adopted the term variable for the primary

enumerated attribute.  Primatologists considered each food to
be a variable; genre was the variable in the movie example.
While there can be multiple enumerated attributes in a spiral,
we have not yet incorporated a clean interface for specifying
them independently.

Figure 10.  The spiral viewer prototype with several control panels displayed.



37

depend on several old values.  The window has controls for
toggling on/off the display of variables and for
determining their relative order in flag displays.

The display window allows the user to set the constant
factor (units per lap), to set an acceleration factor
(attenuating the spiral), and to display more spirals, each
with its own z-offset.  It also has controls to toggle the
display of the spiral, spokes, boundary ticks or lines, and a
z-axis pole, among other features

The laps window allows the user to control how much
spiral is displayed and how much data is displayed.

The animate window looks slightly different depending on
whether the constant factor, variable, spoke, or (spiral)
offset (of one variable) is being animated.  Its purpose is to
allow a user to quickly step through the data.  Animating
the constant factor is useful when searching for periodicity.
Animating by variable or by spoke allows the user to focus
on a portion of the data.  Animating spiral offset allows a
user to search for, for example, leading indictors such as
“2 months after the onset of the rainy season this food is
no longer eaten extensively.”

Continuing Work
While our prototype has proven to be extremely useful, we
also recognize that it is far from complete.  Among the
steps we hope to take in the near future are:

• Experimentation with alternative input devices for
navigation and control; 3-DOF input devices would be
an improvement, though 6-DOF may be too flexible.

• General improvements to the UI, including creation of
reusable viewing and animation templates, better use
of shortcuts and menus, and simplification of the
structure.

• Exploration of automated, data-driven style and view
selection.

Long-term, we also hope to create tighter integration with
spreadsheet and database tools to permit more flexible
manipulation and filtering of data as part of exploration.

DISCUSSION
We are very excited by our initial results with spiral
visualization.  One particularly satisfying part of this work
is the ease with which users and colleagues accept the
notion of serial periodic data.  Seasonality appears to be a
fundamental concept that people recognize and accept.  In
this section we briefly report our experiences with users
and our high-level plans for future work.

Experience with Users
Pretty pictures are worth little if real users find no value in
a system.  We have interacted with about a dozen users so
far, drawn from a variety of disciplines, but mostly from
biological sciences.  From these lessons, we distilled a few
observations.

Users quickly buy into the notion of a spiral display. Even
our fledgling efforts yielded positive feedback, perhaps
because they were saddled with poor tools for dealing with
their serial periodic data.  However, they were not self-
sufficient and needed an experienced operator of the
software to help them explore.

Users react to the spiral displays.  When they saw a
pattern, they tried to explain the pattern to each other by
telling stories. When they saw an anomaly they sometimes
told stories, but they also went back to the original data to
see if it had been entered correctly.  (In one case a whole
file of papers had to be re-checked manually.)  Sometimes
they, with our help, put together a portfolio of spiral
display printouts to show to distant colleagues.

Users want more.  Our users did not run out of ideas for
analyses.  Indeed the opposite occurred.  Often a display
whetted their appetites for further study.

New opportunities arise.  Several times, as we showed
result to uninvolved colleagues, we found ourselves with
new data to analyze.  For example, we are beginning an
extension to support with spiral displays the management
of battery energy for the University of Minnesota’s
successful solar car team.

On-Going and Future Work
In addition to the improvements we plan to make to the
spiral visualization tool, there are several key research
objectives for our future work:

• More extensive usage studies.  Our informal
evaluation has been very successful, and formal
evaluation may need to wait for an improved interface,
but it is a high priority for us.

• Better support for exploration without a trained
operator.  The users who need this tool are willing to
spend some time learning to use it; we need to meet
them halfway with a simplified interface and better
data-driven defaults.

• Better integration with other data exploration tools.
The spiral is evidently not the appropriate tool for all
forms of data exploration--it should be integrated with
other tools to form a more powerful visualization
toolbox.

• More complex spirals.  A colleague asked what
happens when spirals occur in multiple dimensions.
We have also considered spiral-based scrolls as a
focus+context interface.  Much work remains.

CONCLUSION
We highlighted a type of data, serial periodic, which
occurs frequently but has not been the subject of
visualization research.  Arranging data in a spiral provides
the user with easy visual cues to both serial and periodic
aspects of the data, along with interactions such as the
change in period over time.



38

Spiral layout supports many different display options.
Indeed, in some ways it is comparable to trees (which
display hierarchies) or tables (which display data
categorized on two axes).  We have presented a tool that
implements several useful display options, and plan to
explore more of them.  Finally, our users have found these
visualizations to be useful in extracting seasonality and
periodicity data that is not evident from other views of the
data set.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We would like to thank a number of people for their
assistance in this work. They are: Brian Bailey, Elizabeth
Boschee, Jake Chen, Apostolos Georgeopolos, Jane
Goodall, Kalid Hamdy, David Herring, Douglas Perrin,
Anne Pusey, Alex Safonov, Tim Susman, Patrick  Starr,
and Jennifer Williams.  We also acknowledge the support
of the National Science Foundation through grants IRI 94-
10470 and DBI 97-23816.

REFERENCES
1. Ahlberg, C., Williamson, C., and Shneiderman, B.

Dynamic queries for information exploration: an
implementation and evaluation. In Proceedings of CHI
’92.

2. Archimedes.  Uber Spiralen. (Artur Czwalina,
translator). Leipzig, Akademische verlagsgesellschat
m.b.h., 1922.

3. Bederson, B.B. and Hollan, J.D.  Pad++:  a zooming
graphical interface for exploring alternate interface
physics.  In Proceedings of UIST ’94.

4. Chi, E.H., et. al.  A Spreadsheet Approach to
Information Visualization.  To appear in IEEE
Computer Graphics and Applications, July 1998.

5. Chi, E.H., et. al.  Visualizing the Evolution of Web
Ecologies.  In Proceedings of CHI 98.

6. Drapeau, G.D.  Synchronization in the MAEstro
multimedia authoring environment.  In Proceedings of
ACM Multimedia ’93.

7. Gray, A. Modern Differential Geometry of Curves and
Surfaces.  Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, pp. 69-70,
1993.

8. Harris, R.L.,  Information Graphics: A Comprehensive
Illustrated Reference. Management Graphics, Altanta,
1996.

9. Hascoët, M.  Analytical versus empirical evaluation of
spatial displays.  In CHI 98 Conference Summary.

10. Keim, D. A., Enhancing the Visual Clustering of
Query-Dependent Database Visualization Techniques
Using Screen-filling Curves. In Database Issues for
Data Visualization,  Wierse, A., et al, Eds., Springer
Verlag, 1995.

11. Lauweirer, H. Fractals: Endlessly Repeated Geometric
Figures. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, pp.
59-60, 1991.

12. Lamping, J. and Rao, R.  Laying out and visualizing
large tree using a hyperbolic space.  In Proceedings of
UIST ’94.

13. Lawrence, J. D. A Catalog of Special Plane Curves.
New York: Dover, pp. 186 and 189, 1972.

14. Lockwood, E. H. A Book of Curves. Cambridge,
England: Cambridge University Press, p. 175, 1967.

15. Mackinlay, J.D., Rao, R., and Card, S.K.  An organic
user interface for searching citation links.  In
Proceedings of CHI ’95.

16. Mackinlay, J.D., Robertson, G.G., and Card, S.K.  The
perspective wall:  detail and context smoothly
integrated.  In Proceedings of CHI ’91.

17. Mackinlay, J.D., Robertson, G.G., and DeLine, R..
Developing Calendar Visualizers for the Information
Visualizer.  In Proceedings of UIST ’94.

18. Perlin, K. and Fox, D.  Pad:  an alternative approach to
computer interface physics.  In Proceedings of
SIGGRAPH ’93.

19. Plaisant, C., et. al.  LifeLines:  visualizing personal
histories.  In Proceedings of CHI 96.

20. Rao, R. and Card, S.K. The table lens:  merging
graphical and symbolic representations in an
interactive focus + context visualization for tabular
information.  In Proceedings of CHI ’94.

21. Rennison, E.  Galaxy of news:  an approach to
visualizing and understanding expansive news
landscapes.  In Proceedings of UIST ’94.

22. Robertson, G.R. and Mackinlay, J.D.  The document
lens.  In Proceedings of UIST ’93.

23. Robertson, G.R., Mackinlay, J.D., and Card, S.K. Cone
Trees: animated 3D visualizations of hierarchical
information.  In Proceedings of CHI ’91.

24. Sarkar, M., et. al.  Stretching the Rubber Sheet:  A
Metaphor for Viewing Large Layouts on Small
Screens.  In Proceedings of UIST ’93.

25. Spenke, M., Beilken, C., and Berlage, T.  FOCUS:
The interactive table for product comparison and
selection.  In Proceedings of UIST 96.

26. Sutherland, I.  Sketchpad:  A man-machine graphical
communication system.  In AFIPS Conference
Proceedings, Spring Joint Computer Conference.
AFIPS, Arlington, VA, 1963.

27. Tufte, E.R.  The Visual Display of Quantitative
Information.  Graphics Press, Cheshire, CT, 1983.


