














































In-Situ Visualization of Pedaling Forces
on Cycling Training Videos

Oral Kaplan∗, Goshiro Yamamoto†, Yasuhide Yoshitake‡,
Takafumi Taketomi∗, Christian Sandor∗ and Hirokazu Kato∗

∗Nara Institute of Science and Technology, Japan Email: {oral.kaplan.nv4, takafumi-t, sandor, kato}@is.naist.jp
†Kyoto University Hospital, Japan Email: goshiro@kuhp.kyoto-u.ac.jp

‡National Institute of Fitness and Sports in Kanoya, Japan Email: y-yoshi@nifs-k.ac.jp

Abstract—Over the last decades, visual representations of data
has been a commonly used medium to bolster human cognition
in performance evaluation of professional athletes. However, the
current approaches to these visualizations still build upon the
paper based principles of initial designs with solid backgrounds.
Due to this situation, same visualizations usually fail to provide
explicit information about the physical characteristics of the
scenario that the data was captured, such as the form of athletes.

In this work, we present a data visualization method which
combines visual representations of cyclist’s pedaling with corre-
lated frames of indoor training videos. We designed a prototype
system which allows us to superimpose various pedaling visual-
izations onto simultaneously captured training videos of cyclists
(Figure 1). The results of user studies we conducted with twelve
professional cyclists confirmed their interest in new possibilities
emerging from intuitive data visualizations. We also received
valuable feedback about the feasible benefits of our approach
over traditional approaches, such as reduced cognitive overload
in understanding visualizations. We conclude by discussing the
future implementations and application areas of our approach
and further need of adjusting it to distinct training scenarios.

I. INTRODUCTION

Visual representations of data employ numerous abstract
shapes to utilize distinct properties of our visual system[1][2].
These visualizations can frequently be seen all around us; on
newspapers, TV news or simply internet. A line chart showing
the change in inflation over the years, a bar chart displaying the
election results or a pie chart representing the answers given
to a survey are all a part of these visualizations. Although
the current popularity level of these methods can mostly be
associated with the works of Bertin[3], Tukey[4] and Tufte[5],
in fact, the same visualizations were developed a long time
ago. In 18th century, Playfair invented line, area, and bar charts
to represent changes happening in economical data through
time[6]. In 1801, he also invented the pie chart and circle graph
to emphasize part-whole relationships, such as the proportions
of land that the Turkish Empire had in Asia, Africa and Europe
before 1789[6].

It has been more than two centuries and we are still utilizing
the same visualization style defined by Playfair. The immense
power of his approach can be understood by just looking at
this fact alone. Yet, we believe a few aspects of it still can
be improved with the help of current level of technology.
Computer systems started to move away from imitating textual

paper documents with Sutherland’s Sketchpad[7] in 1963,
but when it comes to visual representations of data, they are
still revolving around paper based approaches. Sports training
is also an area where the same visualization approach is being
used extensively.

Athletic performance depends on a great number of vari-
ables. Evaluating the data related to all these variables plays
a significant role in every professional athlete’s training. On
the other hand, the vast amount of data captured in textual
or numerical formats make information comprehension sub-
stantially difficult. Due to this situation, professional sports
communities became dependent on information visualization
techniques over the past years[8].

Professional cycling is also a sport where a vast amount
of sensors are used for capturing various types of data about
cyclist’s training. Among all, the data about cyclist’s pedaling
still remains to be the most important factor in determining
performance[9][10][11]. Captured data is most commonly vi-
sualized in the form of time series, histograms or scatter plots
(Figure 2). Although these visualizations give a nice overview
about one’s pedaling performance over a long period of time,
they usually fail to promote spatial reasoning and provide
explicit information on physical characteristics of cyclist’s
training.

In this work, we introduce a multivariate visualization
approach to be used for cycling training. We combine different
visualizations with video support to promote causality between
one’s form and pedaling by utilizing meaningful background
images. In order to realize this, we developed a prototype
system which allows us to superimpose numerous pedaling
visualizations onto simultaneously captured training videos
of cyclists. In this paper, we describe our vision and the
properties of the visualizations we superimpose onto cycling
training videos. We also explain the studies we did with
twelve professional cyclists by using our system. The results
of interviews showed possible benefits in reducing cognitive
overload in understanding the visualizations. Additionally,
couple of additional design principles that have to be taken
into consideration apart from common visualization methods
were also identified. We conclude this paper by discussing the
future of our approach and the new possibilities it might bring
when compared to traditional visualization methods.

978-1-5090-1897-0/16/$31.00 c©2016 IEEE



(a) No background (b) RGB video frames (c) Monochromatic video frames

Fig. 1: A vector based data visualization to represent pedaling forces that employs a solid background (a) and the same
visualization superimposed onto RGB (b) & monochromatic (c) frames taken from an indoor cycling training video.

II. RELATED WORK

A. Situated Visualizations

The idea of having a visualization with a meaningful back-
ground is not a new approach from information visualization
point of view, but to our knowledge it has never been applied to
cycling or cycling training. White introduced the term Situated
Visualization for referring to a visualization which is related to
its environment[12]. SiteLens is a system that visualizes virtual
data in the context of its physical site to support site visits
of professional urban planners, designers and architects[13].
With SiteLens White et al. aimed to support professionals
in sense making, pattern finding and insight discovery about
a physical site and its characteristics through emphasizing a
data visualization’s relationship to its environment. ClayVision
is an urban navigation system developed by Takeuchi and
Perlin which addresses the problems arising from the infor-
mation bubble trend in vision based Augmented Reality(AR)
applications[14]. This visualization scheme attracts a signifi-
cant amount of user’s attention which eventually reduces the
attention given to other details related to the physical world.
Instead of pasting information bubbles, they employ free-form
transformations on real world elements to convey related in-
formation. Kalkofen et al. introduced interactive visualizations
to emphasize existing spatial relationships between virtual and
real objects in AR applications[15]. They explored the effects
of focus and context on user’s perception when information
is presented in its real environment where the scene’s clutter
density is usually high. Zollmann et al. designed an interface
which augments user’s view with relevant information to
support flight management of micro aerial vehicles[16]. With
their approach, they aimed to provide spatial information about
the environment and support the cognitive abilities of users.

B. Pre-attentive Features

When we visualize data with charts, we simply employ
meaningful abstract representations. Depending on the context
of data, these abstractions might include lines for representing
change over time, bars with a common baseline for value
comparisons or dots for representing the distribution. The

effectiveness of these visualizations is mostly dependent on
a set of rules defined as preattentive features. Healey defines
preattentive processing as a limited set of low-level visual
properties that are detected very rapidly and accurately by
our visual system system[17]. Generally, a preattentive target
can usually be detected in less than 250 milliseconds. In our
visualizations, we mainly try to make use of length, size and
hue to convey information as fast as possible to cyclist’s about
their pedaling performance.

C. Pedaling in Cycling

Although pedaling might seem like a straightforward circu-
lar action, it is not a simple movement as one might think.
Complex structure and the lack of a ground truth in pedaling
usually causes unexpected problems and produces unwanted
outcomes when it comes to cycling specific visualizations.
Designing a visualization specific to cycling training unmistak-
ably requires a deep understanding about pedaling dynamics.

Dorel and Hug gave an overview of pedaling technique in
cycling by using electromyography(EMG)[11]. They mainly
described the patterns of the lower limb muscle activation and
the constraints that effect these patterns such as power output,
pedaling rate, body position and fatigue. Results showed sig-
nificant amount of differences in muscle recruitment patterns
and pedaling techniques of professional road cyclists.

Dorel et al. investigated the contribution of each func-
tional sector of pedaling on the total force produced over
a complete pedaling cycle, including down-stroke, up-stroke
and transition phases[10]. A large positive contribution to
total force production during the down-stroke phase and a
slight negative contribution during the upstroke phase were
commonly observed between participants. Total and effective
forces produced during a complete pedal revolution were
measured at different pedaling rates and difference between
were the greatest especially at high pedaling rates.

III. SYSTEM DESIGN
A. Scenario

Training in professional cycling commonly includes both
indoor and outdoor training. As the name implies, outdoor



(a) Line chart

(b) Histogram (c) Scatter plot

Fig. 2: Commonly used visualizations in sports training for
assessing and evaluating athletic performance

training includes the training done by riding outside with a
certain training schedule or goal. Whereas, indoor training
in cycling might be understood in two different ways; one
is the muscle training that can be done without any cycling
equipment and other one is the indoor cycling training done
with rollers or bicycle resistance trainers.

While designing the system the main scenario that we
focused covered an indoor cycling training with a bicycle
resistance trainer. These trainers allow cyclists to train by
using their own bicycles while it remains stationary. Simply,
they convert a normal bicycle into a cycling ergo-meter that
exemplary ones can mostly be found in gyms. Main purpose of
use includes warming up before a race, training indoors during
bad weather conditions or simply strength training. Training
sessions with these type of trainers can also be used to evaluate
the effects of current form on pedaling forces.

During the experiments, we expect cyclists to undergo a
certain training session with a specific goal in mind. In more
detail, cyclists are expected to see the changes happening in
their form throughout the training session and evaluate the
effects of these changes on their pedaling forces.

B. Components

The experimental setup we used included a power meter
equipped bicycle mounted to a bicycle resistance trainer. The
power meter we have chosen for this research was Pioneer
Pedaling Monitor System. This system allows us to extract
tangential and radial force components in every 30◦ of one
full crank rotation. The pedaling monitor system was installed
on a Dura Ace 9000 FC-9000 with 52-36T combination and
172.5 mm crank arm length. The rear cassette was a Dura Ace
CS-7900 with 11-28T combination. The resistance trainer we
used was a Tacx Booster T2500.

Fig. 3: Triangles representing the amount of torque generation

The training videos were captured by using a Logicool HD
Pro Webcam C920r. An Optitrack Trio V120 were used to
track the passive reflective marker attached pedal in video
frames and to extract data about pedaling trajectory and
measurement points. Both cameras were calibrated prior to
usage by using a calibration board with a 7x10 chessboard
pattern and three passive reflective markers.

C. Force Visualizations

While designing the visualizations used with training
videos, we focused on three different aspects of pedaling.
These were resultant force vectors, torque generation and the
directional deviation between torque and force vectors.

We implemented a vector based visualization based on
the one used by the power meter system itself to represent
direction and magnitude of resultant forces. This visualization
allows cyclists to interpret the information about the forces
measured at twelve measurement points through length and
orientation. Hue was used to explicitly provide information
about produced force’s effect on crank rotation. Such as, a blue
vector means positive contribution to rotation whereas a red
vector means negative contribution. A white vector represents
force with no contribution at all.

For visualizing the torque generation, we employed a vector
and a triangle based approach (Figure 3). Similar to vector
visualization, color was again used to explicitly provide infor-
mation about produced force’s effect on crank rotation.

Finally, for visualizing the directional deviation between
torque and force vectors, we again used two methods including
a vector and a triangle based approach. We used blue to
represent torque and yellow to represent force with positive
contribution to rotation. In terms of negative contribution to
rotation, we only visualized forces while omitting the torque
information for increased visual simplicity.



IV. USER STUDY

A. Experiments with Professionals

We evaluated our approach with a user study where ten male
and two female professional cyclists participated. Participants
were chosen from various cycling disciplines including eight
road cyclists, three track cyclists and one time trialist. Average
age was 20 with a minimum of 19 and a maximum of 23 years
old. Their professional cycling experience was an average of
6 (Min 1, Max 10) years. The professional backgrounds of
cyclists included first place in All-Japan Inter-College 3 km
Cycling Championship, first place in All-Japan Inter-College
Team Sprint, victory in All- Japan Road Race Championship
Under 23 and several victories in both national and interna-
tional time trial events.

The test environment were the same between all participants
except for the saddle height. We modified saddle height ac-
cording to each participant’s preferred height or inseam length.
The test procedure we followed employed three different
intervals. During the first interval, male cyclists were expected
to generate power equal to seven times of their body weights in
watts for one minute. During the second interval, participants
were expected generate power equal to ten times of their body
weights in watts for thirty seconds. The final part employed
a maximal effort for a total of ten seconds. Multipliers were
modified for female participants as six and eight times of their
body weight. The maximal effort interval remained the same
for female cyclists. All participants took an active recovery
break of five minutes between each interval by slowly pedaling
with a low gear low resistance combination. We encouraged
participants to keep a steady cadence of 90 rpm during the first
and second intervals. Since final interval was a maximal effort,
we did not specify any cadence value. We used a metronome
to aid participants in keeping a steady cadence value. During
each trial, we kept the front gear constant; chain was on outer
chain ring. We started the timer for each interval after the
cyclist reached the desired cadence of 90 rpm. The rear gear
and trainer’s resistance level was controlled and determined
according to the values represented in Table I.

B. Interviews with Professionals

Following each experiment, we had a short interview in the
form of free talks with the participant for about 15 minutes. We
recorded the personal data of participant during the first part of
the interview. Such data included age, weight, gender, profes-
sion, specialization, experience and professional background.
During the second part, we asked specific questions prepared
to collect information about pedaling technique and video
usage in cycling training. Finally, we allowed participants to
express their objective thoughts, comments and suggestions
about the concept of our research.

The biggest part that we find useful in the interviews
was unmistakably the comments that we received from each
participant. Almost all participants had experience with using
videos or mirrors to assist their training needs. The most
common purpose of using these two mediums was to check

FIRST INTERVAL

Body Weight(kg) Power(W) Rear Gear Resistance Level

40 280 2/10 7/10
50 350 4/10 7/10
60 420 5/10 7/10
65 455 7/10 7/10
70 490 8/10 7/10
75 525 7/10 8/10
80 560 7/10 8/10
85 595 8/10 8/10

SECOND INTERVAL

Body Weight(kg) Power(W) Rear Gear Resistance Level

40 400 6/10 8/10
50 500 6/10 8/10
60 600 8/10 8/10
65 650 9/10 8/10
70 700 10/10 8/10
75 750 10/10 8/10
80 800 10/10 8/10
85 850 10/10 8/10

TABLE I: Experiment settings we used with male participants

their own form during training. The points that they mostly
focused in their form was the angle of their ankle, fore-
aft saddle position and aerodynamic posture. One female
participant also expressed her usage of videos for checking
cleat positioning. When we asked them about their objective
thoughts on using videos with pedaling force visualizations,
all participants had a positive approach towards it. By using
a combination of videos and charts, it was obvious to them
that they can easily get information about both their forms and
their pedaling styles at the same time. One participant strongly
believed in the possibilities of new training methods that can
be achieved with this kind of visualizations, such as finding a
balance between aerodynamic posture on the bicycle and the
resultant pedaling.

An unexpected result that we achieved from the interviews
was about the force visualization part of our approach. From
our perspective, vectors were expected to be the most suitable
method of visualizing information about force magnitude and
direction. Yet, most of the participants also favored the area
visualizations in addition to the vector visualizations. When
we asked them about the reasons behind their interest, the
most common answer was the increased visibility of the chart
due to wider area being used to draw it. A particular aspect
that almost all participants agreed was given the right design,
this increased visibility would make the visualization easy
to understand after or during the training. Due to physical
and mental fatigue placed upon their bodies during and after
training, a visualization that clearly appears to the eye was
highly favored by the participants. On the contrary, when
we showed the same visualizations to unprofessional cyclists
belonging to information science field, same visualizations had
no value over the ones using utilizing vectors. It is clear that
the user profile and the properties of the sport are extremely



important factors that need to be taken into account while
designing sport specific visualizations.

All participants were positive about comparing their current
performance with their past performances. By doing so, they
were expecting to see the increase or decrease in their pedaling
performance with respect to their physical form on the bicycle.
A point mentioned by the most of participants was to use
our approach to compare their pedaling styles while their
form is relatively bad and good to see if any significant
differences exist in their pedaling performance. The answers
to the question about comparing one’s own performance with
somebody else were mostly negative. Main reason behind this
result was mostly due to the certain differences in body struc-
ture and muscle recruitment patterns between each individual.
Although two participants were positive about this kind of
comparison, they only wanted to make it with people whose
body structures are close to theirs. Yet, they did not fully
believed in this approach and its potential since most of them
already had a clear understanding about their own pedaling
style and believed it would be substantially difficult to modify
according to another cyclist’s style.

Finally, a common suggestion from participants was towards
the making of a real-time application where our approach can
be used during outdoor training. Their main desire was to be
able compare their performance in a scenario which is the
same or as close as to real world scenarios such as races. For
example, since the bicycle and the resistance trainer were fixed
in place, using one’s own body weight was not an option.
Participants expected to see significant differences in their
pedaling performances between indoor and outdoor training
scenarios. Although, five participants also mentioned that they
do not explicitly place their focus nor on their pedaling neither
on their forms during outdoor training. This was mostly due to
the possible dangers it might pose if they are not fully aware
of their surroundings. Participants also believed in the value
of an indoor training scenario which can replicate the outside
conditions, which remains to be an important milestone in our
future work calendar.

V. DISCUSSION

User studies with professionals clearly revealed that the
videos are not the most commonly used medium in cycling
due to the limitation of scenarios where they can be truly
useful. Although all participants had an experience with video
usage to capture and evaluate their form, some of them used
videos as infrequently as twice a year. When presented with
our approach, all participants were positive about using it for
their personal training, but only if provided in a way which
is easy to setup and use. We believe the main reason behind
that interest was the direct relationship that can be formed
effortlessly between cyclist’s form and its effects on pedal-
ing. As mentioned before, current approaches to performance
evaluation in cycling mainly focus on the results rather than
causes. There is no denial that the current methods are highly
useful. The point that we are interested in as researchers is
to overcome the strict boundaries defined to separate those

(a) Track cyclist force vectors

(b) Track cyclist torque triangles

Fig. 4: Occlusion in pedaling visualizations of one track cyclist

methods from each other. Since videos can only provide
information that can be seen with naked eye made videos
suitable for evaluating cyclist’s form or position on the bike.
The same can also be said for pedaling visualizations where
the things that cannot be perceived with naked eye are made
available. We believe better training regimes can be established
with intelligent combinations of distinct visualization methods.
We think if we would like to overcome the difficulties caused
by the complicated nature of pedaling, methods similar to ours
can be highly useful in analyzing and evaluating performance
in cycling.

When asked to choose a chart for visualizing pedaling
forces on videos, the answers pointed to both area and vector
visualizations. Area visualizations were mostly preferred due
to increased amount of screen space used while drawing.
This also made them easier to perceive when superimposed
on videos and eased required effort while making rough
evaluations. All participants mentioned the importance of this



property since physical and mental stress placed upon their
bodies due to training also effected their cognitive abilities.
Participants expressed that the comprehension of information
might require less effort with area visualizations. However,
visualizing more than one data as areas was also defined
as impractical since it might simultaneously increase the
complexity. Vector visualizations were mostly seen useful due
to participants familiarity with the method. We believe the
effects of this phenomenon named as mere-exposure principle
requires a better understanding

Vectors showed great qualities in extracting directional
information about cyclist’s pedaling. Yet, the reduced infor-
mation integrity and visual simplicity also made it difficult for
cyclists to extract a general pattern out of these visualizations.
In this context, area visualizations representing torque gener-
ation received more attention. Participant’s torque generation
pattern was roughly identified during each interval. However,
this visualization had occlusion problems when used with
professional cyclists (Figure 4).

As a result, we believe there are three important aspects that
a pedaling visualization superimposed onto correlated back-
ground images should satisfy; visual simplicity, information
integrity and occlusion free (Figure 5). A quantitative analysis
on visualizations satisfying these points might reveal much
needed additional information for our future designs.

VI. CONCLUSION

In this paper, we introduced a data visualization method
that combines cycling training videos with visual represen-
tations of cyclist’s pedaling. We employed various pedaling
visualizations to better understand the important properties
and significant aspects of our approach. We tested our ideas
with professional cyclists and received positive feedback about
the feasible benefits of our approach over common visualiza-
tion methods used in cycling training. The most frequently
expressed concern by the participants was about the effects of
physical and mental fatigue on understanding and evaluating
the visualizations. We believe three properties might play a
significant role in future visualization designs; visual simplic-
ity, visualization integrity and occlusion free.

In the future, a comparison of preattentive vision features
during sports training might reveal highly important informa-
tion to be used while designing sports specific visualizations.
A quantitative analysis on benefits of our approach over
traditional ones is also marked as an important milestone in
our calendar. Additionally, carrying our experimental scenario
towards outdoor usage might also open up new possibilities
in cycling training. Finally, in this work we have only taken
side views into consideration. The design requirements which
might emerge from employing different viewpoints is also a
topic that attracts our attention in the future.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

We thank the Bicycle Racing Team of National Institute of
Fitness and Sports in Kanoya for all their cooperation. This
research was supported by the MIC/SCOPE #162107006.

Fig. 5: Monochromatic video frames combined with indepen-
dent visualizations of force direction and force magnitude

REFERENCES
[1] B. Shneiderman, “The Eyes Have It: A Task by Data Type Taxonomy

for Information Visualizations,” Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on
Visual Languages, pp. 336–343, 1996.

[2] B. Shneiderman, “Extreme Visualization: Squeezing A Billion Records
Into A Million Pixels,” Proceedings of the ACM SIGMOD International
Conference on Management of Data, pp. 3–12, 2008.

[3] J. Bertin, Semiology of Graphics: Diagrams, Networks, Maps, 1983.
[4] J. W. Tukey, Exploratory Data Analysis, 1977.
[5] E. R. Tufte, The Visual Display of Quantitative Information, 1983.
[6] S. Few, Now You See It: Simple Visualization Techniques for Quantitative

Analysis, 2009.
[7] I. E. Sutherland, “Sketchpad: A Man-machine Graphical Communication

System,” Proceedings of the AFIPS Spring Joint Computer Conference,
pp. 329–346, 1963.

[8] A. Cox and J. Stasko, “SportVis: Discovering Meaning in Sports
Statistics Through Information Visualization,” Conference Compendium
of IEEE Visualization, IEEE Symposium on Information Visualization
and IEEE Symposium on Visual Analytics Science and Technology, pp.
114–115, 2006.

[9] W. M. Bertucci, A. Arfaoui, and G. Polidori, “Analysis of the Pedaling
Biomechanics of Master’s Cyclists: A Preliminary Study,” Journal of
Science and Cycling, vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 42–46, 2012.

[10] S. Dorel, A. Couturier, J. R. Lacour, H. Vandewalle, C. Hautier, and
F. Hug, “Force-Velocity Relationship in Cycling Revisited: Benefit of
Two-Dimensional Pedal Forces Analysis,” Medicine and Science in
Sports and Exercise, vol. 42, no. 6, pp. 1174–1183, 2010.

[11] F. Hug and S. Dorel, “Electromyographic Analysis of Pedaling: A
Review,” Journal of Electromyography and Kinesiology, vol. 19, no. 2,
pp. 182–198, 2009.

[12] S. White, “Interaction and Presentation Techniques for Situated Visual-
ization,” Ph.D. dissertation, Columbia University, 2008.

[13] S. White and S. Feiner, “SiteLens: Situated Visualization Techniques for
Urban Site Visits,” Proceedings of the ACM CHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems, pp. 1117–1120, 2009.

[14] Y. Takeuchi and K. Perlin, “ClayVision: The (Elastic) Image of the City,”
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems, pp. 2411–2420, 2012.

[15] D. Kalkofen, E. Mendez, and D. Schmalstieg, “Comprehensible Visu-
alization for Augmented Reality,” IEEE Transactions on Visualization
and Computer Graphics, vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 193–204, 2009.

[16] S. Zollmann, C. Hoppe, T. Langlotz, and G. Reitmayr, “FlyAR: Aug-
mented Reality Supported Micro Aerial Vehicle Navigation,” IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, vol. 20, no. 4,
pp. 560–568, 2014.

[17] C. G. Healey and J. T. Enns, “Attention and Visual Perception in Visu-
alization and Computer Graphics,” IEEE Transactions on Visualization
and Computer Graphics, vol. 18, no. 7, pp. 1170–1188, 2012.


