

























































Feature-Driven Visual Analytics of Soccer Data

Halldór Janetzko, Student Member, IEEE, Dominik Sacha, Manuel Stein,
Tobias Schreck, Member, IEEE, Daniel A. Keim, Member, IEEE, and Oliver Deussen

Abstract—Soccer is one the most popular sports today and also very interesting from an scientific point of view. We present a system
for analyzing high-frequency position-based soccer data at various levels of detail, allowing to interactively explore and analyze for
movement features and game events. Our Visual Analytics method covers single-player, multi-player and event-based analytical
views. Depending on the task the most promising features are semi-automatically selected, processed, and visualized. Our aim is to
help soccer analysts in finding the most important and interesting events in a match. We present a flexible, modular, and expandable
layer-based system allowing in-depth analysis. The integration of Visual Analytics techniques into the analysis process enables the
analyst to find interesting events based on classification and allows, by a set of custom views, to communicate the found results.
The feedback loop in the Visual Analytics pipeline helps to further improve the classification results. We evaluate our approach
by investigating real-world soccer matches and collecting additional expert feedback. Several use cases and findings illustrate the
capabilities of our approach.

Index Terms—Visual Analytics, Sport Analytics, Soccer Analysis

1 INTRODUCTION
The visual analysis of soccer data is interesting for two reasons: first
of all it is scientifically interesting since it is an instance of a geo-
spatial analysis problem with complex, interdependent trajectories and
events. On the other hand, soccer is a very popular sport and actively
played by approximately 270 million people [14]. Soccer plays a huge
role in public media coverage and also, poses analytical needs by sport
decision makers. Recently, GPS- and video-based tracking technology
became available which allows to record spatio temporal data of play-
ers at high frequency and accuracy. The arising data is interesting to
analyze for two main purposes:

• Scouts are looking for high-performance players, where perfor-
mance needs to be assessed by many measurable parameters or
combinations thereof, in relation to other players and play situ-
ations, and over time. For example, these attributes may be the
accuracy of shots, the quality of passes, or the willingness to run
in the last minutes of a long and exhausting match. Depending
on these high-level attributes of a player, the underlying analysis
must focus on different sets of basic features. The willingness to
run, for instance, depends on the time of the match, the speed of
the player, and the current game situation. If the player’s team is
already three points ahead of the other team, it is not that impor-
tant to run very fast in the last minutes of the match.

• Coaches are analyzing matches to improve the overall perfor-
mance. The analysis can be performed either in real-time, in the
halftime break, or after the match. Depending on when the anal-
ysis is performed the focus is different, which has to be reflected
by the analysis process. In defending situations, coaches are in-
terested in dangerous situations, how they occurred and how the
team resolved those. For instance, an analysis of the back-four
formation can help in assessing the quality of the defense.

Soccer data is a representative of spatio-temporal datasets and
therefore already inherently challenging. Compared to standard move-
ment data, the spatial restriction of the movement stands out. Move-
ment data of soccer matches is located on an approximately 105 by

• All Authors are with the University of Konstanz. Email:
forename.lastname@uni-konstanz.de

Manuscript received 31 Mar. 2014; accepted 1 Aug. 2014; date of
publication xx xxx 2014; date of current version xx xxx 2014.
For information on obtaining reprints of this article, please send
e-mail to: tvcg@computer.org.

68 meters pitch. As 22 players are moving in a relatively small area,
the resulting data is very dense and difficult to visualize by a single
visualization. Furthermore, the observed movement patterns are very
complex as the movements of each player depend on the movement
of all the other players. Nearly every movement action causes a reac-
tion, because of the high interdependencies between all players. Com-
pared e.g., to the flock movement of birds, there are two opposing
teams aiming for different targets and trying to hinder the other team.
Simple leaderships rules, as e.g., in flock movement theory, are there-
fore not applicable. To make matters worse, soccer is a very dynamic
game as tactics and strategics change over time. Depending on the
current game situation a team might, for example, switch their overall
game-play from a defensive to an offensive one being directly reflected
in the observed movement patterns. Even historically the formations
changed from a sweeper up to the late nineties over the 4-4-2 forma-
tion to today’s most often used 4-2-3-1 formation (see also Section
4.2). Though the outcome of the game, basically who wins and who
loses, is not necessary reflecting superiority. Some goals or non-goals
are lucky or due to incorrect referee decisions. But what is important
when assessing games is why a team won or lost. In order to assess
the quality of a team, it is important to take the respective context,
e.g., strategy or movement patterns, into account. Switching from of-
fensive to defensive gameplay when losing the ball for instance can be
an important clue for coaches.

In this design study, we analyze soccer data with Visual Analytics
methods using single-player, multi-player and event-based features.
We apply feature analysis techniques to present the most important
features to the analyst depending on the respective analysis task. We
combine data mining techniques detecting interesting game events
with interactive visualizations allowing immediate user feedback to
the data mining process. Our focus is to help coaches in investigat-
ing interesting and dangerous game situations. There are two points
to tackle when trying to support coaches. First of all, interesting game
situations have to be identified and presented to the coach and, second,
the coach should be able to analyze features of players with respect to
these situations. Analyzing a certain game situation can be performed
on different levels, such as taking only one single player into account
or consider even several players. Our implemented prototype is de-
picted in Figure 1.

The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. We outline
existing and related approaches and system in Section 2. The analysis
of a single-player is described in Section 3, followed by a discussion
of our multi-player analyses in Section 4. Furthermore, we perform
event-based analyses in Section 5. We implemented a modular, layer-
based system allowing an easy integration of existing data mining and
visualization techniques, described briefly in Section 6 with further



outlook to the Visual Analytics capabilities. Our design is evaluated
by use cases and interesting findings together with expert feedback in
Section 7. We finally conclude our paper and give an outlook to future
work in Section 8.

2 RELATED WORK

We first discuss related work in general visual analysis of sports data
in Section 2.1, followed by specific works organized according to the
considered analysis perspective in Sections 2.2 and 2.3. Section 2.4
positions our approach within the aforementioned works.

2.1 Visual Analysis of Sport Data in Research Interest

The visual analysis of data related to sports has recently come into fo-
cus of research and application [7]. The interest is seen driven by ad-
vances in acquisition of high-resolution sports data, and in advances in
visualization and analysis of sensor and movement data. Sports anal-
ysis is expected to foster many new applications for end users, sports
coaches, and sports managers alike [7]. Analytical goals in these ap-
plications include overviewing and comparison of player and team
performance, prediction and correlation of behavior, and understand-
ing changes over time on the short, medium and long term perspec-
tive. Commercial systems are very hard to compare to as the there are
high financial interests behind the scenes. We had some discussions
with a professional soccer analyst telling us that existing automatic
approaches cover more or less only single-player statistics. In-depth
team analyses are typically performed by manual inspection.

We just mention two of the most recent sport analysis systems here
as examples, before surveying more in the following paragraphs. A
recent work on visual analysis of sport data includes [29], where a
visual search system for scenes in a Rugby match was introduced.
The approach is based on the configuration of team players and their
movement during a match, where this data is extracted by means of
video analysis. The approach offers a sketch-based query processing
for movement patterns extended by Visual Analytics methods. Instead
of using movement sketches, we directly look at manually annotated
important and dangerous situations and extract similar dangerous ones.
We compute semantically meaningful features with respect to soccer
and use them for our data mining process. Regarding soccer, by means
of a design study, in [33] a tool was developed which combines dif-
ferent perspectives on soccer match data with the aim of creating play
reports. The data set used included raw player positions and move-
ment, as well as manually annotated match events like goals, fouls or
ball contacts. Thereby, the match data was segmented into meaningful
units, which can be visualized in different views. The matches were
for instance partitioned by looking at shots and going back in time
until the team gained the ball. We extend this work by detecting in-
teresting event and phases semi-automatically by integrating statistical
features.

2.2 Movement and Constellation-based Analysis

In general, many approaches for sports analytics consider trajectories
extracted for players and teams as a basic abstraction of the data to
be analyzed. Consequently, methods of spatio-temporal data analy-
sis are applicable [3, 4]. Important data analysis methods in this area
include the segmentation, abstraction, correlation, clustering or classi-
fication of trajectories. Today, many applications for trajectory-based
data analysis have been identified, including studying of traffic data
[43], movements of pedestrians in office spaces [23], or analyzing eye
tracking data in context of user studies [31]. Further applications of
trajectory-based analysis include understanding of animal movements
[38], or analysis of time-dependent measurements in a 2D diagram
space [37, 42]. In general, key to successful trajectory-based analysis
is finding a meaningful trajectory representation [5].

The trajectory of even a single player can already be useful for
sports analysis of a game, and it certainly is useful for measuring
the performance of a given player. However, often also properties of
groups of players are relevant. To this end, certain approaches first de-
tect specific constellations among groups of players which may then

again, be described by trajectories or other time-dependent group fea-
tures. Examples for soccer analysis include [25], where player for-
mations are analyzed. Specifically, the spatial constellation between
all defenders of one team are analyzed over time, which can reveal
tactical maneuvers. In [15], the area on the field where a given player
showed a particularly strong influence during the game, was identified.
In [40], speed and direction were considered as features in such areas
of interest. In [16], distances between player, puck and goal within
hockey games were used as features of analysis. Further extensions of
the approach of associated areas can be found in [24, 26, 30].

Other works detect specific scenes of interest during a match. [39]
detect attacks of a team based on trajectory segmentation in conjunc-
tion with specific heuristics on the game progression including change
of ball posession and distance to goal. In a further work [18], pass
alternatives and their specific contextual difficulty are visualized. Fur-
thermore, paths frequently taken by individual players are considered
in that work.

2.3 Analysis Based on Temporal and Statistical Aspects

Besides trajectory-based analysis, also methods from time series and
multivariate analysis are applicable to sports data analysis. In general,
any relevant measure which is recorded over time (including proper-
ties of trajectories) can give rise to time series analysis approaches
[20]. Examples include comparison and correlation of measurements
among players, or analyzing for cyclic behaviors of measurements [4].
In addition, time-dependent measurements can also be aggregated by
descriptive statistics such as mean, variance or other statistical mo-
ments of interest.

In [27], it was evaluated which statistic measures correlate with the
outcome of a game. The temporal development of geometric statis-
tics, like the convex hull, circumference, or center of a team were
analyzed in [12]. Also, statistics were used in [11] to differenti-
ate between players of different positions. A number of commercial
and academic software solutions for the analysis of statistical sports
data exists. In [35, 36] an interactive statistical tool for coaches is
introduced, enabling to analyze and compare players. Furthermore,
domain-dependent tools exist e.g., Matchpad [28], CourtVision [17]
and SnapShot [34].

Statistical measures can, among other transformations, be defined
based on a relational perspective on data: Passing networks can be
seen as a rich source for investigating soccer matches even further.
Then, statistics can be extracted from a network (or graph-based) rep-
resentation of the data. E.g., in ball sports, the passing network indi-
cates which player passes the ball to which other players over time.
In [32], the performance of players is measured by aggregates of the
ball passing network. In [13], additional nodes for “shots to goal” and
“shots wide” are added to the passing network description.

2.4 Summary and Positioning of our Work

We distinguish two classes of analysis of sports data. Approaches
based on low-level features extract measurements from movement or
other sensor data and perform statistical and correlation analyses on
the (possibly, pre-processed) data. On the other hand, approaches be-
ing oriented toward higher-level representations, such as semantic an-
notations of data, exist. These can stem, e.g., from manual annotation
by human experts or crowds; or by recognition of specific constella-
tions of interest, based on heuristics or Machine Learning approaches.

The work most closely related to ours is [33]. Similarly, we present
an interactive system for explorative analysis of soccer data. Our sys-
tem is flexible in that it incorporates both low-level features (based on
trajectory features, see Section 6) and semantic annotations (based on
recognition of play configurations, see Section 5) for the analysis. Our
system flexibly allows to draw on either of these analysis perspectives,
based on the user task. Our semi-automatic selection of features helps
to cope with the otherwise difficult problem of feature selection by
users. We achieve this by incorporating a user-configurable classifier
which allows to detect further events in the movement data, based on
a number of example events and input features. Thereby, our system



Fig. 1. Interesting phases of a single player can be automatically found by applying the clustering approach presented in Section 3. In this case,
we analyze a forward and are interested in the attacks in that the player was involved. Resulting phases can be inspected using the small-multiples
view (top-right panel) in combination with the other rendering layers and Horizon Graphs (left and bottom panels).

is not limited to detect a certain number of pre-configured situations,
but helps in configuring detectors for many events of interest.

3 SINGLE PLAYER ANALYSIS

The single player analysis investigates the performance and features
of one player at a time. We want for example to detect when a player
is actively participating during a match. Certain player features, as
speed or distance to the ball, will be of use for this kind of analysis.
More abstract, we divide the different behavior and motion patterns
of a player into different phases. The features being relevant for a
single player analysis can be divided into three categories: Individual
Characteristics (e.g., coordinates and speed), Game Context (e.g., dis-
tance to ball), and Events (e.g., shots, receptions and fouls) features.
These features can be seen as numerical time series with changing val-
ues over time, with events transformed into a binary time series with
singletons.

In order to segment the match into different phases, we apply clus-
tering and hereby detect similar phases. Phases derived from the clus-
tering results should be as homogeneous as possible with respect to
the underlying numerical features. The overall analysis process in de-
picted in Figure 2. We first partition all time series into small, fixed-
size intervals and aggregate the values into a numerical feature vector
describing the respective time interval. The values are linearly normal-
ized to avoid any biases during the distance calculation. Additionally,
we can apply dimension reduction techniques such as PCA to remove
noisy dimensions if necessary. The PCA is performed by WEKA [19]
automatically reducing the number of dimensions with a threshold of
95 percent of the variance being still explained. The intervals are af-
terwards clustered resulting in a certain number of clusters (depicted
by small letters in Figure 2). In our analyses, we apply k-Means (al-
lowing us to control the number of resulting clusters) and DBSCAN
(being a robust clustering technique with respect to noise and outliers).
Finally, we merge similarly clustered and adjacent intervals to phases.

We visualize the analysis results using colored trajectories, line
charts, parallel coordinates [22] and small multiples [41] all linked
via Brushing & Linking. In Figure 1, we present the visual interface

Player‘s Features

Normalized Feature Vectors

Dimension Reduced FVs

Clustering Result

Phases

Fig. 2. Feature-based approach to detect similar activity phases of a
single player.

showing the results analyzing a forward described in more detail in
Section 7.1. It is very crucial in the analysis process to understand-
ing the semantical meaning of found clusters or phases. We therefore
integrated several views onto the segmentation results and the human
analyst can bring in his expertise.

A first overview is provided by a linechart with a freely selectable
feature and background coloring depicting the phases (bottom of Fig-
ure 1). Parallel coordinates help to understand the distributions of fea-
ture values in the respective clusters. Finally, small multiples offer
several interaction possibilities like filtering, sorting (according to a
feature, phase similarity or time), or visualization options (e.g., map-
ping feature values to the trajectory’s color).

A typical workflow for this kind of analysis is shown in Figure 3.
We start specifying parameters including the clustering parameters and
features to regard during the segmentation process. Afterwards, the
analyst uses the line chart and parallel coordinates in combination with
the small multiples view allowing filtering, highlighting and inspecting



phases. Furthermore, all other implemented visualization layers can
be applied to analyze the selected situations of the soccer match in
more detail. As our system is interactively reflecting changes to the
clustering settings, all steps of the workflow may be revisited several
times.

Fig. 3. Schematic workflow for the analysis of a single player.

4 MULTI PLAYER ANALYSIS

Regarding more than only one player in the analysis process is very
important as soccer is a team sport. This section introduces our meth-
ods for the analysis of soccer matches with respect to the movement
patterns of multiple players.

4.1 Player Comparison

We enable the analyst to compare several players visually by providing
Horizon Graphs [21] for selected players and features. In Figure 4, we
show the speed of all field players of one team in the first three minutes
of a soccer match. The correlation and the similarity of the speed
feature is clearly visible. There are phases with high speed (blue) and
also phases with almost no speed (red) showing that the players act as
a team. The bottom player can be seen as an outlier to the coherent
movement behavior. The bottom Horizon Graph represents a forward
who does usually not participate in all defense actions explaining the
observed pattern.

Fig. 4. Speed feature of all field players of one team in the first three
minutes of a soccer match.

We furthermore extend the single-player segmentation process de-
scribed in the previous section towards a multi-player analysis. The
combination of phases together with the possibility to inspect selected
features visually can reveal interesting patterns. E.g., in Figure 5
we analyze two central defense players. The trajectories are colored
by detected phase and the speed features are visualized by Horizon
Graphs for the selected time interval (blue rectangle in the timeline).
Interestingly, both defense players act very similar, which is reflected
in both, the movement features and the phase coloring.

We help the analyst in selecting interesting features to visually in-
spect by predefined sets of features for the analysis of certain event
types. Further details can be found in the use case Section 7.

Fig. 5. Activity phases and trajectories for two defense players.

4.2 Constellations and Formations

In addition to low-level and statistical trajectory features, the analysis
of spatio temporal team formations in soccer games is very impor-
tant. This is because formations reveal semantically meaningful pat-
terns and may relate to tactics or strategies of the teams. Formations
tell us more about tactics than single player analysis. There exists a
variety of formations in modern soccer, like the nowadays very widely
known and used 4-2-3-1, the 4-4-2 (a.k.a. “Diamond”), or the 4-3-2-1
(a.k.a. “Christmas Tree”) formation. In this section, we focus on the
analysis of the defensive lines and more specifically on the back-four
formation. Other defensive structures, such as the defensive triangle,
could be also easily automatically assessed. Further descriptions of
different formations can be found in [2].

The crucial point when analyzing the back-four formation is to as-
sess the quality with means to the defensive effectiveness. We therefor
need a definition for a good and a bad back-four formation. The main
task of the back-four formation is to defend their own goal. Nowa-
days, zonal marking is the widely used defense strategy. Consulting
soccer literature and training handbooks, we found some criteria how
the back-four formation should react to attacks [10]. There exists an
ideal line parallel to the ground lines of the pitch, where all back-four
players should be. Basically all players should be on the same height,
which is also very relevant for the offside trap. Scoring the defen-
sive formation is then simply computing the average distance from the
ideal line. However, there exist different kinds of attacks that have to
be dealt with differently, resulting in a more complicated assessment.
Incoming attacks can be differentiated by the following criteria: As
long as the distance between ball and goal is larger than 24 yards, the
back-four formation shall use the ideal line described above. If the
ball is closer to the goal, we will have to distinguish between an attack
from the middle and one from the side. Attacks from the side should
be answered by a sickle-like formation. Further details can be seen in
this Youtube video [1]. From the computational perspective, we need
to check the curvature between outside and central defender of the re-
spective side. Furthermore, the distance between central and outside
defender must not be too big, because the outside defender might need



help. The defenders of the side which is not attacked should then build
an ideal line reflecting the positions of the other defenders. Defense
triangles are the correct reaction to attacks from the middle. The com-
putational assessment is performed by angle computations between the
affected defenders. We score the defensive triangle by computing the
angles and also include the distances of the involved players. Figure 6
shows two examples for a bad and a good back-four formation.

Fig. 6. An example for a bad (upper) and good (lower) evaluated back-
four formation based on the ideal line.

5 EVENT-BASED ANALYSIS
Soccer matches are not only continuous movements of players, but
there are also incisive events. Besides goals and fouls there are also
events like passes or crosses. These events are manually annotated
and added to our datasets. We use these events as a basis for event-
specific feature pattern exploration. We support two modes of analysis
within our system. The first visualizes the development of selected
features around user-chosen event types. The second analysis applies
a classification technique to support discovery of previously unnoticed
candidate events of interest.

5.1 Interactive Feature Analysis
If the analyst wants to analyze a certain kind of events, we visual-
ize features in a time frame around the events with Horizon Graphs.
Player specific features are derived from the involved players and ad-
ditionally game context features as ball specific features are available.
We render for each feature and event a single Horizon Graph, and lay
them our in a tabular way. A line within each visualization indicates
the time point when the event occurs. We included also Brushing &
Linking to enable the selection of single events being reflected in all
other shown visualizations.

Figure 7 illustrates as an example Horizon Graphs for all crosses
occurring in one half of a soccer match. Feature patterns for standard
crosses like corners or free kicks are visible as opposite players are
typically not near of the executing player. Furthermore, the speed of
the executing player is very low at the beginning of the interval, as
the player is waiting until he is allowed to perform the free kick. This
visualization serves also as a verification for the similar phase analysis
presented in the next section.

Fig. 7. Features for all crosses occurring in one half of a match. Stan-
dard crosses like corners or free kicks can be clearly distinguished from
crosses that happen within the match. Before a standard cross speed
and straightness are similar lower than other crosses and there are al-
most no opposite players around the ball.

5.2 Similar Phase Analysis
Using manually annotated data comes with the advantage that human
knowledge is added to the data. Though at the same time, there is no
guarantee that all events have been detected. We want to make use of
the labeled events and learn, how these events can be described from
a feature perspective. In this work, we focus on important events as
shots on goal, fouls, crosses, and assists. We analyze how specific fea-
tures, some related to only the involved player and some related to the
team, develop right before these events over certain time intervals (2, 5
and 10 seconds). Our goal was to define and train a classifier enabling
us to distinguish between intervals where something, like a “shot on
goal” event, happened and intervals without this kind of event. Fur-
thermore, we were interested in finding which features are important
for this differentiation. We use the resulting classifier to detect similar
phases in our data and validate the new found events in our tool as de-
scribed further in Section 6.4.2. We use KNIME [8] as a state-of-the-
art data mining framework and applied all widely used classifiers as
Neural Networks, Decision Trees, Probabilistic Models, and Support
Vector Machines. Evaluating the classifiers by n-cross-fold validation,
we used finally Decision Trees as the classification results were rea-
sonably good and at the same time the model can be easily inspected.
Specifically, as the decision tree implies an order of the features which
are used for distinguishing the events, we can take these as a reading
of the most important features for a given analysis. This information
can in turn be used for more in-depth exploration of game situations
for these features.

6 SYSTEM
In this section, we describe the developed components of our system
more technically. Our developed Java prototype for the analysis of
soccer data is depicted in Figure 1. We implemented a layer-based
soccer-pitch visualization, with several visualization techniques avail-
able (e.g., player position renderer and heat map). The visualization
layers can be added interactively and the order and further parameter
settings can be controlled by the left control panel. Furthermore, we
integrated a timeline visualization and additional panels related to the
analyses described in the previous sections. We designed the system
in a modular and expandable way in order to enable an easy develop-
ment of new layers or visualizations being connected to all the other
components.

6.1 Features
Most of our visualizations and analyses rely on different kinds of fea-
tures (see previous sections). These features are extracted, derived,



and finally delivered to all other components. Player-specific features
are computed and available for each player. Furthermore, team- and
ball-related features are calculated as well. In Table 1 we list all fea-
tures that are already implemented and available in our system. The
extension of this list is an ongoing process triggered by new use cases
and analysis needs emerging by tool usage and expert interviews.

Single Player Analysis
Speed Acceleration

Position Direction of movement
Distance covered Straightness

Distance to next opposite Distance to ball
Distance to own team center Distance to opposite team center

Multi Player Analysis
Width of team shape Height of team shape

Opposite players around player Back-four formation

Event Based Analysis
Shots on goal Passes

Fouls Off-site
Cards Reception
Goal Clearance

Running with ball Assists

Game Specific Analysis
Ball-goal distance Ball position

Angle of ball to goal

Table 1. Features implemented in our system.

6.2 Visualization Components

Our prototype offers several panels where visualization can be plugged
into and also provides synchronization functionality between the com-
ponents. The analyst can control the currently visualized time win-
dows by using the timeline component showing the selected time in-
terval and event occurrences. We furthermore developed a layer man-
ager where several layers can be registered and rendered on a soccer
pitch area simultaneously. For each layer it is possible to integrate
an option panel handling the layer’s configuration (e.g., clustering pa-
rameters). Finally, we offer a feature export component allowing to
export features based on selected players, events, or time intervals.
We make use of the export capabilities integrating external software
components, described in more detail in Section 6.4.2.

6.3 Visualizations

Depending on the analysis task, we provide different visualizations.
Most of the visualizations are realized as layers that can be drawn on a
soccer pitch. In order to get details of a soccer scene, we offer a player
and ball renderer visualizing a selected scene. For larger time win-
dows, we provide a heat map that can be computed for every spatio-
temporal object (e.g., player, ball, event position). Selected features
may be analyzed through line charts or horizon graphs. We provide
specific views being useful in combination with each other. For exam-
ple, the single player analysis view consists of the colored trajectory
on the soccer pitch, the small multiples view, a colored line chart and
the parallel coordinates plot. Another example is the back-four for-
mation layer that renders formation dependent lines and colors on top
other layers and also adds information to the timeline component.

6.4 Analysis Facilities

This section briefly describes how our system integrates analysis func-
tionality.

6.4.1 WEKA Clustering Integration
We integrated the WEKA-library [19] in order to support state-of-
the-art analysis techniques. WEKA takes care of the cluster analy-
sis described in section 3. We integrated the clustering components
K-Means, DBSCAN, and hierarchical clustering for the single player
analysis. The classification capabilities of WEKA are used in KNIME
for the data mining part of our Visual Analytics pipeline.

6.4.2 Visual Analytics Integration and Machine Learning
As stated above, we are interested in gaining knowledge from investi-
gating features of annotated events. We want to study which features
and values are significant for different kinds of events. Furthermore,
we want to use this knowledge for finding new events that were not
annotated but can fulfill the found criteria. We set up a KNIME work-
flow and integrated it into the analysis process depicted in Figure 8.
We export all extracted and computed features into the KNIME work-
flow and partition the time series data into fixed-length intervals. In-
tervals including an event are marked as class A, while all others are
marked as class B. After preprocessing, we train all available KN-
IME and WEKA classifiers with a 33% data sample and evaluate with
the remaining data. We take the best five classifiers (LMT, LibSVM,
Logistic Base, FT, and Decision Stump) according to their accuracy
measured by their confusion matrix. The accuracy of the best classi-
fiers ranges from 72 to 90 percent. We consider for our decision also
the amount of false positives, which should be reasonable. False pos-
itives indicate new potential interesting intervals not yet annotated in
our data. The classification results are then imported back into our pro-
totype allowing the analyst to investigate time points labeled as class
A. Furthermore, we integrate a feedback loop enabling the analyst to
confirm found, previously untagged events and use them as additional
training data for the classifier. This feedback loop may be repeated as
often as the analyst wishes to.

Import into
VA System 

Evaluate
Classifier

Export Data

Intervall
Construc�on

Classificator
Learning

Evalua�on Data

Tr
ai

ni
ng

 D
at

a
M

odel

Confirm
New Events VA System

DM System

Addi�onal Training Data

Fig. 8. Analysis process for the detection of similar events and feedback
loop to the classifier.

6.5 Interaction and Animation
Every developed component offers several interaction possibilities al-
lowing the analyst to steer his analysis. Linking & Brushing is sup-
ported among all visualizations enabling multi-view data exploration.
Besides mouse interactions and parameter setting controls, we pro-
vide common keyboard shortcuts in order to facilitate power user op-
erations (e.g., animation control). Additionally, animation of selected
soccer scenes turned out to be useful in order to verify results or to un-
derstand and investigate longer phases avoiding overplotting issues.

7 USE CASES AND EVALUATION
In this section, we demonstrate in applicability of our prototype in
different analytical use cases. We present several analyses and find-
ings in which a domain expert could gain further knowledge about his
team. We analyze a single player, detect similar situations in the soccer
game, and investigate team formations as the back-four formation.

The data analyzed in our use cases is provided by pro-
zone/mastercoach. The data set is not publicly available and was
anonymized as it was a professional game. For each of the 22 play-
ers timestamped, two-dimensional position data are available with a



temporal resolution of 100 milliseconds. Furthermore, the data in-
cludes manually annotated events containing information about posi-
tion, time, and event-specific information as the involved player. These
events are less frequent and lack in accuracy as they are manually
tagged.

The use-cases were designed to show how our prototype can help
coaches in analyzing the offensive and defensive qualities of their
team. We will first analyze a single player and focus on his active
phases. Afterwards, we investigate the offensive gameplay and the
defensive back-four formation. These use-cases reflect some of the
most important training aspects for a successful training, basically the
attacking and defending skills. The last paragraph will cover some ex-
pert feedback we received when showing the tool to a subject matter
expert.

7.1 Analysis of a Forward
Grouping and clustering interesting phases of a single player can
be performed automatically by applying the clustering approach pre-
sented in section 3. In this use case, we analyze a forward and are
interested in the attacks where he was involved. Therefore, we select
the features Speed, Direction of Movement (x and y-dimension), Dis-
tance to nearest opposite Player, Distance to Ball and apply a k-Means
clustering with two desired clusters in order to divide interesting from
non-interesting phases. The resulting phases can be inspected using
the small-multiples view in combination with the other rendering lay-
ers and the Horizon Graphs. In Figure 1, we show the analysis results
of the forward’s attacks.

If we want to investigate the two clusters, we will use the parallel
coordinates plot showing the feature values for all phases. Though
the labels of the parallel coordinates plot show the original data space,
we used normalization before applying clustering. Obviously, green
phases are defined by large distances to the ball. These green phases
are uninteresting phases which we can ignore in our analysis. The un-
interesting green phases can be hidden from the small multiples view
to focus only on the interesting phases. As a next step, we take a closer
look at the interesting (orange) phases where the player was very ac-
tive and near to the ball. We sort the small-multiples according to
his x-position in order to see the phases where the player was clos-
est to the opposite goal first. Selecting one small multiple will make
all other components showing the selected phase. Figure 1 shows the
third phase the system found, in which the forward receives the ball
after he started to sprint and scores his first goal. The player is ren-
dered by an orange trajectory and the phase can be animated as well.
As a next step, the coach could inspect the other phases or arrange the
small-multiples by similarity in order to find similar patterns. Another
option would be to explore the player’s features using horizon graphs
as described previously.

7.2 Shot-Event Feature Pattern Analysis
As described above, we try to gain knowledge from the manually an-
notated events. We focus in this section on the most important event of
a soccer event, namely the shot on goal. We applied and investigated
the Decision Trees mentioned above in Section 6.4.2 to classify the
events. We found that the most relevant features are x-Position (near
to left or right goal), Total Width of Team (in dangerous situations the
team width in x-dimension is greater that usual), and Opposite Play-
ers around (more opposite players are around trying to prevent shots).
Furthermore, the speed feature turned out to be useful for all kind of
events. Crosses and shots are events easily detectable by classifiers,
whereas fouls and assists are difficult to detect.

7.2.1 Annotated Shot Events
We visually inspect all pre-annotated shots on goal by plotting them
next to each other using Horizon Graphs for the most relevant features.
In Figure 9 we investigate all relevant features of the first half of the
game by Horizon Graphs in combination with the soccer pitch, play-
ers, and ball rendered for the second shot event. Similar to crosses
(analyzed in Figure 7), we can detect one direct free kick (6th event)
as there are no opposite players around and there is no speed before

Fig. 9. Horizon Graphs for the relevant features of all shots on goal
events in first half of the game. The second shot event is shown on
the soccer pitch above. The time point of the event is represented by a
vertical white line.

the shot (the player is waiting until he is allowed to perform the free
kick). During all other shot events there are many of opposite players
around and the x-position is near to the relevant goal. In most of the
events the team width is higher than usual indicating that there is a fast
movement of the offensive players towards the goal.

7.2.2 Shot Events Found by Classification
The analyst may also be interested in similar, dangerous, and inter-
esting situations not yet being marked in the data. We therefore ex-
ported the transformed soccer data into the KNIME workflow as de-
scribed in Section 6.4.2. We trained and evaluated our classifiers and
imported the results back into our prototype. Several new shot on goal
events could be detected by our classifier but were not yet marked
in the original game data. Figure 10 illustrates the classification re-
sults. Where green bars depict correctly found events, red represent
not found events, and yellow bars stand for potentially interesting
events.

Fig. 10. Analysis of detected new shot on goal events. Green colored
bars indicate correct classified events, red represent not found events,
and yellow bars show events found by the classifier but not tagged in
the original input data.



The analyst is able to validate new found shot on goal events and
mark correct found as new shot on goal events. Following the Visual
Analytics pipeline it is possible to add the new events to our KNIME
workflow and to update the classifiers. It is therefore feasible to ex-
tend, update and improve the classifiers to gain more insights.

For our example, we inspected all found shots on goal events not
annotated before and marked the correct ones. We retrained our clas-
sifiers with the additional training data and imported the classification
results into our tool. By this single iteration we discovered eight new
events of which five were relevant. An excerpt of the newly found
events can be seen in Figure 11.

It seems that the extension of our classifiers with additional inter-
esting events helped to move away from pure shot on goal events to
overall dangerous events. The upper image in Figure 11 shows a new
not yet marked shot on goal event, whereas the middle and lower im-
age show dangerous situations. In the bottom row for example a striker
tried to enter the penalty area, but was stopped in the very last moment.
We see the discovery of overall dangerous situations as a prove that the
Visual Analytics pipeline helps in improving the classification results.

Fig. 11. New events found after adding confirmed events to the clas-
sifier’s training data. The classifier returns not only shots on goal (top)
anymore but also semantically dangerous situations (middle and bot-
tom).

7.3 Back-Four Formation

In this use case, we want to evaluate how the back-four formation per-
formed right before a goal was scored. We investigate a short period
before the goal of use case 1 happens (Section 7.1).

The key scene of the failure is shown in upper Figure 12. Our pre-
viously described assessment of the back-four formation detects that
there seems to be something wrong with the back-four formation re-
sulting in a red coloring. Investigating this time frame we can see why:
the back-four formation seems to have problems with their coordina-
tion. The nearest midfield player to the right-back is not fulfilling any
correct defensive tasks. Unfortunately, the central right defender de-
cides wrong and moves out to the sideline in order to cover another
opposite player. Instead, he should have stayed near his usual position
to cover the central areas in front of the goal. Although, a free oppo-
site player at the sideline is not good, it is much more dangerous to
have large distances between defenders and uncovered opposite play-
ers near the middle. A simple pass through the resulting free space
leads to a situation with again too much free space for the opposite
striker. Three own defending players are consequently outplayed and
not involved in the defense anymore.

Fig. 12. Back-four formations immediately before the goal occurs. The
connecting line is colored from red to green representing the computed
quality of the back-four formation.

In lower Figure 12, the back-four formation has improved their po-
sitions and tries hard to recover from their previous mistake. As the
central right defender moved back, the overall formation is better than
before resulting in greenish coloring. Though the mistake was too se-
vere to recover from and the opposite players is already on his way to
score a goal.

The coach of this team can learn from the analysis and teaches
his central-back players to stay near the center area and avoid any
free spaces in the center. Furthermore, the coach should improve the
collaboration and coordination of defensive midfield players and the
back-four formation as well. If the midfield player at the sideline had
covered his opposite number, the central right defender would not have
needed to assist at all.



7.4 Expert Feedback

We had contact to a soccer expert, who is involved into playing soc-
cer since 23 years and into coaching since nine years. Currently, he
is working for FC Bayern München being an international successful
German soccer club. He is certain about the benefits a semi-automatic
tool has and that such tools can be implemented in professional soc-
cer sports. The semi-automatic analysis will help coaches in cases
where there is not enough time for a manual analysis and it allows an-
alyzing more games in the same amount of time compared to a pure
manual analysis. Current developments in soccer show that coaches
want to decide less by intuition but more by hard facts and figures. We
showed the capabilities of our current prototype and the use-cases to
the soccer expert and asked for his feedback and opinions. The overall
feedback was quite good, but he came immediately with suggestions
for improvements that will be included in future versions of this tool.

We were especially interested in the effectiveness of the imple-
mented Horizon Graphs. Horizon Graphs were not intuitive to the soc-
cer expert and were explained to him by showing the visual process of
transforming a line chart into a Horizon Graph. After the explanations,
he was not only able to read the visualizations but was also convinced
that this visualization technique supports him better than traditional
line charts. He was amazed by the possibility to see the team’s co-
herence for certain features as speed or acceleration supported by the
color changes around the quartiles. In his opinion, Horizon Graphs
are most beneficial when comparing the same attribute across several
players. Comparing several players reflects the spirit of soccer being a
team sport.

Detecting dangerous situations and potential shots semi-
automatically was regarded positively, especially with respect to
fast analysis tasks. During half-time breaks, the detection of poten-
tially dangerous situations can be very helpful. He mentioned that it
would be also interesting to get hints about, why a certain attack did
not succeed and lead to a goal.

With respect to future improvements and capabilities of our tool he
sees the following potential: Coaches could validate their – maybe in-
tuitive or experience-based – hypotheses in our tool, by looking for a
certain kind of situation specified by the coach. Thereafter, the sys-
tem should automatically derive the corresponding features and detect
similar situations and display them.

8 CONCLUSION

We presented a Visual Analytics approach to investigate soccer data
and gain new insights. Based on the analysis of single-player, multi-
player, and event-based we were able to easily detect standard situ-
ations as crosses for example. The integration of state-of-the-art data
mining techniques helps to find and understand interesting events. Ad-
ditionally, even not previously annotated interesting events could be
found by Visual Analytics methods. Currently, our prototype is set up
as an expert tool. We followed a data-driven tool design, namely, we
aimed to combine visual analytics techniques deemed useful to answer
analytical questions in context of high-resolution soccer sensor data.
These techniques include interactive and automatic data filtering, vi-
sual representation of trajectories on a soccer field, and compact time
series visualization using horizon graphs. As we expect the types of
required movement features to vary between different analytical ques-
tions, we decided to compute a large number of features from which
the expert can chose. In addition, inspired by similar recent work [9],
we incorporated an interactive classifier which can help to discover
events of potential interest, based on example event annotation, rely-
ing on a broad basis of features. Given our system is set up as an expert
system, we recommend it being used in Pair Analytic scenarios [6].

Our future work includes to provide our prototype to coaches and
to support the most often used analyses by predefined configuration
settings and the definition of task-driven views. The analysis of soccer
features is at an early stage, but this pre-study showed already some
information available in the data. We want to extend our approach to
a semi-automatic detection of mistakes of a team to help the coach
in finding critical situations. Furthermore, we want to integrate video

material into our system whenever available and implement more as-
sessment criteria for formations. Furthermore, we want to integrate
a better visualization for the movement of players and soccer-specific
artifacts as free spaces or running paths. Especially when visualizing
longer time windows, a more abstract visualization technique adapted
to soccer is necessary. Additionally, we will integrate the expert’s
feedback in order to support the coach in validating hypotheses.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors wish to thank David Perlich for his implementations and
Moritz Stefaner for the fruitful discussions. Further thanks for fruitful
discussions on the subject are due to Michael Behrisch. We further-
more wish to thank Andreas Riederer for his valuable feedback and
discussions. The soccer data used in this publication was generously
provided by prozone/mastercoach.

REFERENCES
[1] Behavior of a back-four formation (German). http://www.

youtube.com/watch?v=P_pFKGDEgUc, 2014.
[2] Formation (association football). http://en.wikipedia.org/

wiki/Formation_%28association_football%29, 2014.
[3] G. L. Andrienko, N. V. Andrienko, P. Bak, D. A. Keim, and S. Wrobel.

Visual Analytics of Movement. Springer, 2013.
[4] N. V. Andrienko and G. L. Andrienko. Exploratory analysis of spatial

and temporal data - a systematic approach. Springer, 2006.
[5] N. V. Andrienko, G. L. Andrienko, L. Barrett, M. Dostie, and S. P. Henzi.

Space transformation for understanding group movement. IEEE Trans.
Vis. Comput. Graph., 19(12):2169–2178, 2013.

[6] R. Arias-Hernández, L. T. Kaastra, T. M. Green, and B. D. Fisher. Pair
analytics: Capturing reasoning processes in collaborative visual analyt-
ics. In HICSS, pages 1–10, 2011.

[7] R. Basole, E. Clarkson, A. Cox, C. Healey, J. Stasko, and C. S. (Orga-
nizers). First IEEE visworkshop on sports data visualization, Oct. 14,
2013.

[8] M. R. Berthold, N. Cebron, F. Dill, T. R. Gabriel, T. Kötter, T. Meinl,
P. Ohl, C. Sieb, K. Thiel, and B. Wiswedel. KNIME: The Konstanz In-
formation Miner. In Studies in Classification, Data Analysis, and Knowl-
edge Organization (GfKL 2007). Springer, 2007.

[9] H. Bosch, D. Thom, F. Heimerl, E. Puttmann, S. Koch, R. Krüger,
M. Wörner, and T. Ertl. Scatterblogs2: Real-time monitoring of mi-
croblog messages through user-guided filtering. IEEE Trans. Vis. Com-
put. Graph., 19(12):2022–2031, 2013.

[10] S. Chapman, E. Derse, and J. Hansen, editors. LA84 Foundation Soccer
Coaching Manual. LA84 Foundation, 2012.

[11] V. Di Salvo, R. Baron, H. Tschan, F. Calderon Montero, N. Bachl, and
F. Pigozzi. Performance characteristics according to playing position in
elite soccer. International journal of sports medicine, 28(3):222, 2007.

[12] R. Duarte, D. Araújo, H. Folgado, P. Esteves, P. Marques, and K. Davids.
Capturing complex, non-linear team behaviours during competitive foot-
ball performance. Journal of Systems Science and Complexity, 26(1):62–
72, 2013.

[13] J. Duch, J. S. Waitzman, and L. A. N. Amaral. Quantifying the perfor-
mance of individual players in a team activity. PloS one, 5(6):e10937,
2010.

[14] Fédération Internationale de Football Association. Big Count, Mar.
2014. http://www.fifa.com/worldfootball/bigcount/
index.html.

[15] S. Fonseca, J. Milho, B. Travassos, D. Araújo, and A. Lopes. Mea-
suring spatial interaction behavior in team sports using superimposed
voronoi diagrams. International Journal of Performance Analysis in
Sport, 13(1):179–189, 2013.

[16] A. Fujimura and K. Sugihara. Geometric analysis and quantitative evalu-
ation of sport teamwork. Systems and Computers in Japan, 36(6):49–58,
2005.

[17] K. Goldsberry. Courtvision: New visual and spatial analytics for the nba.
MIT Sloan Sports Analytics Conference, 2012.

[18] J. Gudmundsson and T. Wolle. Football analysis using spatio-temporal
tools. In Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on Advances
in Geographic nformation Systems, pages 566–569. ACM, 2012.

[19] M. Hall, E. Frank, G. Holmes, B. Pfahringer, P. Reutemann, and I. H.
Witten. The weka data mining software: An update. SIGKDD Explor.
Newsl., 11(1):10–18, Nov. 2009.

http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=P_pFKGDEgUc
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=P_pFKGDEgUc
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Formation_%28association_football%29
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Formation_%28association_football%29
http://www.fifa.com/worldfootball/bigcount/index.html
http://www.fifa.com/worldfootball/bigcount/index.html


[20] J. Hamilton. Time series analysis, volume 2. Cambridge Univ Press,
1994.

[21] J. Heer, N. Kong, and M. Agrawala. Sizing the horizon: the effects of
chart size and layering on the graphical perception of time series visual-
izations. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems, pages 1303–1312. ACM, 2009.

[22] A. Inselberg and B. Dimsdale. Parallel coordinates. In Human-Machine
Interactive Systems, pages 199–233. Springer, 1991.

[23] Y. Ivanov, C. Wren, A. Sorokin, and I. Kaur. Visualizing the history of
living spaces. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graph-
ics, 13(6):1153–1160, 2007.

[24] C.-H. Kang, J.-R. Hwang, and K.-J. Li. Trajectory analysis for soccer
players. In Data Mining Workshops, 2006. ICDM Workshops 2006. Sixth
IEEE International Conference on, pages 377–381. IEEE, 2006.

[25] H.-C. Kim, O. Kwon, and K.-J. Li. Spatial and spatiotemporal analysis
of soccer. In Proceedings of the 19th ACM SIGSPATIAL International
Conference on Advances in Geographic Information Systems, pages 385–
388. ACM, 2011.

[26] S. Kim. Voronoi analysis of a soccer game. Nonlinear Analysis: Mod-
elling and Control, 9(3):233–240, 2004.

[27] C. Lago-Peñas, J. Lago-Ballesteros, A. Dellal, and M. Gómez. Game-
related statistics that discriminated winning, drawing and losing teams
from the spanish soccer league. Journal of sports science & medicine,
9(2):288, 2010.

[28] P. A. Legg, D. H. Chung, M. L. Parry, M. W. Jones, R. Long, I. W. Grif-
fiths, and M. Chen. Matchpad: Interactive glyph-based visualization for
real-time sports performance analysis. In Computer Graphics Forum,
volume 31, pages 1255–1264. Wiley Online Library, 2012.

[29] P. A. Legg, D. H. S. Chung, M. L. Parry, R. Bown, M. W. Jones, I. W.
Griffiths, and M. Chen. Transformation of an uncertain video search
pipeline to a sketch-based visual analytics loop. IEEE Transactions on
Visualization and Computer Graphics, 19(12):2109–2118, 2013.

[30] R. Nakanishi, J. Maeno, K. Murakami, and T. Naruse. An approximate
computation of the dominant region diagram for the real-time analysis of
group behaviors. In RoboCup 2009: Robot Soccer World Cup XIII, pages
228–239. Springer, 2010.

[31] K. Ooms, G. L. Andrienko, N. V. Andrienko, P. D. Maeyer, and V. Fack.
Analysing the spatial dimension of eye movement data using a visual
analytic approach. Expert Syst. Appl., 39(1):1324–1332, 2012.

[32] J. L. Peña and H. Touchette. A network theory analysis of football strate-
gies. arXiv preprint arXiv:1206.6904, 2012.

[33] C. Perin, R. Vuillemot, J.-D. Fekete, et al. Soccerstories: A kick-off for
visual soccer analysis. IEEE transactions on visualization and computer
graphics, 2013.

[34] H. Pileggi, C. D. Stolper, J. M. Boyle, and J. T. Stasko. Snapshot: Vi-
sualization to propel ice hockey analytics. Visualization and Computer
Graphics, IEEE Transactions on, 18(12):2819–2828, 2012.

[35] A. Rusu, D. Stoica, and E. Burns. Analyzing soccer goalkeeper perfor-
mance using a metaphor-based visualization. In Information Visualisa-
tion (IV), 2011 15th International Conference on, pages 194–199. IEEE,
2011.

[36] A. Rusu, D. Stoica, E. Burns, B. Hample, K. McGarry, and R. Russell.
Dynamic visualizations for soccer statistical analysis. In Information
Visualisation (IV), 2010 14th International Conference, pages 207–212.
IEEE, 2010.

[37] T. Schreck, J. Bernard, T. Tekuov, and J. Kohlhammer. Visual clus-
ter analysis of trajectory data with interactive Kohonen maps. Palgrave
Macmillan Information Visualization, 8:14–29, 2009.

[38] D. Spretke, H. Janetzko, F. Mansmann, P. Bak, B. Kranstauber, S. David-
son, and M. Mueller. Exploration through Enrichment: A Visual Ana-
lytics Approach for Animal Movement. In D. Agrawal, I. Cruz, C. S.
Jensen, E. Ofek, and E. Tanin, editors, Proceedings of the 19th SIGSPA-
TIAL International Conference on Advances in Geographic Information
Systems, GIS ’11, pages 421–424, New York, NY, USA, 2011. ACM.

[39] F. Staals and J. Gudmundsson. Detecting attack patterns in football tra-
jectory data & home region computation.

[40] T. Taki and J.-i. Hasegawa. Visualization of dominant region in team
games and its application to teamwork analysis. In Computer Graphics
International, 2000. Proceedings, pages 227–235. IEEE, 2000.

[41] E. R. Tufte and P. Graves-Morris. The visual display of quantitative in-
formation, volume 2. Graphics press Cheshire, CT, 1983.

[42] T. von Landesberger, S. Bremm, T. Schreck, and D. Fellner. Feature-
based Automatic Identification of Interesting Data Segments in Group

Movement Data. Information Visualization Journal, 2013.
[43] Z. Wang, M. Lu, X. Yuan, J. Zhang, and H. V. D. Wetering. Visual traffic

jam analysis based on trajectory data. IEEE Transactions on Visualization
and Computer Graphics, 19(12):2159–2168, 2013.


	Introduction
	Related Work
	Visual Analysis of Sport Data in Research Interest
	Movement and Constellation-based Analysis
	Analysis Based on Temporal and Statistical Aspects
	Summary and Positioning of our Work

	Single Player Analysis
	Multi Player Analysis
	Player Comparison
	Constellations and Formations

	Event-Based Analysis
	Interactive Feature Analysis
	Similar Phase Analysis

	System
	Features
	Visualization Components
	Visualizations
	Analysis Facilities
	WEKA Clustering Integration
	Visual Analytics Integration and Machine Learning

	Interaction and Animation

	Use Cases and Evaluation
	Analysis of a Forward
	Shot-Event Feature Pattern Analysis
	Annotated Shot Events
	Shot Events Found by Classification

	Back-Four Formation
	Expert Feedback

	Conclusion

