








































                                83 cartographic perspectives    Number 63, Spring 2009

and input into the design of new features based on 
what is now available are invited.

References

South Land to New Holland: Dutch Charting of Australia 
1606–1756, National and State Libraries Australasia 
(NSLA), formerly the Council of Australian State Li-
braries (CASL), 2006.

Australia in maps: great maps in Australia’s history from 
the National Library’s collection.  2008.   Canberra : Na-
tional Library of Australia>

“Maps of Australia” prototype:  http://mapsearch.nla.
gov.au/

National Library of Australia Catalogue:
www.nla.gov.au/catalogue/

Mapping: Methods & Tips

A Technique for Encoding Elevation
Changes Along a Route

Daniel Huffman
University of Wisconsin at Madison

For many bicyclists and runners out in rugged areas, 
knowing the character of the route’s terrain is critical: 
where the steep climbs, the downward slopes, and the 
flat stretches lie. Many bike maps, however, do not 
encode this information–they focus instead on show-
ing the road network and which routes are safest for 
bicyclists. These are certainly important, but they do 
not help readers determine if they should press on to 
the next hill or stop and rest.

Proposed Symbology

The solution I propose is relatively simple: encode the 
elevation along the route using line width as shown by 
Figure 1.

Though simple, the symbology here is quite effi-
cient. By varying the width of the line with elevation, 
this map allows the reader to access three data sets: 
the elevation of the path, the slope, and the aspect. 
When viewing the first variable, the reader’s brain can 
derive the other two, by examining the spatial pattern 
of how elevation changes. The elevation itself is not 
particularly useful, but slope and aspect are critical 
pieces of information for the bicyclist or runner. Both 
need to be on the map together–knowing the slope of a 
hill is important, but users also have to know whether, 
as they head along the road, they’ll be climbing up a 
particular steep slope or coasting down it. 

So, the usefulness of the map relies on the reader’s 
being able to determine how elevation is changing 
from one point on the route to another, in order for 

them to derive the slope and aspect. The symbology, 
then, needs to make this pattern of change as easy to 
understand as possible. Consider two different tech-
niques for encoding elevation as shown in Figure 2.

The first encodes elevation along the path using 
color value and the other by varying line width, as I 
advocate. The slope of the route is much easier to fig-
ure out when line width changes than when the color 
value does. That the color at the left end of the line is 
lighter than the color at the right is relatively easy to 
determine. However, quantifying how much darker will 
be a challenge for the reader, when compared to the 
simpler task of quantifying how much wider the line 
is at one end than the other. Easy comparison of points 
is essential for understanding the change in eleva-
tion, and therefore the slope and aspect. Speed and 
simplicity of use is also important on account of the 
conditions under which such maps will be used. Some 
bicyclists do not even stop their bikes when reading 
maps, and so the map must work when they’re not 
looking closely or long at it. Encoding elevation by line 
width has an additional advantage over any sort of 
color scheme: line widths are more robust–they won’t 
vary according to lighting conditions as the readers 
travel in and out of shade of trees and in varying lev-
els of cloud cover.

However, using color value does have two advan-
tages of its own. The first is that by not changing line 
width, lines don’t become too wide (causing crowd-
ing) or too narrow (and thus being hard to see). The 
second advantage is really more of a lack of a disad-
vantage–the highest elevations are not dominant. In 
Figure 1 the bottom half of the route stands out the 
most. Being at the highest elevation, it has the widest 
lines. But the route here also consists of largely flat 
stretches, which means that it’s not a concern to bicy-
clists or runners–they want to know about the hills, 
about how the elevation changes. Encoding elevation 



      84 Number 63, Spring 2009cartographic perspectives    

Figure 1. A sample map showing the proposed symbology.

by colors keeps the reader from being distracted as 
much by the high elevations, which will not stand out 
quite so much.

There is one further potential disadvantage to 
the proposed technique. Two equal slopes can look 

unequal, if they are 
at different eleva-
tions. Figure 3 shows 
two road stretches, 
each the same length, 
and each having the 
same change in eleva-
tion. One takes place 
at a lower elevation, 
however, and appears 
as though it is a steeper 
slope, when in fact the 
two are even, and are 
in fact drawn with the 
exact same line angles 
on the page.

Instead of encoding 
something the bicyclist 
is not interested in 

Figure 2. Using a change in color 
value (top figure) and line thickness 
(lower figure). (see page 91 for color 
version)

Figure 3. Possible confusion over 
identifying changes in elevation.

(elevation) and leaving it to their mind to derive the 
things they do want to know (slope and aspect), the 
latter could be encoded directly. Showing the slope is 
relatively simple, as it is a number. A color ramp or 
changing line width or other non-categorical symbol-
ization will work for this. Aspect, however, poses a 
challenge, since it depends on which way the bicyclist 
is traveling down the road. It’s uphill one way and 
downhill the other. A few possible solutions come to 
mind. Arrows could be drawn next to the route to 
indicate which way is uphill (or downhill). Color hue 
could be used for the route to show the aspect (red 
for north, blue for east, etc.), paired with changing 
value, saturation, or width for slope. A more interest-
ing alternative is seen in Figure 4: using a pattern of 
chevrons or arrows to 
draw the route, each of 
which points downhill, 
and varying the size of 
those arrows or their 
lightness to show the 
degree of the slope.

There are more pos-
sibilities, obviously. 

Figure 4. A possible symbolization 
method for showing aspect.



                                85 cartographic perspectives    Number 63, Spring 2009

But these solutions have one significant weakness 
when compared to showing elevation directly–the 
reader has to process two different symbols (or two 
properties of the same symbol) and extract two pieces 
of information, rather than one. Most bicyclist and 
runner map readers intend to use the map to figure 
out the lay of the land,; they expecting to see some-
thing resembling terrain–hills, valleys, etc. Figure 4 
above is too abstract-- it no longer feels like land, and 
so is harder to interpret. This is one reason why people 
like hill shading–mountains look like mountains, and 
that’s something they can understand without a lot 
of mental processing. Experimental testing may show 
that it is possible that readers could eventually train 
themselves to interpret something like Figure 4 faster 
and easier than Figure 1, since it does show what they 
want to know and with the least amount of ink pos-
sible and without showing anything extraneous. But 
that will take effort and learning. 

Production Technique

The linear symbols are built by determining the eleva-
tion of the route at several points and then connect-
ing those points with line segments that increase or 
decrease in width according to the elevation at each 
endpoint, as in Figure 5.

The first step, then, is 
to create a set of points of 
known elevation. These 
points must be sufficient to 
roughly define the shape of 
the route and must ad-
equately convey all major 
elevation changes. A good 
starting point for the latter 
is to use a GIS package to 
calculate the intersections 
between elevation con-
tours and the users’ chosen 
route. More points may 

need to be manually added to make sure the shape of 
the route is adequately conveyed as well, such as at 
road junctions and curved segments. Once the points 
are chosen, a circle is placed at each and scaled pro-
portionally to the elevation. Figure 6 shows a field of 
points sufficient to create linear elevation symbols for 
the roads in an example area, each appropriately sized.

In order to create line segments that gradually and 
evenly change width, the project is next taken into 
Adobe Illustrator, where the Blend tool is used. This 
tool fills in the space between two objects with inter-
mediate steps, to create a smooth transition, as in Fig-
ure 7. In this case, the intermediate circles are chang-
ing size to blend from one point of known elevation 
to another. Hundreds of steps in the transition may be 

Figure 5. Showing the location 
of points of known elevation and 
line width changes in between.

Figure 6. An example of a road network. (see 
page 91 for color version)

Figure 7. A sample of using the Blend tool 
in Adoble Illustrator. (see page 91 for color 
version)

needed in order to give the appearance of a solid line, 
as seen on the right-hand side of the figure. Blends 
can also be done along a curved path to help better 
represent the shape of the underlying road. Once the 
blend has been performed, the circles can be merged 
together into one simple, rounded line segment. The 
segments can them be joined into a complete route. 
The joints will be smooth and rounded, because the 
segments are based on circles.

The end result is a map in the style of Figure 1, 
in which the line width of routes varies according 
to elevation, offering map readers a simple way of 
understanding the terrain they will be facing on their 
journey.

An Alternate Production Technique

Worth noting is an alternate production technique 
developed by Jo Wood of City University London, 
who saw an earlier draft of this article published in an 
online blog. Mr. Wood begins with GPS tracks, record-
ed from previous rides along a route, as his starting 



      86 Number 63, Spring 2009cartographic perspectives    

data. He then runs them through a program written 
in Processing1 to quickly generate a map based on this 
large set of input points. His technique has a couple 
of important advantages: it is much more automated 
than the one proposed above, and it generates a more 
complete terrain profile, being based on a larger set 
of elevation points than a manual selection technique. 
It does, however, require a prior trip along the route 
with a GPS unit.

Summary

Regardless of the technique used, the proposed sym-
bology offers a simple and effective way to show map 
readers the character of the terrain they will be fac-
ing on a route by encoding elevation with line width. 
Readers can quickly understand changes in elevation 
and derive the slope and aspect information necessary 

Visual Fields

to help them make decisions along the route. It is visu-
ally simpler than encoding slope and aspect directly 
and is not so abstract that it cannot be easily under-
stood as representing a landscape. It is also compatible 
with current cycling maps–it still allows the depiction 
of road networks, which can be color-coded based on 
such things as traffic conditions or shoulder width. 
The technique simply uses up a portion of the “visual 
variable space” that is currently not being employed 
on most road maps. It offers a way for more–and 
highly useful – information to be added to route maps 
where terrain is important, to the benefit of bicyclists 
and runners.

1Processing is an open source programming language 
and environment for people who want to program im-
ages, animation, and interactions.

Mollymaps started in my journal pages while studying 
abroad in central Asia. They were a way to recount a 
day's wanderings on foot. When I successfully got out 
of helping to write a group research project in ex-
change for drawing all the maps, I learned maps could 
be used as barter. I spent the entire year after college 
traveling around the world and, oddly enough, trad-
ing maps for room and board. Mollymaps has since 
developed into a small freelance business, celebrating 
the places that matter to people.

I still get nervous showing final products to cli-
ents—maybe because I am truly aiming to make the 
map that is in their heads, from their experience. And 
that's impossible, but I have to try anyway. When they 
look at the map, I want them to see their experiences. I 
want the map to be a place where a few shared memo-
ries can live. I don't always reach these goals but that 
is my aim.

I'll probably always make maps for whomever asks. 
But I'm a little tired of my 'happy pastures' maps—
those that make landscapes look perfect, quaint and 
static. The hand-drawn message can do much more 

than appease our need for idyllic landscapes. Maps 
can draw attention to the tragedies and unsettling 
changes in our landscapes through the tragic beauty 
of irony, and the sobriety and sway of pen-to-paper 
expression. My project now is to take my skill set and 
apply it to environmental risks and injustices such as 
mountaintop removal, climate change vulnerabilities, 
point source pollution, irresponsible development; the 
list is rich with stories of real places and communities. 
Maps can draw us together to embrace or to revolt. 
All too quickly we are accepting the creation and use 
of slick, repeatable maps ("starbucks maps" as John 
Fels called them) and while they may be participa-
tory, ubiquitous and novel, are they compelling? There 
will always be a need for the storyteller, reminding us 
again and again of the exacting beauties and tragedies 
of individual human experience.

Molly Holmberg

For more information about Molly Holmgren's work, 
see www.mollymaps.com


