
































JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2016 1

GameFlow: Narrative Visualization of NBA
Basketball Games

Wei Chen, Tianyi Lao, Jing Xia, Xinxin Huang, Biao Zhu, Wanqi Hu, Huihua Guan

Abstract—Although basketball games have received broad
attention, the forms of game reports and webcast are purely
content-based cross-media: texts, videos, snapshots, and per-
formance figures. Analytical narrations of games that seek to
compose a complete game from heterogeneous datasets are chal-
lenging for general media producers because such a composition
is time-consuming and heavily depends on domain experts. In
particular, an appropriate analytical commentary of basketball
games requires two factors, namely, rich context and domain
knowledge, which includes game events, player locations, player
profiles, and team profiles, among others. This type of analytical
commentary elicits a timely and effective basketball game data
visualization made up of different sources of media. Existing
visualizations of basketball games mainly profile a particular
aspect of the game. Therefore, this paper presents an expressive
visualization scheme that comprehensively illustrates NBA games
with three levels of details: a season level, a game level and a
session level. We reorganize a basketball game as a sequence of
sessions to depict the game states and heated confrontations. We
design and implement a live system that integrates multi-media
NBA datasets: play-by-play text data, box score data, game video
data, and action area data. We demonstrate the effectiveness of
this scheme with case studies and user feedbacks.

Index Terms—Game narration, basketball games, visualiza-
tion, video.

I. INTRODUCTION

Basketball is one of the most popular and widely watched
ball games all over the world. It is a fast-paced contact game in
which the players are constantly moving in heated confronta-
tions, thus leading to quick transitions from defense to offense
or vice versa. Analytical narrations of games aim to compose a
complete game from different perspectives. This composition
is time-consuming and heavily depends on domain experts.
Thus, a timely and effective analysis of the games has been
greatly demanded in basketball game narration. For instance,
commentators need timely comprehension of the games to
quickly gain insight and detect interesting patterns that may
be hidden, i.e., the performance of players or the tactics used
in the games. Nevertheless, the existing analysis of basketball
games is less effective and time consuming. Users still heavily
rely on watching lengthy videos and reading statistical tables
to examine the fast-changing games. Developing an effective
and efficient solution that facilitate the analysis of basketball
games is urgently needed.

Wei Chen, Tianyi Lao, Jing Xia, Xinxin Huang, Biao Zhu, Wanqi Hu,
Huihua Guan were with the State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University.
Being a devotee of basketball, Xinxin Huang came up with the idea of
basketball game visualization and implemented the very first version of the
system.

Manuscript received April 19, 2005; revised August 26, 2015.

This paper aims to use multimedia datasets, such as play-
by-play (PBP) text data, action areas data, basic statistics,
and game video data of NBA games to enable the audience,
such as basketball devotees and commentators, to conduct
game narration. The PBP data contain abundant information
on the players, time-outs, and score series, etc. and describe all
changes in a game. The PBP data also describe player actions,
such as shot attempts, turnovers, possession of the ball, fouls,
etc. Action area data, which indicate where actions take place,
are utilized to further analyze the attack styles of teams. Basic
statistical data, such as field goals and rebounds, provide a
numeric overview of the performance of a team or individual
players in a game. Game video data record every movement
of a game. We use game video data only for review and
verification as analyzing a complete game process with a game
video takes at least 48 minutes. Overall, multimedia NBA
datasets enable a multi-facet analysis in characterizing the
entire proceeding of a season and individual games. Users can
perform in-depth, comprehensive game narration by evaluating
the performance of teams and players and by understanding
the unfolding of a game among others. The integration of
heterogeneous datasets enables users to explore the game from
different perspectives with a rich game context.

Quantitative analysis using data mining methods or statis-
tical methods, has been employed by expert users to analyze
the game data. The book Basketball on Paper [1] emphasizes
the power of quantitative analysis in basketball game analysis.
However, these methods have two obvious shortcomings. First,
these methods usually depend on well-trained models and pre-
defined features [2], [3] that require domain knowledge. Thus,
they cannot be easily interpreted by non-expert users. Second,
the methods can successfully detect well-known patterns, but
can hardly find unexpected ones. Finally, the results produced
by the methods may still require more work to read and
understand, not to mention to reach a wide audience. To
address these issues, an increasing number of visualization
research has been conducted in recent years, such as visual
analysis of player trajectories, visualization of field goals of
a player [4], and visualization of basic statistics of different
players in different games [5]. Nevertheless, these works only
focus on a particular aspect of a game. A visual analysis sys-
tem that enables non-expert users to conduct comprehensive
game narration is still absent.

By integrating multimedia data of NBA basketball games,
we provide a comprehensive representation of an entire NBA
season. Our visualization reveals NBA games at multiple levels
of details: the season level, the game level and the session
level. The overall season view (the season level) visualizes



JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2016 2

the win-lose statistics and other statistics, thus enabling the
comparison of the strengths and weaknesses of all teams.
The progress of a game (the game level) is visualized as an
ordered sequence of sessions segmented by the substitution of
players. In a session (the session level), actions are designed
as glyphs and the performers are directly revealed. Thus, the
key player and his contributions in a session can be inferred.
PBP data, video data and action areas data together facilitate
multi-faceted visualization of a session. Based on the visual
designs, our GameFlow system makes visual narrations of
a complete proceeding of NBA games efficiently: action by
action, player by player and session by session. Users can
identify the changes in intenseness of a basketball game, and
explore the contributing factors of the final score.

Our contributions are summarized as follows:

• An integration scheme of multimedia heterogeneous N-
BA game datasets that enables a comprehensive visual
narration of a complete basketball game.

• A level-of-detail exploration scheme that reveals the
entire NBA season, an NBA game, and a game session
progressively and interactively.

II. RELATED WORK

A. Basketball Games Analysis

The quantitative analysis of basketball games can be divided
into two categories: modeling methods and non-modeling
methods. The Markov chain model is widely applied in mod-
eling transitions in basketball games [2], [3]. In this model,
each game is a sequence of transitions between discrete states.
A well-fitted model can build a simulation of a basketball
game to forecast the final scores of a game. In non-modeling
methods, Bashuk [6] predicted the performance of a team and
an individual player in basketball games with cumulative win
probabilities. Hamilton et al. [7] modeled basketball free
throws as a function of angle, speed, and spin at release
and calculated the optimal trajectory. They then provided a
function of the height of ball release for a higher hit rate.
Perše et al. [8] proposed a trajectory-based approach with a
probabilistic play model and team activities. The approach
could automatically recognize complex multi-player behav-
iors in basketball games. Other than the trajectories in the
trajectory-based approach, the quantitative analysis approaches
do not utilize visualization. Thus they are usually lack of
illustrative description of their analysis.

Instead of making predictions, visualization methods focus
on representations, statistical values, or events on the basket-
ball field. CourtVision [4] is an ensemble method that quanti-
fies and visualizes the shooting range of NBA players and the
differences in their shooting abilities. PluMP [5] augmented
the traditional plus/minus plot to a measurement of impact
through differentials to all box score statistics. The media
has released various visualization reports on basketball. The
Fathom information design [9] visualized basketball move-
ment throughout the game as well as players’ movements with
a dataset generated by the latest SportVU tracking system.
Unfortunately, the trajectory data are not publicly available.

The New York Times [10] depicted basketball players’ shoot-
ing positions with a shooting heatmap and realized mid-range
jumpers are rare in the NBA. The HotShotChart [11] utilized
an arc diagram to reveal the assist relationships between
players in NBA games. All these great visualizations exhibit
a basketball game with one or two perspectives. Nevertheless,
because of the complexity of basketball game data, none of
them can narrate a complete game with the changing scores
and events.

B. Sports Visualization

Other than basketball game analysis, sports visualization has
attracted much academic attention. Soccer Matches [12] is an
application that provides an overview of soccer championship
results with glyphs in a matrix representation. Although the
overall championship season is visualized, Soccer Matches
does not deal with individual soccer games. Integrating Twit-
ter data, Wongsuphasawat [13] narrated the most interesting
moments in the UEFA Champions League. The entire season
and all the interesting moments in each game detected from
Twitter were visualized. However, inter-player collaboration
was not covered in their work. SoccerStories [14] enriches
the current soccer analysis by aggregating game phases into
a series of connected visualizations of actions such as goal
attempts. Janetzko [15] built a prototype of soccer data that
covers single-player, multi-player, and event-based aspects
of soccer analysis. Note that basketball is a more intense
game than soccer. Gathered in a much smaller field, players’
movements and actions, such as shooting, assisting, and fouls,
can happen in quick successions. This intensity also increases
the challenges in visualization.

Other than soccer, other sports can also be visualized. Parry
et al. [16] proposed a generic scheme for event prioritization
and selection in a video storyboard. They demonstrated the
scheme using a case study of a snooker video storyboard.
However, the idea of visualizing trajectories with a video is
not feasible with basketball because the game field is too large
to cover all the details in a game. Introducing the radial heat
map technique, SnapShot [17] integrates visualization into a
hockey intelligence-gathering process. The focus of SnapShot
is the shot data, specifically the shot length. Baseball4D [18]
reconstructs baseball games and obtains a better baseball
analysis by combining visualization and statistical methods. As
baseball is not a fast-paced game like basketball, Baseball4D
also focuses on ball and fielder trajectories. TenniVis [19]
provides two new visualizations and rich interactions that
enable tennis coaches and players to obtain insights into match
performance. Pie Meter views and Fish Grid views were
designed to visualize the proceeding of a game. Rather than
a one-to-one sport, basketball is a multi-player sport. Both
single-player performance and multi-player collaboration are
crucial factors for a team victory.

Regardless of all great sports and analysis visualization, a
complete analysis of the proceedings of basketball games is
still required.



JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2016 3

III. DATA DESCRIPTION

Box score data of the entire season, PBP data, game video
data, and action area data are the datasets used in this paper.
Box score data of the whole season cover all winnings and
losings of each team and other statistics, including average
scoring, average assists, average turnovers, etc. Game video
data contain the videos of games with the video time calibrated
to the corresponding game time. Action area data keep track
of where the actions take place in the game, and can be used
to analyze the attacking styles of the teams.

The format of PBP data is a sequence of event records with
timestamps, scores and descriptions of actions (see Figure 1).

Fig. 1. An example of a PBP data.

For each record, we extract the time, the player, the action as
well as its attributes. Taking the record in green as an example,
the extracted attributes are listed in Table I. Attributes include
times of the event, scores for each team, actions, areas of the
actions, and players involved in the actions. To be specific, a
“made” shot may be 1 point, 2 points, or 3 points. And only
the last player who passes the ball to the shooter and directly
helps contribute the shot (if ever) is called an “assist” player.
If the action involves another action (a “made” action may
involve an “assist” action), the attributes of the other action
are also extracted. Actions and the number of players involved
are listed in Table II.

Time 11:43:0
Team 1 Score 0
Team 2 Score 2
Action Team Miami
Action Player U. Haslem
Action Type Made

Action Attribute 1 2-pt
Action Attribute 2 rim

Action Involvement M. Chalmers
Involvement Type Assist

TABLE I
ATTRIBUTES EXTRACTED FROM A PBP EVENT RECORD.

Action Type Player Involvement
Made (1 or 2 or 3 point(s)) 1 or 2 may associate with (Assist)

Turnover 1 or 2, may associate with (Steal)
Miss 1

Rebound 1
Foul 2
Steal 2
Assist 2

Timeout 0
TABLE II

ACTION TYPES AND THE NUMBER OF PLAYERS INVOLVED.

IV. TASKS AND PRINCIPLES

Concerning the particular application of basketball game
narration, we propose user tasks that can guide us to design
principles. The tasks involve level-of-detail descriptions of an
NBA season: the entire season navigation, the game overview
and the session level player performance display.

Depict the win-lose situation of the entire season
The win-lose view provides a good overview of all
teams in an entire game season. Users can ana-
lyze the strength or weakness of a team from this
overview. It can also serve as a game entry through
which users select a loss of a strong team or a victory
of a weak team or other games of interest.

Identify the change in score difference
A descriptor of the score difference is the direct
indication of the game and is thus the basis of the
basketball game analysis. Dramatic changes in scores
indicate an intensive period of the game. A great
score difference at the end of a game drags the game
into trash time. Coaches usually change their tactics
when their teams are losing.

Identify how an intensive period or a turning point proceeds
Users can determine an intensive period or a turning
point of the game from a score difference curve.
However, users cannot obtain the whole picture of
the game without detailed information on player-
wise performance or inter-player interactions. In the
case of two teams that are good at defending, a
score difference curve cannot locate the intensity of a
game. Thus, other visualizations are still required to
identify the intensity or the turning point of a game.

Evaluate the contribution of a player
Valuable players are not merely the players who
made the most scores. Assists and rebounds are
also important contribution metrics. Players who had
great performance at the turning points of a game
are also considered valuable. A common question to
answer at the session level is how to evaluate the role
and contribution of a player.

Based on the narration tasks, the design principles are
summarized before we start the visualization designs.

• Visualization designs at season, game, and session levels
are required.

• Score difference reflects game states and actions reveal
game proceedings. To make a comprehensive game nar-
ration, both score difference and player actions should be
integrated.

• Although it has no explicit data, a good visualization
design should reveal intensive periods or turning points
of basketball games.

V. SEASON OVERVIEW

As an entry to select a particular game for further analysis,
the season overview depicts the win-lose situation at the season
level, and meanwhile provides effective indicators to the game
of interest. We design two views, namely, the team season view



JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2016 4

(a) the Time-series Component (b) the Box score Component

Fig. 2. The team season view. It contains two components: the time series component and the box score component.

and the opponent season view, to provide a season summary
from different perspectives.

A. Team Season View

The team season view consists of two components: the time-
series component and the box score component, (see Figure 2).

1) Time-series Component: The time-series component en-
codes each team in a separate line. Within each line, all the
games the corresponding team played are shown in a temporal
ascending order. This component shows the wins and losses
of individual teams throughout the whole season. As shown in
Figure 2, the time-series component is decomposed into three
levels:

• Team Game Line: For each team, all games it played
throughout the season are encoded within a line from
left to right in a temporal ascending order. At the left
end of each line, the name of the team and the number
of wins and loses are displayed. The ratio of winnings
and losings is encoded in the background rectangle of
the team name. The red and green sections represent the
percentage of wins and losses, respectively.

• Single Game: Each single game is encoded with a
rectangle. The color of the rectangle encodes the result
of the game: green for win and red for lose. As the final
score difference for a game can reflect the gap between
both sides, it is encoded by the height of the rectangle.

• Win-Lose Streak: A winning streak and a losing streak
can reflect the excellent and poor status of a team within a
period of time, respectively. In our design, we use a poly-
line to connect winning/losing streak rectangles similar to
Sparkline1. In this way, the poly-line is able to show the

1http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sparkline.

trend of score difference within a winning/losing streak.
To enable the quantitative analysis of these streaks, we
explicitly add the number of each streak and place it
beside the corresponding streak.

2) Box score Component: The box score component dis-
plays the average values of each user-selected attribute for all
the teams. It is similar to parallel coordinates and is designed
to facilitate the comparison among different teams.

In this component, each column encodes a user-selected
attribute. At the top are labels showing the names of the
attributes. Below each label are 30 glyphs, one for each team.
These glyphs are initially aligned with the teams in the time-
series component. Each glyph consists of two parts. The left
part encodes the average value of the attribute in that column
for the team in that row, and it is calculated from all the games
that team played throughout the season. The right part encodes
the average value of the same attribute, which is calculated
from the same games but for the opponent teams. Values of
attributes such as “points” have large bases (usually larger
than 90), which make the differences between teams too small
to distinguish. To address this problem, we truncate the bars
into bases and remainders and explicitly visualize the breaks
(as shown in the box score component of Figure 2) to avoid
misleading. The base values are labelled on the top of the
columns and the breaks are indicated by slash marks. The two
parts indicate different abilities of a team. Suppose that the
attribute is “Points.” The left part shows the average points a
team gained, which indicate the attack ability of a team. The
right part shows the average points gained by its opponent
team, which reflect the defensive ability of the team.

All the attributes are sortable, either by the value of a team
or its opponent teams. Thus, we can determine how teams are
ranked with respect to different attributes. The adjacent glyphs



JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2016 5

of the same team are connected by a line, and thus users are
able to trace the data of a specific team, which further enable
users to compare the different teams.

3) Interactions: We have carefully designed several inter-
actions for this view to help users better view and compare
the data.

a) Attribute Selection: Users are free to decide which
attribute to show and which one to hide in the box score
component. As different compositions of attributes indicate
different characters of a team, users are able to compare teams
from different aspects in this way.

b) Game and Team Highlight: When users hover over a
game rectangle or an attribute glyph, the corresponding team
is highlighted as shown in Figure 2. If a game rectangle is
hovered, basic information, such as team names, final score
and date, of that game will be displayed beside that rectangle.
Moreover, the average values of the selected attributes for this
specific game are displayed above the corresponding attribute
glyph as shown in Figure 2.

If users click the left-most team name, the corresponding
team will remain highlighted until a second click. With this
interaction, users can highlight multiple teams at the same
time.

The highlighting of a game or team makes viewing the
information of a single game or team easier for users, and
the highlighting of multiple teams at the same time simplifies
the comparison among different teams.

c) Filtering: We enable users to filter games in the time-
series component in three ways:

• Win/lose filtering can filter out all win games or lose
games.

• Score difference filtering can filter out games with a
smaller score difference than the user-selected value.

• Streak length filtering can filter out games within the
streaks of which the length is smaller than the user-
selected streak length.

The filtered out game rectangles and streak lines are shown
with high transparency.

d) Sorting: Aside from sorting by attribute as mentioned
in section V-A2, the team game lines in the time-series
component can also be reordered by the number of either
wins or losses. Therefore, users can determine which team
plays well and which team plays poorly.

B. Inter-Team View

Different NBA teams have different characteristics, ad-
vantages, and disadvantages. The analysis of games played
between each two teams may be meaningful and interesting.
For example, a weak team may defeat a specific strong team
because its tactical characteristics can restrain the advantage
of the strong team.

Therefore, we design the inter-team view (see Figure 3) to
visualize games played between pairwise teams. We employ
the adjacent matrix [20] because of its effectiveness in dis-
playing relational data. To the left of the matrix, 30 teams
are encoded and laid out in the same way as in the team
season view. We denote these teams as teamAi (i ∈ [1, 30]).

At the top of the matrix, we simply display the names of
the 30 teams, which are denoted as teamBj (j ∈ [1, 30]).
Within each matrix cell cellij , we encode the games played
by teamAi and teamBj with horizontal bars. As two to four
games are played between each two teams within a season,
each cellij has two or four bars. The bars are arranged from
top to bottom in a temporal ascending order. The colors of
the bars are used to encode the win-lose information: the
green bar indicates that TeamAi wins the game, and the
red bar indicates that teamAi loses the game. Thus, cellij
is referred to as the win-lose cell. The length of the bars
encodes a user-selected attribute, e.g., “Rebound,” “Assist,”
etc. The background color of cellij encodes the aggregated
outcome: light red indicates that TeamAi wins more games
than teamBj , and light green means that teamBj wins more
games than teamAi. The teams are on a draw when the color
is gray. Although the entries in the upper-right triangle of the
matrix are indeed the inverse of that in the lower-left triangle,
we keep both triangles to maintain consistent visualization of
a team’s records.

VI. GAME FLOW VIEW

After investigating the season overviews introduced in Sec-
tion V, users may find several interesting games and want
to further analyze the details of each game. The game flow
view is designed to depict the games at the game level and
at the session level. In this section, we introduce several
design considerations and then describe visual encodings and
interactions.

A. Game Session

According to Dean Oliver in his book Basketball on Pa-
per [1], “The box score summarizes one game, the unit of
basketball time that is most important to coaches and players.”.
We define the unit of basketball time as the duration between
two substitutions and refer to it as a session. A session is a
confrontation period of five players with five players without
substitution. As every player has his position in the team, the
tactic is usually maintained in a session. A basketball game is
a fast-paced game that leads to a quick transition from defense
to offense. We segment a full basketball game with the unit
of basketball time to reveal possible game transitions.

B. Visual Encodings and Interactions

As shown in Figure 4, the game flow view is divided into
two parts: the upper half that encodes information on the home
team and the lower half that encodes information on the away
team. Team names and logos are displayed in the left. In the
middle of the view, a score difference curve (see Figure 4 (a))
is presented. If the curve is above (below) the middle axis,
then the home (away) team is leading the game. If the curve
is on the middle axis, the two teams are on a draw at that time
point. Score scale is shown at both the left and the right sides
of the curve. The score difference curve can be utilized to
indicate intensive periods or turning points of the game. Upon
mouse hover, time and score difference at the corresponding



JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2016 6

An exception of 

the red lower 

triangle pattern

the red lower 

triangle pattern

Fig. 3. The inter team view. The red lower triangle pattern indicates that strong teams often had advantages against teams weaker than them. The Spurs is
an obvious exception of this pattern: among the five teams who got higher ranks, they won over three teams and made draws with the rest two teams.

(e) The action areas

(a) The score difference curve

(c) The actions

(b) The game sessions

(d) The players

times

Fig. 4. The game flow view. (a) The score difference curve. (b) The game sessions. (c) The actions. (d) The players. (e) The action areas.



JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2016 7

time point is shown to the left of the curve. A“play” icon is
shown at the corresponding time axis position, and users can
click it to watch the video at that time (Figure 7). The game
sessions are displayed above and below the score difference
curve (see Figure 4 (b)). Here, we take home team as an
example. The game sessions of the away team are encoded
and laid out in the same way. We use circles to encode players.
Each session consists of six circles in a column: five connected
circles denote the court players and the remaining ones denote
the off-court players. The fill color of each circles encode the
position of the corresponding player. Specifically, the off-court
players’ circle is filled with white. The color of the circle
border encodes the substitution of a player. The color is black
if a player is substituted into the court; otherwise, the color
of the circle border is gray. When users hover over any on-
court player’s circle, all the circles representing the player are
highlighted. Moreover, the adjacent ones are connected by a
band, the transparency of which is calculated on the basis of
the scoring rate (i.e., the points gained per second) within the
time period between the two sessions. The lower the scoring
rate is, the more transparent the band, and vice versa.

If users click between two adjacent session columns, all
the actions taking place in that time period will be displayed
with action icons. If the space between two adjacent sessions
is too narrow, users can keep clicking to enlarge the space,
so that all the actions can be displayed without visual clutter.
The legend of the actions is shown at the top of the view. By
clicking a specific action icon in the legend, the corresponding
action icons will show or hide in the view. The actions are also
indicators of intensive periods of the game. By integrating the
players’ performance bands and their actions, users are able
to evaluate the contribution of the players.

Our data contain position information for each action, as
shown in Figure 4 (e). As the whole court is divided into
28 regions, and we can determine which region a specific
action takes place. At the beginning, all the regions are colored
according to the numbers of goals made within them. When
users hover on an action icon, the corresponding region is
highlighted. To collapse the actions within the session, users
need to right-click between the two adjacent session columns.

A list of all the players (see Figure 4 (d)) of the home
team who played in the game is located on the left side of
the session panel. The list is filled with white background and
the jersey number of the corresponding player. The border
color encodes the position of the player. When clicked, the
circles are highlighted by filling with their border color.
The corresponding player is highlighted in the session panel,
and the information of that player is displayed on the top
left corner. This interaction enables users to compare among
different players in the game.

VII. CASE STUDY

A. 2014-2015 NBA Season

We collect the standings and other box score statistics of
all teams in the 2014-2015 regular season.

1) Team season view: We begin the analysis from the team
season view. By ordering the teams by their winning games

Fig. 5. Sorting teams by points made by the opponents. A clear negative
correlation pattern between the strength of teams and points made their
opponents is revealed.

(Figure 2 (a)), we distinguish the strong teams, such as the
Warriors, from the weak teams, such as the Timberwolves.
Strong teams usually have large score differences and long
winning streaks. Taking the Warriors as an example, the teams’
longest winning streak is 16. Thus, we wonder whether good
offense or good defense makes a team strong.

An initial assumption is made that strong teams must make
more points and have better collaboration among players. On
the basis of this assumption, we sort the teams by points and
assists in the slope graph of box scores (Figure 2 (b)). With
strong teams indicated by green lines and weak teams by red
lines, we find that strong teams (in green lines) usually have
higher ranks in both points and assists. However, green lines
of a great downwards slope and red lines of a great upwards
slope indicate exceptional cases such as the Grizzlies and the
Nuggets, respectively. The Grizzlies is a strong team that made
relatively less points and less assists. Conversely, the Nuggets
are a weak team that made passable number of points and
assists. We sort the teams by other metrics and then realize
that it is the points made by the opponents, rather than the
points made by the team, that determines the strength of a
team. Figure 5 shows the teams sorted by points made by
their opponents. A clear negative correlation pattern between
the strength of teams and points made by their opponents is
revealed, as most green lines have a downwards slope. The
stronger the team is, the sharper the slope, and vice versa.
Strong teams tend to lose less points than their opponents.
The pattern of assists is the opposite, but it indicates a similar
situation that stronger teams tend to have better assists.

From this observation, we make another assumption that
defense and teamwork are better indicators of the strength
of a team than offense. Nevertheless, exceptions can be
found based on the new assumption: the Thunders and the
Mavericks. The Thunders ranked fourth in average points, but
they performed poorly in assists and had many turnovers. The
three technical statistics reflect the style that the team had



JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2016 8

Fig. 6. Player #23 is the only leading scorer in the Cavaliers while in the Warriors there are several leading scorers such as #30, #11 and #9.

poor teamwork (indicated by low assists and high turnovers)
but had one or more players of strong personal abilities. In
fact, the Thunders had great players such as Kevin Durant
and Russel Westbrook. In terms of the Mavericks, the team
had low turnovers and low rebounds. The former reflects their
strength, while the latter indicates that it contributed to the
high points made by its opponents.

2) Inter-team view: We can also obtain some observations
in the inter-team view (see Figure 3). First, the entries in
the lower triangle are mostly in red, while the entries in the
upper triangle are mostly in green. The red section in the
lower triangle pattern indicates that strong teams usually have
advantages over teams weaker than themselves. The Spurs is
an obvious exception from this pattern: among the five teams
that obtained higher ranks, this team won over three teams and
made draws with the remaining two teams. It is because the
Spurs lost a few games to those who ranked behind them. To
be specific, the Spur lost 3 games out of 4 to the Pelicans, a
team ranked medium in the NBA league. An assumption can
be made that the Pelicans might have something that restricts
the Spurs’ performance.

B. 2015 NBA Finals Game 5

In 2015 NBA Finals Game 5, the Golden States Warriors
won over the Cleveland Cavaliers at home at 104-91. The
starting lineup of the Warriors was three guard players and
two forward players, and the starting lineup of the Cavaliers
is two guard players, two forward players and one center
player. Based on the configuration, both teams used a small
lineup. According to the score difference curve, the game was
intensive in the first three periods, and the scores increased
alternatively. The Warriors conquered the game in the fourth

period and remained ahead of the Cavaliers until the end of
the game.

By ranking players by points, we can locate the shooters in
the two teams (see Figure 6). Among the Cavaliers, player
#23 played almost every minute of the game and had an
outstanding performance (see Figure 4 (c)). He obtained high
ranks in points, defensive rebounds, and assists. The Cavaliers
was able to catch up with the Warriors in the first three
periods because of his performance. However, he missed
several baskets in the fourth period probably because of the
great physical consumption. Short of his contribution, the
Cavaliers had no other leading scorer and could not reverse the
situation. By contrast, the three guard players (#30, #11 and
#9) of the Warriors were all leading scorers and contributed
great performances in the fourth period. Clearly, defending
three scorers is more difficult than defending only one.

The only starting center player (player #20 Timofey Moz-
gov) played only a couple of minutes in the beginning. He
was substituted onto the court at the end of the third period.
According to the actions and video review, the Cavaliers could
not protect their defensive rebounds at that time. He was
probably substituted to improve the team’s rebound and gain
control of the situation. However, he only contributed fouls and
turnovers (see Figure 4 (c)). Thus, he was substituted again.

The finals MVP is player #9 Andre Iguodala of the Warriors.
He made 14 points, 8 rebounds, 7 assists and a game-high 3
steals in Game 5. Three minutes after the game started, the
Warriors led the game for the first time at 6-0, and player
#9 made a significant contribution. Although he did not make
any shots, he contributed two assists out of the three shots,
two rebounds, and one steal. Especially at 3:49 of the first
period, he launched the offense of the team. As shown in
Figure 7 session A, he made a defensive rebound and passed



JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2016 9

session A session B
times

Fig. 7. Player #9 contributed to this game by being the key man who switched from defense to offense. We can infer his decisive role in the team at 3:49
of the first period (session A) and at 7:45 of the fourth period (session B).

the ball to #30, who made the shot. In the next round, he
stole the ball from the Cavaliers and made another assist to
the Warriors. In the round after that, he made another defensive
rebound and helped the team make its third shot. We can infer
his decisive role in the team at 7:45 of the fourth period,
when the Warriors remained ahead and extended their lead.
He first made a three-point shot and then a three-point play
(see Figure 7 session B). Although he missed the free throw,
the five points he made helped the team to lead the game
again. Later, his teammates extended the lead and sealed their
victory. Thus, we can conclude that player #9 contributed to
this game by being the key man who switched from defense
to offense.

VIII. USER FEEDBACK

Two basketball devotees were invited to use our system and
give feedbacks over the design. They were satisfied with the
season view, especially with the comprehensive comparisons
in multiple aspects of all teams. They thought the box score
component reveals the offense-defense characteristics of the
teams: some teams are better at shooting but their weak
defense restrict their paces towards the finals. Regarding the
game view, they liked the video function and thought the
session by substitution design is really crucial to analyze the
tactic change of a team. However, they also pointed out that the
game view is lack of supporting descriptions over the situation.
They suggest textual narrations from social network or social
media to complement the visualization. They also would like
to know the exact shooting locations for each score.

IX. CONCLUSION

In this paper, we integrate multi-media heterogeneous NBA
game datasets, such as PBP text data, action area data, basic

statistics, and game video data of basketball games, to enable
a comprehensive visual narration of a complete basketball
season. On the basis of the datasets, we propose a full
representation of the whole basketball season, which reveals
games in multiple levels of details: the season level, the game
level and the session level. In future works, we plan to integrate
player location track data to enable an in-depth analysis of
coaches’ tactics.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

This work is supported by National 973 Program of China
(2015CB352503), Major Program of National Natural Science
Foundation of China (61232012), National Natural Science
Foundation of China (61422211), National Natural Science
Foundation of China (61303134), Zhejiang Provincial Natural
Science Foundation of China (LR13F020001), the Fundamen-
tal Research Funds for the Central Universities.



JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2016 10

REFERENCES
[1] D. Oliver, Basketball on paper: rules and tools for performance analysis.

Potomac Books, Inc., 2004.
[2] P. Kvam and J. S. Sokol, “A logistic regression/markov chain model for

ncaa basketball,” Naval Research Logistics (NRL), vol. 53, no. 8, pp.
788 – 803, 2006.

[3] J. Igor, T. Slavko, and P. Ante, “Analysis of basketball game states
and transition probabilities using the markov chains,” Physical Culture
- Journal of Sport Sciences & Physical Education, vol. 66, no. 1, pp.
15 – 24, 2012.

[4] K. Goldsberry, “Courtvision: New visual and spatial analytics for the
nba,” in MIT Sloan Sports Analytics Conference, 2012.

[5] R. Sisneros and M. Van Moer, “Expanding plus-minus for visual and
statistical analysis of nba box-score data,” in SportVIS - Workshop on
Sports Data Visualization. IEEE, 2013.

[6] M. Bashuk, “Using cumulative win probabilities to predict ncaa basket-
ball performance,” in MIT Sloan Sports Analytics Conference, 2012.

[7] G. R. Hamilton and C. Reinschmidt., “Optimal trajectory for the
basketball free throw,” Journal of sports sciences, vol. 15, no. 5, pp.
491–504, 1997.

[8] Matej Perše and Matej Kristan and Stanislav Kovačič and Goran
Vučkovič and Janez Perš, “A trajectory-based analysis of coordinated
team activity in a basketball game,” Computer Vision and Image Un-
derstanding, vol. 113, no. 5, pp. 612 – 621, 2009.

[9] “Fathon’s visualization over basketball data,” http://fathom.info/latest/
6985, accessed: 2014-03-22.

[10] “New york times’s NBA shot analysis,” http://www.nytimes.com/
interactive/2012/06/11/sports/basketball/nba-shot-analysis.html,
accessed: 2012-06-12.

[11] “Hotshotchart,” http://www.hotshotcharts.com/, accessed: 2014-03-22.
[12] R. Cava and C. D. S. Freitas, “Glyphs in matrix representation of graphs

for displaying soccer games results,” in SportVIS - Workshop on Sports
Data Visualization. IEEE, 2013.

[13] K. Wongsuphasawat, “A narrative display for sports tournament recap,”
in SportVIS - Workshop on Sports Data Visualization. IEEE, 2013.

[14] C. Perin, R. Vuillemot, and J.-D. Fekete, “Soccerstories: A kick-off
for visual soccer analysis,” IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics, vol. 19, no. 12, pp. 2506–2515, 2013.

[15] H. Janetzko, D. Sacha, M. Stein, T. Schreck, D. Keim, O. Deussen et al.,
“Feature-driven visual analytics of soccer data,” in IEEE Symposium on
Visual Analytics Science and Technology. IEEE, 2014, pp. 13–22.

[16] M. L. Parry, P. A. Legg, D. H. S. Chung, I. W. Griffiths, and M. Chen,
“Hierarchical event selection for video storyboards with a case study on
snooker video visualization,” IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics, vol. 17, no. 12, pp. 1747 – 1756, 2011.

[17] H. Pileggi, C. D. Stolper, J. M. Boyle, and J. T. Stasko, “Snapshot:
Visualization to propel ice hockey analytics,” IEEE Transactions on
Visualization and Computer Graphics, vol. 18, no. 12, pp. 2819–2828,
2012.

[18] C. Dietrich, D. Koop, H. T. Vo, and C. T. Silva, “Baseball4d: A tool for
baseball game reconstruction & visualization,” in IEEE Symposium on
Visual Analytics Science and Technology. IEEE, 2014, pp. 23–32.

[19] T. Polk, J. Yang, Y. Hu, and Y. Zhao, “Tennivis: Visualization for tennis
match analysis,” IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer
Graphics, vol. 20, no. 12, p. 2339, 2014.

[20] D. Holten, “Hierarchical edge bundles: Visualization of adjacency re-
lations in hierarchical data,” IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics, vol. 12, no. 5, pp. 741–748, 2006.

Wei Chen is a professor in State Key Lab of
CAD & CG at Zhejiang University, P. R. Chi-
na. He has published more than 60 papers in
international journal and conferences. He served
as Steering committee of IEEE Pacific Visualiza-
tion, Conference chair of IEEE Pacific Visualiza-
tion 2015, Paper Co-chair of IEEE Pacific Visu-
alization 2013. For more information, please refer
to http://www.cad.zju.edu.cn/home/chenwei/. Con-
tact him at chenwei@cad.zju.edu.cn.

Tianyi Lao is a master student at the State Key
Laboratory of CAD & CG, Zhejiang University. Her
current research focuses are information visualiza-
tion and visual analytics, especially visual analytics
of sports data. Contact her at laotianyi@zju.edu.cn.

Jing Xia a Ph. D. student at the State Key Lab
of CAD & CG, Zhejiang University. Her research
interests include Information Visualization and Vi-
sual Analytics, especially visual analytics of tem-
poral data and spatial-temporal data. Contact her at
xiajing cad@zju.edu.cn.

Xinxin Huang received her master degree at the
State Key Laboratory of CAD & CG, Zhejiang
University. Her research focuses are information
visualization and visual analytics, especially visual
analytics of sports data. Contact her at huangxinx-
in07@gmail.com.

Biao Zhu is a Ph. D. student at the State Key
Laboratory of CAD & CG, Zhejiang University.
His current research focuses are information visu-
alization and visual analytics. Contact him at zhu-
biao@zju.edu.cn.

Wanqi Hu a master student at the State Key Lab-
oratory of CAD & CG, Zhejiang University. His
current research focuses is information visualization.
Contact him at huwanqi@zju.edu.cn.



JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2016 11

Huihua Guan is a graduate student at the State
Key Laboratory of CAD & CG, Zhejiang University.
Her current research focuses are visual analytics,
information visualization and human-computer in-
teraction. Contact her at ghh@zju.edu.cn.


