

























































Vision, Modeling, and Visualization (2016)
M. Hullin, M. Stamminger, and T. Weinkauf (Eds.)

A Matrix-Based Visual Comparison of Time Series Sports Data

Fabian Beck, Michael Burch, and Daniel Weiskopf

VISUS, University of Stuttgart, Germany

Figure 1: Matrix-based visualization technique for comparing the time-varying performance of two athletes in time trials (e.g., road cycling).

Abstract
In sports, large amounts of data are measured and stored with the help of modern sensors and electronic devices. In particular,
for endurance sports events, time-varying data are recorded and can be used to analyze the athletes’ performance. Finding pat-
terns and issues can help better understand results in sports competitions, which is of interest for the athletes, sports managers,
and trainers alike. In this paper, we introduce a matrix-based approach to visually compare similar and dissimilar periods in
performances of athletes. We differentiate the performances and visually encode these differences as color-coded matrix cells.
The strengths of our approach are illustrated in a case study investigating the performances of two riders in the prologue of
Tour de France 2012.

1. Introduction

Sports events have become a popular form of entertainment and,
with the progress in technology, more and more data about the par-
ticipating athletes can be measured, recorded, and stored. Typically,
sports events span a predefined period of time or require to do a
certain task as fast as possible—in either case, analysis involves
time-varying performance data of the athletes. Visualization is par-
ticularly suitable to support analysts in an explorative inspection of
such data sets because precise goals of the analysis might not be
known in advance and questions can be multi-faceted. For the ath-
letes themselves, their trainers, and managers, visualization could
help react to possible problems either during the event or in retro-
spective analysis.

While it is already interesting to analyze the performance of a
single athlete, this perspective sometimes lacks a reference to judge
the performance and to reveal potential for improvement. Providing
a static, absolute standard, however, is difficult because the athlete’s

performance is time-dependent. A better criterion could be to take
another athlete’s performance as a reference. A comparison like
that might tell what one athlete does better than the other or could
reveal different tactics they use. While there often exist straightfor-
ward ways to just overlay or juxtapose standard diagrams reflect-
ing the performance of different athletes, developing visualizations
explicitly designed for comparison could even provide more pow-
erful tools. Also, temporal data alignment between inputs and data
inconsistencies are challenges that often play a role in the practical
application of such approaches for sports data.

In this paper, we introduce a matrix-based visualization approach
to compare time-varying athletes’ performance. To the best of our
knowledge, the approach is novel and extends the state of the art
(Section 2). As an underlying concept for the visualization, a per-
formance difference is used as a difference measure (Section 3).
The resulting differences are depicted in a color-coded matrix rep-
resentation where the axes represent the time lines for two athletes

c© 2016 The Author(s)
Eurographics Proceedings c© 2016 The Eurographics Association.



Fabian Beck, Michael Burch, and Daniel Weiskopf / A Matrix-Based Visual Comparison of Time Series Sports Data

to be compared, or for two repetitions of the same challenge for a
single athlete (Section 4). Performance, in the context of this work,
can be regarded as a quantitative measure of the behavior or state
of the athlete, such as the traveled distance, velocity, acceleration,
and the like; the approach is applicable to many sport disciplines, in
particular, endurance sports. Our technique is illustrated by a case
study investigating time series data for cyclists acquired during the
prologue of Tour de France 2012 (Section 5).

We see our main contributions in applying a matrix-based vi-
sualization approach—a well-studied and effective technique—to
the novel application of time series comparison. The application
in sports analytics serves as a first, promising example where the
technique can be leveraged to support athletes, trainers, as well as
sports managers and researchers. However, its applicability poten-
tially reaches to all scenarios where two time series need to be com-
pared. In contrast to other time series comparison techniques, ours
allows for comparing arbitrary points in time and does not require
uniform sampling or temporal alignment of inputs.

This paper is based on an unpublished contribution to the
SportVis workshop at IEEE VIS 2013 [BBW13].

2. Related Work

Analyzing the performance of athletes is an active research disci-
pline in sports science [McG09,NAH08]. For endurance sports, for
instance, factors can be identified to predict performance [AN01]
or the variation of performance of single athletes across different
races can be studied [HH01]. While these questions are typically
answered applying statistics, we suggest a more explorative ap-
proach. Instead of extracting results generalizable to larger groups
of athletes, our goal is to gain insights into performance of an in-
dividual athlete. We are not aware that this is already sufficiently
supported by results and tools of statistical sports analysis or by
domain-tailored visualization approaches.

Visualization of temporal sports data is not limited to athletes’
performance. For instance, SoccerStories [PVF13] visualize tem-
poral trajectories of soccer players on the field. À Table! [PVF14]
shows the evolution of team ranks in soccer rankings along time.
MatchPad [LCP∗12] represents real-time statistics and events of
soccer and rugby matches on a time line. TenniVis [PYHZ14] en-
codes the evolution of scores in tennis matches in a matrix-like rep-
resentation. In our approach, however, we purely focus on athletes’
performance as it can be measured in all sorts of endurance sports.

Generally, not limited to applications in sports, there are
various visualization techniques to represent time-varying
data [AMST11]. Dynamic quantities are a simple form of time-
varying data because only one variable is changing over time. Visu-
alizing such data is intuitive by just plotting the points at each time
step in a Cartesian coordinate system and possibly connecting two
subsequent points by a line. In literature, such diagrams are referred
to as line plots [Tuf92]. Comparing several dynamic quantities, line
plots are oftentimes aligned and plotted into the same coordinate
system; different colors or stroke styles can be used to distinguish
a small number of those lines. Alternatively, avoiding the over-
plotting of lines, a so-called ThemeRiver visualization [HHWN02]
represents time series as river-like shapes stacked on top of each

other. However, it becomes difficult to compare quantities over
time. As evaluated by Cleveland and McGill [CM86], a common
baseline aligning the quantities is missing. Krstajic et al. [KBK11]
therefore propose CloudLines where each river has its own baseline
to circumvent this problem. TimeEdgeTrees [BW11] use a similar
concept encoding multiple time series embedded into a hierarchy.
Those techniques working with small multiples, however, require
jumping back and forth between the diagrams to conduct a com-
parison; in particular, comparing the exact same positions in time
becomes difficult.

Only few approaches explicitly encode the comparison of time
series, that means, compute a comparison and visualize the result
of this [CMR07,GHWG14,HKF16,KPBG13,LS09,SLKS12]. Ac-
cording to the taxonomy of Gleicher et al. [GAW∗11], an explicit
encoding is one of three main approaches of visual comparison;
the other techniques described above can be mostly classified ei-
ther as superposition (overlay) or juxtaposition (small multiples).
A simple explicit encoding for the visual comparison of time se-
ries would be to compute the difference of the time series and vi-
sualize the resulting difference time series, for instance, as a line
plot [GAW∗11] or bar charts [KPBG13]. Kehrer et al. [KPBG13]
discuss several approaches how to compute meaningful differences
based on absolute and relative references. Others, for instance,
compute and show relationships between time series based on tem-
poral changes and trend [LS09] or summarize multivariate time se-
ries [CMR07, GHWG14]. Haroz et al. [HKF16] compare paired
time series in connected scatterplots.

Matrix-based techniques have been used for the visual compar-
ison of data. Most related to our approach, DiffMatrix [SLKS12]
uses a matrix for time series comparison, but compares n (tem-
porally aligned) time series with each other, employing line-based
difference encodings in the cells of the matrix. Other data types
can also be compared in matrices. For instance, bioinformatics re-
searchers work with dot plot matrices [GM70] for comparing DNA
or RNA sequences. Matrix representations are also employed for
comparing vertex sets in graphs plotting the vertices to the axis
of the matrix and marking adjacencies in the cells of the ma-
trix [ABZD13, BD13]; similarly, the cells could represent evolv-
ing edge weights [BN11, SWS10, YEL10]. Also, the comparison
of hierarchies can be implemented by marking cell areas of a ma-
trix while having the two hierarchies attached to axes of the ma-
trix [BD13,GK09]. However, we are not aware of any matrix-based
approach directly comparable to ours.

3. Data Model

In the context of this work, we model a time series S as a finite
sequence of n data points

S := ((t1,v1), . . . ,(tn,vn))

where ti represents a point in time with ti < ti+1 and vi ∈R+ a data
value. Depending on the sports events, the time series can repre-
sent different kinds of performance data of a single athlete. Mul-
tiple aligned time series of the same length representing different
measures might be available.

c© 2016 The Author(s)
Eurographics Proceedings c© 2016 The Eurographics Association.



Fabian Beck, Michael Burch, and Daniel Weiskopf / A Matrix-Based Visual Comparison of Time Series Sports Data

Figure 2: Small sample data set visualized with the basic time series comparison technique (left) and the weighted time series comparison
technique plus line plots (right).

The approach is able to compare two time series

S1 := ((t11 ,v
1
1), . . . ,(t

1
n ,v

1
n))

S2 := ((t21 ,v
2
1), . . . ,(t

2
m,v

2
m))

of lengths n and m. The two time series could either represent
the performances of two different athletes or repetitions of perfor-
mances of the same athlete—in either case, the underlying sports
challenge should have been equivalent for the sake of fair compar-
ison. Please note that time series S1 and S2 might not be aligned,
could be gapped, or may result from different sampling rates.

For contrasting any two data points v1i and v
2
j of two time series

S1 and S2, a difference measure δ : R+×R+ −→ R is required.
This function allows comparisons between arbitrary data points;
the result will be explicitly encoded in the visualization. The most
straightforward definition of the difference measure is δ := v1i −v

2
j ,

which we use in the following. Additionally, we introduce a func-
tion σ : R+×R+ −→R+ that does not reflect the difference of the
compared data points but their aggregation; its easiest definition is
σ := v1i + v

2
j . This aggregation measure σ will be used in the visu-

alization as an additional augmentation of the difference measure
δ for a weighted comparison approach. This combination of both
measures allows the analyst to judge both absolute quantities and
differences. Exploring other difference and aggregation measures
will be part of future work.

4. Visualization Technique

Our proposed visualization technique is based on a matrix view
with the time series attached to the axes. Both time series start in the
upper left corner; while time series S1 is aligned horizontally and
ends on the right, time series S2 goes vertically to the bottom of the
diagram. The matrix in the middle provides a visual comparison
of the two time series. The visualization technique employing a

basic visual comparison approach is illustrated in Figure 2 (left),
which compares two time series each having ten data points; in
addition, Figure 2 (right) shows the same data based on an extended
comparison approach.

4.1. Time Series Visualization

The two time series visualizations attached to the matrix are stan-
dard bar chart plots, however, one of them not aligned from left to
right but from top to bottom. Two colors, red and blue, are used to
consistently discern the two diagrams from each other. The length
of the bar, encoding a value v1i or v

2
j of the series, follows the

same scale in both diagrams (i.e., the same length encodes the same
value). While all examples in this paper use linear scales, logarith-
mic or other scaling could be applied as well.

The decision to use filled bar charts instead of line charts for en-
coding the time series was motivated by several reasons: first, bars
better reflect the discrete nature of the sampled time series than
continuous lines; second, the bars intuitively show the orientation
of the horizontal axis in the rotated time series plot (i.e., values
increase from right to left, not vice versa); and third, the quantity
of colored screen space increasing with the values of the time se-
ries provides a metaphor that can be further exploited for encoding
differences as explained in the following.

4.2. Basic Time Series Comparison

The matrix in the center of the diagram encodes the comparison
of the two time series, as shown in Figure 2 (left) for the basic
comparison approach. Each cell in the matrix represents the com-
parison of two data points: the data point in the respective column
of time series S1 (red diagram) and the data point of the respec-
tive row of time series S2 (blue diagram). In the basic comparison
approach, only the difference measure δ of the two data points is
reflected in the color: red represents positive values of δ (higher

c© 2016 The Author(s)
Eurographics Proceedings c© 2016 The Eurographics Association.



Fabian Beck, Michael Burch, and Daniel Weiskopf / A Matrix-Based Visual Comparison of Time Series Sports Data

value in the red diagram), blue negative values (a higher value in the
blue diagram), and white balanced values around δ = 0. The color
scale is normalized by the maximum data value across both time se-
ries maxi, j(v1i ,v

2
j). Transitions between colors are continuous, but

non-linear to have a higher color resolution for more frequently oc-
curring small difference values (in particular, a root function). The
color scale is provided in the left upper corner of the diagram as a
static color legend; the scales of the bar chart diagrams are aligned
with the two axes of the legend, i.e., two values from both diagrams
can be intersected in the legend and resolved to a color. Since dif-
ferent combinations of values map to the same value of δ , those
combinations will have the same color in the visualization.

Since we potentially handle long time series, we need to discuss
visual scalability. Following the proposed approach, it can be pos-
sible that multiple cells of the matrix are mapped to the same pixel
on screen. Generally, there are two ways of dealing with this issue:

• Blending: Data values are processed and drawn in their temporal
order, potentially overplotting previous values that fall into the
same pixel. Blending approaches mix the colors proportional to
their overlap with the respective pixel so that not only the latest
data value is visible. The resulting blended colors might slightly
deviate from the color scale.

• Aggregation: Aggregation of data points implies that we first
look up all data points that fall into the same pixel. All candi-
dates are taken into account for computing a specific color. Sev-
eral ways of aggregation might be used: the maximal value, the
average value, or the sum.

The current implementation of our approach uses the standard
subpixel rendering (floating point coordinates) of Java 2D as a
blending techique.

The encoding of the difference values in the matrix allows us,
in contrast to standard overlaid line charts, to compare data points
or subsequences of the time series independently of shifts in time:
without changing the image, just by looking at different areas of
the matrix, the first data points of S1 can be compared to the first
data points of S2 as well as to last ones of S2. The visualization also
supports the balancing of different scaling in the two compared di-
agrams, which just requires analyzing a non-quadratic, rectangular
region of the matrix. As a consequence, it is not a problem if the
time series have different lengths (n 6= m), the sampling rate varies,
or the time series are not aligned properly. The matrix compari-
son encodes all possible n×m comparisons, whereas overlaid line
charts only depict min(n,m) direct comparisons (additional indi-
rect comparisons are possible in a certain spatial neighborhood of
the data points).

4.3. Weighted Time Series Comparison

Although the values of the time series can be retrieved from the
attached bar charts, it would be helpful being able to directly esti-
mate the values from the matrix: for instance, it could make a con-
siderable difference for the interpretation if a balanced difference
is caused by two small values or two large ones. As a weighted
comparison approach illustrated in Figure 2 (right), we vary the
brightness of color coding to additionally encode the absolute val-
ues based on the aggregation measure σ . Mapping σ to a bright-

ness scale and applying that to the previously described color scale
makes the resulting color unique for every combination of values.
For instance, a bright red color then indicates a high value of S1 and
a medium one for S2 or a dark gray color represents two balanced
but low values in the two time series. A non-linear mapping (again,
a root function) of values to the brightness scale is applied because
it is difficult to discern colors of very dark colors. Again, the color
scale, now varying in two dimensions, is provided in the upper left
corner of the visualization and can be read as before.

The design of the visualization technique allows for easy encod-
ing of additional information such as further time series. To imple-
ment that, we propose plotting the time series as line plots and over-
laying these on the bar charts as demonstrated in Figure 2 (right).
The different chart styles (bars and lines) clearly indicate the dif-
ferent roles of the time series: while the heavy bar charts form the
basis for the comparison, the light line charts just provide addi-
tional information. Although multiple line charts can be overlaid at
the same time and discerned by color, we just use examples with
one additional time series because the diagram can quickly become
overloaded with information when adding more data.

4.4. Multiple Comparisons

The technique can easily be extended to the comparison of more
than two time series: Instead of attaching one time series at each
side of the matrix, we can add a set of time series. This creates a
matrix (meta-matrix) of time series comparisons, where each ma-
trix cell contains a matrix-based comparison of two time series as
introduced above (comparison matrices). An example is given in
Figure 3, where four time series on the horizontal axis are con-
trasted to the same set of four time series on the vertical axis. While
a symmetric layout like this might be a good default approach for
a comparison of multiple time series, asymmetric layouts using
different series on the horizontal and vertical axes are possible as
well. Increasing the number of time series, of course, decreases the
size and readability of the individual comparisons within the matrix
cells. However, we consider the meta-matrix only as an overview
that allows us to find interesting pairwise comparisons, and then,
enlarge and analyze those one-by-one.

5. Case Study: Cycling Time Trials

For this case study, we investigate the example of cycling time tri-
als. In particular, we analyze data of two riders from the prologue
of the Tour de France [TdF]. The prologue is a short time trial race
where all riders are sent on the track separately, one after the other,
and slipstreaming (which can have a big impact in road cycling)
is forbidden. The 2012 prologue of Tour de France was carried
out in Liège, Belgium, on a 6.4 km track without any relevant as-
cents. Fabian Cancellara, a Swiss time-trial specialist from Team
Radioshack-Nissan, won the stage in 7’ 13”.

For this stage, Peaksware, a company that sells analytics soft-
ware for cycling professionals called TrainingPeaks, recorded per-
formance data of a small number of riders. We compare the perfor-
mance of Kanstantsin Sivtsov, a Belarusian rider from Team Sky
Procycling, against equivalent data of Janez Brajkovic, a Slowe-
nian member of the Astana Pro Team (the two riders shown in Fig-

c© 2016 The Author(s)
Eurographics Proceedings c© 2016 The Eurographics Association.



Fabian Beck, Michael Burch, and Daniel Weiskopf / A Matrix-Based Visual Comparison of Time Series Sports Data

ure 1 are other cyclists; pictures were taken at the prologue of Tour
de France 2004, which also happened to be situated in Liège, Bel-
gium). While Sivtsov finished 63rd out of 198 cyclists, 0’ 25” be-
hind the winner Cancellara, Brajkovic was ranked 32nd with 0’ 22”
time difference to the winner. The provided data for the two rid-
ers are recorded with a sampling interval of one second for Sivtsov
and two seconds for Brajkovic. Including not only the race, but also
race preparation (with gaps), the data sets span 148’ 25” (5,522 data
points) for Sivtsov and 284’ 01” (3,304 data points) for Brajkovic,
i.e., the actual race is only a small subset of the data.

The case study is based on three visualizations comparing the
performance measured as the power used for pedaling of the two
cyclists: Figure 4 provides an overview of the complete data sets
including the race preparation and race (no preprocessing or align-
ment was applied). Figure 3 focuses on the four training laps of
Kanstantsin Sivtsov. Finally, Figure 5 shows details of the race pe-
riods in larger resolution. To create space-efficient visualizations,
time periods without recorded data are skipped and the progress
of time is presented as an additional line plot to mark the gaps in
Figure 4; since there were no gaps in recording during the training
laps and race periods, this additional encoding is not necessary for
Figure 3 and Figure 5. When comparing two riders (Figure 4 and
Figure 5), we counterbalanced for the different sampling rate by
scaling the visualization to have the same temporal scale on both
axes.

5.1. Race Preparation

Analyzing the complete data sets in Figure 4, we can confirm from
the visualization that the race itself, which can be easily detected
as a period of high and constant performance values, covers only
a short time span at the end of the time series. This can either be
detected by looking at each time series individually (A1, A2) or
by searching for the brightest area within the matrix (A3). This
area actually conforms to what is depicted at a higher resolution
in Figure 5 and will be discussed below. Figure 4 is more suitable
for analyzing and contrasting the race preparation strategies (and
follow-up activities) of the two athletes.

For both riders, the preparation phase falls into two parts indi-
cated by larger jumps in the additional time series as well as by
different patterns in the bar charts and matrix. We assume that the
first part (B1, B2) was recorded while the riders cycled on the road
because the performance values are varying more: while being on
the road, the cyclists have to slow down for bends or obstacles like
other cyclists, cars, or pedestrians, that can be still on the track dur-
ing race preparation. The comparable, repetitive patterns of similar
length within the time series of the two riders (bar charts) as well
as in between of the riders (matrix) further indicate that both drove
four laps on a similar track. Comparing those laps to the race period
in the matrix (B3, B4) even suggests that this track was the later
race track: the matrix shows quite homogeneous red or blue areas
at the intersections of the early preparation phase and the race, i.e.,
the athletes’ performances follow the same pattern but just on a
consistently lower level. The dominating red color at the upper left
corner of the matrix shows that first Sivtsov trained harder for the
first three laps (B5); the last lap, however, Brajkovic powered more
as indicated by blue color in the matrix (B6).

Figure 3: Comparing the four training laps of Kanstantsin Sivtsov
to each other in a grid of matrix comparisons.

The second phase of the preparation is dominated by more reg-
ular patterns (C1, C2) that can hardly be achieved when cycling
on the road, but require a more controlled environment as proba-
bly provided through bicycle rollers (i.e., a training device similar
to a stationary bicycle but that can be used with the road bicycle).
Brajkovic trained multiple intervals of constantly increasing inten-
sity; a sudden drop in intensity marks the beginning of a new in-
terval (C1). Indicated through diagonal patterns in the matrix (C3),
a similar pattern can be observed just once for Sivtsov, who spans
this single interval, however, over a much longer period. Sivtsov
used the second half of this controlled training phase for constant
intensity training with three extreme but short peaks at the end.
These peaks are reflected in isolated vertical red lines in the matrix
(C4)—equivalent blue horizontal lines indicating similar peaks for
Brajkovic are not detectable. In total, Brajkovic spent more time on
this second preparation phase than Sivtsov, but including a shorter
period of relative inactivity directly before the race (C5, C6).

After the race, Brajkovic seemed to continue with some training
on bicycle rollers (regular pattern in D1), while the recording for
Sivtsov ends shortly after the race (D2).

5.2. Training Laps

Further analyzing the four training laps of Sivtsov, we demonstrate
how we can make use of the comparison of multiple time series. To
this end, we cut the first half of the recordings of Sivtsov into four
parts, estimating the ends of the individual laps. This creates a set of
four time series that are compared to each other in all combinations,
which is shown in Figure 3.

c© 2016 The Author(s)
Eurographics Proceedings c© 2016 The Eurographics Association.



Fabian Beck, Michael Burch, and Daniel Weiskopf / A Matrix-Based Visual Comparison of Time Series Sports Data

A1 A3

A2B2

B1

B3

B4B5

B6

C1

C2

C3 C4

C5

C6

D1

D2

Figure 4: Comparing the performance (power) of Kanstantsin Sivtsov (red) against Janez Brajkovic (blue) in the prologue of Tour de France
2012 including their preparation period for the race; the additional line chart reflects the progress of time and indicates gaps in measurement.

c© 2016 The Author(s)
Eurographics Proceedings c© 2016 The Eurographics Association.



Fabian Beck, Michael Burch, and Daniel Weiskopf / A Matrix-Based Visual Comparison of Time Series Sports Data

Figure 5: Focusing the data of Figure 4 on the actual race periods.

While the comparison matrices on the diagonal are necessarily
symmetric, we partly observe largely symmetric comparison ma-
trices, also off the diagonal, which indicates high overall similar-
ity between the time series. In particular, Laps 1–3 follow a very
similar pattern, whereas Lap 4 shares less characteristics, resulting
in non-symmetric comparison matrices compared to all other laps.
Analyzing the first row of the meta-matrix (i.e., comparing Lap 1
to Laps 2–4), we also find that in Laps 2 and 3 Sivtsov increased
his efforts (overall, red is dominating over blue), while Lap 4 was
considerably slower (overall, blue is dominating over red). Investi-
gating in more detail, we notice that these differences mostly derive
from each the second parts of the laps: while the balance between
blue and red is about the same in the upper left quadrant of all
comparison matrices of this first row of the meta-matrix, there are
reasonable changes in the balance in the lower right quadrant.

5.3. Race

The race itself can be best analyzed in Figure 5, which compares
the two race periods of the two riders in an enlarged version. The
matrix showing the comparison is dominated by two vertical and
two horizontal color-intense lines and is divided by these into reg-
ular squares. The lines are caused by two sudden drops in power at
the same time of the race for both riders. These parallel short phases
of rolling hint at sharp bends in the track—looking at the map of
the course, we find indeed two 180◦ bends at about the middle of
the distance. Further, weaker horizontal and vertical lines, symmet-
rical for both cyclists, indicate weaker bends or other obstacles on
the track. The first drop of power and the following climb, however,
are stronger for Sivtsov than for Brajkovic as the more intense ver-
tical than horizontal lines show; Sivtsov hence may have had more
problems at the first obstacle.

In general, the whole matrix area of Figure 5 is colored in a
bright mixture of blue, red, and white, only with exceptions of the
already discussed color-intense vertical and horizontal lines. Nei-
ther blue nor red is dominating: none of the riders seems to have
performed consistently better. This can be confirmed by looking
at the total time difference between the two athletes, which was
only 0’ 03” at the finish line. Since there can be many reasons that
explain the small difference, it might be too ambitious trying to
name the reasons just through the use of visualization. Neverthe-
less, our visualization reveals subtle differences between the rid-
ers that could have influenced the total time: high-frequent vertical
stripes in the matrix are somewhat more distinguished than equiva-
lent horizontal ones, which shows that the performance of Sivtsov
is varying more than the performance of Brajkovic. In particular,
after the second 180◦ bend, Sivtsov’s performance has a more ir-
regular pattern than Brajkovic’s. These observations together with
observations from the race preparation might point to potential is-
sues and could help the athlete and trainer improve the athlete’s
performance beyond just trying to increase overall fitness.

6. Discussion and Limitations

We are aware that our matrix visualization has limitations. More-
over, we only applied our visualization to time series from sports
applications and scenarios from other domains may cause addi-
tional challenges for our visualization approach.

• Data Selectability: A matrix-based visualization on pixel-based
visual granularity is suitable to represent long time series, but
the interactive selection of individual points becomes a difficult
task. Hence, we argue that more region-based selection concepts
have to be applied before selecting single points as a details-on-
demand feature.

• Visual Scalability: Visually encoding thousands of data points
leads to the problem of either aggregating certain time periods or
of showing only one representative of all the contained ones in
a time period. In either case, some information is lost in the vi-
sualization, which may cause misinterpretation of the visualized
data.

• Perceptual Scalability: We use color coding as the major visual
feature to distinguish data values in the matrix representation.
The human visual system is not able to distinguish that many
colors, i.e., if similar color hues are placed far apart from each
other in the display, those might be taken one for the other al-
though they are not exactly the same [War10]. Even a change in
color scale cannot solve this problem reliably.

7. Conclusion and Future Work

In this paper, we illustrated how time series can be visually com-
pared by using a matrix representation. The novel concept of show-
ing comparisons of data points as color-coded matrix cells is sim-
ple, yet powerful: in contrast to overlaid line plots, our approach
allows for the comparison of any shifted and scaled periods within
a single static diagram because all pairwise combinations of data
points are represented. This advantage may come at the costs of
a less intuitive representation and a more difficult comparison of
concurrent data points. We extended the approach to n×m compar-
isons. The case study illustrates the applicability and utility of the

c© 2016 The Author(s)
Eurographics Proceedings c© 2016 The Eurographics Association.



Fabian Beck, Michael Burch, and Daniel Weiskopf / A Matrix-Based Visual Comparison of Time Series Sports Data

visualization approach in the area of sports visualization. Although
being only tested on data from a bicycle time trial, it is likely that
the visualization will also be suitable for analyzing other kinds of
endurance sports. In particular, the visualization revealed different
preparation strategies for the race of the two compared athletes as
well as subtle differences in race performance. As part of future
work, we plan to explore the usefulness of the approach in other ar-
eas of application, study how interaction techniques could support
the analysis, and evaluate the tool against traditional comparison
techniques for time series data.

Acknowledgments

The authors wish to thank Sabrina Ehses for granting permission to
use the photos for Figure 1. We also thank Boitumelo Ruf for sup-
porting the implementation of the approach. This work was par-
tially funded by Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) under
grant WE 2836/6-1.

References
[ABZD13] ABUTHAWABEH A., BECK F., ZECKZER D., DIEHL S.:

Finding structures in multi-type code couplings with node-link and ma-
trix visualizations. In Proceedings of the 1st IEEE Working Conference
on Software Visualization (2013), VISSOFT, IEEE Computer Society,
pp. 1–10. 2

[AMST11] AIGNER W., MIKSCH S., SCHUMANN H., TOMINSKI C.:
Visualization of Time-Oriented Data. Human-Computer Interaction Se-
ries. Springer, London, UK, 2011. 2

[AN01] ATKINSON G., NEVILL A. M.: Selected issues in the design and
analysis of sport performance research. Journal of Sports Sciences 19,
10 (2001), 811–827. 2

[BBW13] BECK F., BURCH M., WEISKOPF D.: Visual comparison
of time-varying athletes’ performance. Unpublished contribution to
SportVis 2013 Workshop at IEEE VIS, 2013. 2

[BD13] BECK F., DIEHL S.: Visual comparison of software architec-
tures. Information Visualization 12, 2 (2013), 178–199. 2

[BN11] BRANDES U., NICK B.: Asymmetric relations in longitudinal
social networks. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer
Graphics 17, 12 (2011), 2283–2290. 2

[BW11] BURCH M., WEISKOPF D.: Visualizing dynamic quantitative
data in hierarchies – TimeEdgeTrees: Attaching dynamic weights to
tree edges. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Imag-
ing Theory and Applications and International Conference on Informa-
tion Visualization Theory and Applications (2011), IMAGAPP/IVAPP,
SciTePress, pp. 177–186. 2

[CM86] CLEVELAND W. S., MCGILL R.: An experiment in graphical
perception. International Journal of Man-Machine Studies 25, 5 (1986),
491–501. 2

[CMR07] CAAT M. T., MAURITS N. M., ROERDINK J. B.: Design and
evaluation of tiled parallel coordinate visualization of multichannel EEG
data. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 13, 1
(2007), 70–79. 2

[GAW∗11] GLEICHER M., ALBERS D., WALKER R., JUSUFI I.,
HANSEN C. D., ROBERTS J. C.: Visual comparison for information
visualization. Information Visualization 10, 4 (2011), 289–309. 2

[GHWG14] GROTTEL S., HEINRICH J., WEISKOPF D., GUMHOLD S.:
Visual analysis of trajectories in multi-dimensional state spaces. Com-
puter Graphics Forum 33, 6 (2014), 310–321. 2

[GK09] GRAHAM M., KENNEDY J.: A survey of multiple tree visuali-
sation. Information Visualization 9, 4 (2009), 235–252. 2

[GM70] GIBBS A. J., MCINTYRE G. A.: The diagram, a method for
comparing sequences. Its use with amino acid and nucleotide sequences.
European Journal of Biochemistry 16 (1970), 1–11. 2

[HH01] HOPKINS W. G., HEWSON D. J.: Variability of competitive
performance of distance runners. Medicine and Science in Sports and
Exercise 33, 9 (2001), 1588–1592. 2

[HHWN02] HAVRE S., HETZLER E. G., WHITNEY P., NOWELL L. T.:
ThemeRiver: Visualizing thematic changes in large document collec-
tions. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 8,
1 (2002), 9–20. 2

[HKF16] HAROZ S., KOSARA R., FRANCONERI S. L.: The connected
scatterplot for presenting paired time series. Transactions on Visualiza-
tion and Computer Graphics 22, 9 (2016). 2

[KBK11] KRSTAJIC M., BERTINI E., KEIM D. A.: CloudLines: Com-
pact display of event episodes in multiple time-series. IEEE Transactions
on Visualization and Computer Graphics 17, 12 (2011), 2432–2439. 2

[KPBG13] KEHRER J., PIRINGER H., BERGER W., GRÖLLER M. E.:
A model for structure-based comparison of many categories in small-
multiple displays. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer
Graphics 19, 12 (2013), 2287–2296. 2

[LCP∗12] LEGG P. A., CHUNG D. H., PARRY M. L., JONES M. W.,
LONG R., GRIFFITHS I. W., CHEN M.: MatchPad: Interactive glyph-
based visualization for real-time sports performance analysis. Computer
Graphics Forum 31, 3pt4 (2012), 1255–1264. 2

[LS09] LEE T.-Y., SHEN H.-W.: Visualization and exploration of tempo-
ral trend relationships in multivariate time-varying data. IEEE Transac-
tions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 15, 6 (2009), 1359–1366.
2

[McG09] MCGARRY T.: Applied and theoretical perspectives of perfor-
mance analysis in sport: Scientific issues and challenges. International
Journal of Performance Analysis 9, 1 (2009), 128–140. 2

[NAH08] NEVILL A., ATKINSON G., HUGHES M.: Twenty-five years
of sport performance research in the Journal of Sports Sciences. Journal
of Sports Sciences 26 (2008), 413–426. 2

[PVF13] PERIN C., VUILLEMOT R., FEKETE J.-D.: SoccerStories: A
kick-off for visual soccer analysis. IEEE Transactions on Visualization
and Computer Graphics 19, 12 (2013), 2506–2515. 2

[PVF14] PERIN C., VUILLEMOT R., FEKETE J.-D.: À Table! improv-
ing temporal navigation in soccer ranking tables. In Proceedings of the
32nd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(2014), CHI, ACM, pp. 887–896. 2

[PYHZ14] POLK T., YANG J., HU Y., ZHAO Y.: TenniVis: Visualiza-
tion for tennis match analysis. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics 20, 12 (2014), 2339–2348. 2

[SLKS12] SONG H., LEE B., KIM B., SEO J.: DiffMatrix: Matrix-based
interactive visualization for comparing temporal trends. In EuroVis -
Short Papers (2012), EuroVis, The Eurographics Association. 2

[SWS10] STEIN K., WEGENER R., SCHLIEDER C.: Pixel-oriented vi-
sualization of change in social networks. In Proceedings of the 2010
International Conference on Advances in Social Networks Analysis and
Mining (2010), ASONAM, IEEE, pp. 233–240. 2

[TdF] Tour de France 2012, Prologue, http://www.letour.fr/
le-tour/2012/us/prologue.html, last retrieved 2016-01-13. 4

[Tuf92] TUFTE E. R.: The Visual Display of Quantitative Information.
Graphics Press, Cheshire, CT, USA, 1992. 2

[War10] WARE C.: Visual Thinking for Design. Morgan Kaufmann, San
Francisco, CA, USA, 2010. 7

[YEL10] YI J. S., ELMQVIST N., LEE S.: TimeMatrix: Analyzing tem-
poral social networks using interactive matrix-based visualizations. In-
ternational Journal of Human-Computer Interaction 26, 11-12 (2010),
1031–1051. 2

c© 2016 The Author(s)
Eurographics Proceedings c© 2016 The Eurographics Association.

http://www.letour.fr/le-tour/2012/us/prologue.html
http://www.letour.fr/le-tour/2012/us/prologue.html

