


























































              

City, University of London Institutional Repository

Citation: Wood, J. (2015). Visualizing Personal Progress in Participatory Sports Cycling 
Events. IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications, 35(4), pp. 73-81. doi: 
10.1109/MCG.2015.71 

This is the accepted version of the paper. 

This version of the publication may differ from the final published 
version. 

Permanent repository link:  http://openaccess.city.ac.uk/id/eprint/12351/

Link to published version: http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MCG.2015.71

Copyright and reuse: City Research Online aims to make research 
outputs of City, University of London available to a wider audience. 
Copyright and Moral Rights remain with the author(s) and/or copyright 
holders. URLs from City Research Online may be freely distributed and 
linked to.

City Research Online:            http://openaccess.city.ac.uk/            publications@city.ac.uk

City Research Online

http://openaccess.city.ac.uk/
mailto:publications@city.ac.uk


Personal Visualization and Personal Visual Analytics

Visualizing Personal
Progress in Participatory
Sports Cycling Events
Jo Wood – City University London

R
ECORDING participation in sporting activities
has become increasingly sophisticated with
the wide availability affordable tracking tech-

nologies. GPS receivers and positionally aware smart-
phones have given rise to services such as Strava, Ride
With GPS and RunKeeper that allow individuals to
record and visualize their own sporting performances,
set goals and share data with others. Cheap wear-
able RFID devices allow live checkpoint timing of
runners, cyclists and swimmers in multi-stage races.
Equally, new approaches to visualizing the data gen-
erated by these sensors has provided opportunities to
make meaningful patterns of space-time trajectories
salient1. Drawing on my own experience of partici-
pating in long distance cycling events, in this paper
I explore some of the design choices that allow indi-
viduals to visualize their own progress in mass partici-
pation sporting events. I will use the examples given
here to consider the differences and similarities of per-
sonal visualization with more conventional analytical
data visualization design. The continuum between
these two approaches is considered when comparing
an individual’s personal experience with that of others
participating in the same event.

SPATIAL NARRATIVES
Long distance participatory cycling events (commonly
known as audax, ultra-cycling or randonneur events)

typically involve many hours of riding and can cover
distances of many hundreds of kilometres. Even with
large fields of participants, over such distances it is
common for riders to end up cycling alone or in small
groups for long periods. And while not a ‘race’ the
ultra-endurance nature of the events, sometimes in-
volving riding for several days with limited or no sleep,
presents significant challenges for most riders. As
a consequence it is common after an event has been
completed for riders to write ‘ride reports’ of their ex-
perience to share with others. Typically these take the
form of a conventional written narrative in diary form,
often supported by photographs. I was interested in
whether visualization might offer an alternative way in
which these personal narratives might be constructed.
The incorporation of personal narratives in space-time
histories is not new2, but the context of the participat-
ing individual in mass sporting events has yet to be
fully explored.

Given the long distances covered by these cycling
events, an obvious visual representation of progress
would be cartographic. Indeed, routes are often shown
as linear overlays using mapping services (e.g. Ride
With GPS). These can work well for route planning and
integration with GPS navigation, but are not so well
suited to personal narratives of a ride post hoc as the de-
tail of the background mapping leaves little graphical
space for other information or links with the tempo-
ral2 in the narrative. I therefore considered alternative
minimalist cartographic designs that represented only

73 Author post-print of Wood (2015) IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications, 35(4)

http://www.strava.com
http://ridewithgps.com
http://ridewithgps.com
http://runkeeper.com
http://ridewithgps.com
http://ridewithgps.com


Personal Visualization and Personal Visual Analytics

0

100

200

300

400

500

600

0 25 50 75 100 125 150 175 200 225 250 275km

E
le
va
tio
n

Distance

m

Up
ton

 M
ag

na

La
ke

 Vy
rn

wy

Ll
an

be
ris

Do
lge

lla
u

Figure 1. Conventional vertical profile view of the first 280km of the Mille Cymru audax route.
Elevation changes are clear, but at the expense of locational detail. Graphical space for
adding personal narrative is limited, especially for longer routes.

the key cycling-relevant information, leaving space to
add a rider’s spatially located temporally sequenced
‘diary’ entries.

Three elements dominate my experience of long
distance riding: gradient, especially when climbing,
has a big impact on amount of effort and feeling of
progress made and anticipation of effort yet to be made;
wind can dominate a ride experience if strong both as-
sisting and impeding progress depending on direction;
controls (checkpoints) are the opportunities for rest
and feeding stops and are vital in punctuating what
would otherwise be daunting distances to ride. Gradi-
ent and controls could be shown as a vertical profile
map (see, for example, Figure 1), but there is little
sense of the geography of the route and little space
for personal narrative text. In terrain with a prevailing
wind, there are no visual indications as to which parts
of the route may be assisted or hindered by wind.

An alternative is offered by the profile map, first
proposed by Daniel Huffman3. This minimalist design
maps only the route as a black line where its thick-
ness varies in proportion to the elevation of the route
along its length. This alone is sufficient to indicate
the length, elevation and direction of the route using
very little ‘data ink’. Given that it is local gradient
that is more important to the cyclist, why not map this
directly rather than absolute elevation? Huffman con-
sidered this but rejected it on the grounds that encoding
gradient also requires aspect to be separately symbol-
ised (e.g. through chevrons to distinguish upward from
downward slopes) leading to a more cluttered represen-
tation. In the context of longer distances there are two
further reasons for symbolising elevation rather than
gradient. Firstly, perceived ‘slope’ is a scale-dependent
measure – a short steep section of road over 10 me-
tres might be significant to the rider, but would not
occupy any visible portion of a map covering hundreds

of kilometres. By viewing changing elevation over
a scale of kilometres, an indication of likely periods
of climbing or descending is made more salient than
alternating fine bands of steeper and flatter segments.
Secondly, for longer rides it can be common for the
same section of road to be ridden several times, often
from different directions. Absolute elevation avoids
the need to symbolise each traversal (and its associated
ascent or descent) separately.

The design offers the possibility to map other vari-
ables onto a color component of line segments. Wind
direction and speed might be obvious candidates, al-
though for most events, there is unlikely to be suffi-
ciently detailed data available to capture the rider’s
experience of headwinds as it varies with location,
altitude and time. But by maintaining a geographic
mapping of the route, the effect of the prevailing wind
direction can be estimated along the length of the ride.

Huffman constructed his profile maps by manually
interpolating line thickness with reference to elevation
contour lines. This process, in the hands of a good car-
tographer, can produce visually appealing results, but
is time consuming to create. Instead, I propose here a
simple method to construct profile maps automatically
from a digital elevation source such as that provided by
a GPS receiver after riding an event, or a raster digital
elevation model (see Figure 2).

The function that relates line width w in pixel units
to the normalized elevation z in the range [0,1] will
depend on the visual impression of terrain variation
desired as well as the nature of terrain. A simple linear
mapping is comparatively poor at distinguishing flat
from hilly terrain as local variation in line width tends
to be quite small. A rider’s subjective effort in response
to altitude gain is itself non-linear with steeper, higher
elevation riding having a proportionately greater im-
pact on the character of the ride than lower elevation

74 Author post-print of Wood (2015) IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications, 35(4)



Personal Visualization and Personal Visual Analytics

11 12 10 9 9 12 13 14 14 14 15 13

10 9 9 7 7 12 15 14 15 15 16 15

12 9 6 5 7 10 12 13 15 17 18 18

15 11 7 5 4 5 7 10 13 15 19 20

17 12 8 6 4 4 5 8 11 13 18 19

15 12 6 6 4 3 6 8 9 11 15 17

15 12 6 6 5 2 4 6 10 13 16 20

11 12 10 9 9 12 13 14 14 14 15 13

10 9 9 7 7 12 15 14 15 15 16 15

12 9 6 5 7 10 12 13 15 17 18 18

15 11 7 5 4 5 7 10 13 15 19 20

17 12 8 6 4 4 5 8 11 13 18 19

15 12 6 6 4 3 6 8 9 11 15 17

15 12 6 6 5 2 4 6 10 13 16 20

(a) (c)(b)

Figure 2. Construction of a profile map. A route is compared with height values of digital
elevation model (a). A circle is drawn at regular intervals with radius a function of the
interpolated height at its centre (b). Representing the circles as solid discs (c) creates a line
with width proportional to elevation. By making the distance between consecutive circles
sufficiently small the line appears continuous.

Loughton

Edinburgh

Great Easton

St Ives

Kirton
Market Rasen

Pocklington
Thirsk

Barnard Cast le

Brampton

Moffat

TraquairN
W

E

60
0melevation

50 km

Eskdalemuir

Figure 3. Profile map of the London-Edinburgh-London audax with control locations marked.

flatter terrain. This suggests some form of exponential
function may be more appropriate:

w = wmin +(wmax −wmin)za

where wmin is the minimum desired line width in
pixel units (representing the minimum elevation), typ-
ically in the range [0.1,0.5], wmax is the maximum
desired line width (representing the highest elevation),
typically in the range [5,30] and the exponent a typi-
cally in the range [1.2,1.8]. Outside of this range, line
width is either undiscriminating (a < 1) or it overem-
phasizes the difference between high and low elevation
at the cost of local terrain variation (a > 2). Figure 3
shows an automatically generated profile map of the
London-Edinburgh-London 1400km audax with con-
trol stops marked. This minimalist design allows spa-
tially embedded textual narratives to be added with
relative ease while emphasising the role of elevation
and direction in the narrative (see, for example, Fig-
ure 4).

As a participant in this event, the minimalist design
reflects its essence – a struggle between me as rider
(reflected in the textual narrative) and the geography of
the terrain (reflected in the profile map). It represents a
recurring theme in successful sporting personal visual-
ization, that of the design drawing out those aspects of
the experience that have greatest emotional resonance.

VISUALISING RELATIVE POSITION

The profile map provides an opportunity to integrate
personal experience with a depiction of terrain, but
says little about the other riders in an event. While
not a race, it is often of interest to riders to know how
they are performing relative to others in the same event.
As riders may be separated by many hours, even days
on longer events, this is often not possible during the
ride itself. Visualizing relative position can provide
the rider with the opportunity to relate their personal
experience of a ride with those of others.

Relative position in timed sporting events is most
commonly represented as a ranked table of comple-
tion times with occasional ‘split’ times at intermedi-
ate checkpoints used as supplementary information.
A long (1000km or more) audax event might typi-
cally have 10-20 of these intermediate timings and
so presents an opportunity to show how ranked posi-
tion changes over the course of an event. Visualizing
change in rank over time was proposed using Rank
Clocks by Batty in 20064 where a relative position in
an ordered list was projected onto a polar coordinate
system to produce spiral-like features where radial an-
gle represents time and distance from centre represents
rank. While compact, and capable of showing several
hundred items simultaneously, the radial projection
can be difficult to interpret and gives undue salience
to lower ranked items that appear larger away from
the centre of the projection. Instead, I propose here a

75 Author post-print of Wood (2015) IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications, 35(4)



Personal Visualization and Personal Visual Analytics

Upton Magna
Lake Vyrnwy

Llanberis

Dolgellau

1. Arrived Thursday evening for a pre-
ride meal. Fellow audaxers looking 
intimidatingly fit in their non-lycra 

civvies. A sense of  foreboding and onion 
soup pervades the village hall.

3. Climbing begins in earnest through 
stunning landscape. Unexpected surprise to 
see the magnificent dam at Lake Vyrnwy - 

and then to cycle over it. The first control does 
generous beans on toast - the first of  about 
ten  I'll get through on this long weekend.

4. Wonderful wooded road along the banks of  
Lake Vyrnwy. Not a car (or cyclist) in sight.

5. Climbing proper begins up to Bwlch y Groes. 
Highest point on the ride, but not the hardest 
climbing. We ascend the "easy" way. At the t-

junction near the top, get precipitous views of  the 
25% climb to our left that thankfully we avoid.

8. Magnificent views of  Snowdon as we begin the steady climb from Betws Y Coed to Pen-y-pass. 
Sun is out, little wind to bother us. The last part of  the climb overlaps with the Brian Chapman 

route, but feels much easier today with fresher legs and benign weather.

6. The climb up above Ffestiniog starts to feel increasingly remote. 
In this weather it's beautiful, surrounded by the higher peaks of  

Snowdonia. In poor weather this could be a bit of  a brute.

9. Beetroot soup and a chocolate 
milkshake at Pete's Eats in Llanberis. 

Hummers remarks that to have 
willingly chosen the beetroot must 
mean my body has developed an 

immunity to it. There is talk in the 
cafe from veterans of  the Snowdon 
and Coasts of  taking the long way 

round to avoid a gratuitous climb out 
of  town. I decide to take the official 

route and am rewarded with stunning 
views of  Snowdon and coasts.

7. Have run out of  water and am feeling 
increasingly thirsty. Fill water bottles up in 

mountain stream. More eco-friendly than Evian.

10. Interesting to ride a bit more of  the 
Brian Chapman here, but earlier in the day 

with better weather and fresher legs. A novelty 
not to get minor hassle from drunken locals in 
Penrhyndeudraeth. A slight tail wind helps 

speed me on my way.  

11. Get the beginnings of  the bonk, so 
munch through two Snickers flapjacks 
(very good on the bike comfort eating) 
and a Magnum with views of  holiday 

folk on the beach. 

12. Barmouth bridge as delightful as ever. 
Man at toll booth very careful to make sure I 
have my ticket. I wonder how much they've 

made in tolls from the various Brian 
Chapmans and other audaxes over the years.

13. Decide to 
take the road 
rather than 

NCN route to 
Dolgellau. 

Relief  not to 
have to climb 
up to Kings 

YHA.

14. Civilised 
food stop and 
in Dolgellau. 
Apparently 
about 'half  

the field' have 
already 

controlled here.

15. Great to climb 
Cross Foxes and 
descend Dinas 

Mawddwy on gears 
for a change. Seems 
easier than at 5am 
on day two of  the 
Brian Chapman.

 A novelty to 
experience 

overheating on this 
climb. Could do with 

less traffic though.

16. MattH catches me on the 
descent. We end up riding the 
rest of  the MC together. Your 
company is much appreciated.

0                                      25km                                      50

600m                                
0                           

2. Welsh place names seem to arrive remarkably quickly. The pace 
is quite fast, with a fairly organised peloton and turns at the front. 

This is a new part of  the country for cycling for me. The good 
weather, clear, dry, little wind, brings out the best in the landscape.

Mille Cymru

Figure 4. Excerpt from the northern portion of the Mille Cymru 1000km audax profile map
with personal spatio-temporal narrative ordered anticlockwise from the east. The elevation
profile is the same as that shown in Figure 1

ranked position chart using a conventional Cartesian
projection.

Figure 5 depicts a simple position chart showing
my own relative placing during in the 2011 Paris-Brest-
Paris ride.Vertical changes in the position line indicate
movement up or down the ranked order of riders at any
given point. Because the horizontal axis represents
distance along the route rather than time, changes in
the difficulty of the terrain are accounted for in the
ranked order. The steepest segments of the line there-
fore tend to represent atypical rest or sleep patterns
such as riding though the night (e.g. from Loudeac
to Carhaix), or extra sleep stops (e.g. from Dreux to
St Quentin). As a piece of personal visualization the
design allows annotation to provide a brief textual nar-
rative, but importantly allows the individual to make
some comparison with the group as a whole.

Figure 5 was originally constructed manually in
2011 using Microsoft Excel, but given a table of split
times for a set of riders it is possible generate such
charts automatically and to make a stronger connec-
tion between individual and group progress. Rather
than show only a single rider’s progress, all riders can
be visualized together – effectively a form of parallel
coordinates plot. Figure 6 shows the relative positions
of 1000 riders over 21 checkpoints in the 2013 London-
Edinburgh-London audax with a single (interactively
selected) rider’s progress highlighted. This was built

using JavaScript and Processing to enable web-based
interaction. Lines are constructed as Catmull-Rom
splines to produce curved lines that honour all data
points. They have the property of creating smoothly
changing curves but at the cost of possible ‘overshoot’
at sharp changes in direction. While overshooting is
undesirable, the spline form has the advantage of giv-
ing a more individual signature to each rider’s unique
profile making it easier to spot trends and structure in
the complete dataset. By rounding the curve at stop-
ping points where commonly there is a change in line
direction, the uncertainty in timing where arrival at
each control is recorded, but not exit time, is given
visual expression.

The thinning of the chart towards the right gives an
indication of how many riders have dropped out of the
event and at what point. The darker vertical patches
created by many crossing lines (e.g. from Pocklington
to Thirsk and from Market Rasen to Kirton) indicate
periods when many riders changed their relative po-
sition, usually due to some choosing to sleep while
others continue. There is also vertical differentiation
in the amount of line crossing. Those with the fastest
times at the beginning of the event tend to retain their
relative position throughout (less crossing towards the
top of the chart). Likewise, those at the back of the
field tend to remain so for the majority of the event.
Most of the changes in rank tend to happen in the mid-

76 Author post-print of Wood (2015) IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications, 35(4)



Personal Visualization and Personal Visual Analytics

0 

500 

1000 

1500 

2000 

2500 

3000 

3500 

4000 

4500 

5000 

200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900 1000 1100 1200 1300 
1st

Villaines

Fougeres

Tinteniac
Loudeac

Carhaix

Brest

Mortagne

Dreux

Saint Quentin

Carhaix

LoudeacTinteniac
Fougeres

Villaines

Dehydrated; 
two short 
sleep stops 
in a field; 
couldn't 
eat

Found my 
form; good 
fixed terrain; 
fast riding 
buddy

RODE THROUGH 
STORM RATHER 
THAN SLEEP

SECOND SLEEP 
STOP

FIRST SLEEP 
STOP

STOP FOR 
SHOWER

 SHOWER

Hallucinating with 
Lack of Sleep. 
Forced  SLEEP STOP

GOOD FIXED TERRAIN; 
ATE PROPERLY

GOOD FOOD and 
weather

D i s t a n c e  

P 
o 
s 
i 
t 

i 
o 
n

Paris-Brest-Paris 2011

Arrivee !!
82 hrs

km 1300 km

Figure 5. Original visualization of the author’s relative position over the course of the
four-day Paris-Brest-Paris event.

dle of the field. This distinction is most pronounced
towards the end of the event, such as between Market
Rasen and Kirton.

Change in position is important to many riders as
these are the points when there is opportunity for so-
cial interaction at controls, or because they are due
to periods of relatively strong or slow progress. They
are often the periods that dominate the experience of
the rider. By making them salient in the visualisation
design, the personal visualization offers opportunity to
engage the reader.

Event Elimination
For many riders, one of the most significant factors
that shapes the event experience is the possibility of
being eliminated by failing to reach a control within
the prescribed maximum time limit. Typically on a
long event, between 20-40% of participants may be
eliminated in this way. The reduction in the size of the
field due to elimination, mechanical, health or other
issues is evident from the thinning of the position chart
in Figure 6, but this says little about which riders did
not finish (known as ‘DNF’) or where they stopped
riding. Figure 7 highlights in red, the 22% of riders
in the 2013 London-Edinburgh-London who did not
complete the event. It reveals the extent to which time
elimination was responsible for overall DNF figures as
the majority who DNF were towards the back of the
field for most of their ride. In contrast it also shows a
group of riders near the head of the field who remain
in front until Edinburgh (the half-way point) and then

elect to retire for reasons other than being out of time.

Time in hand
The overview of DNF patterns offered by the posi-
tion chart describes something of the experience of the
shifting positions and the ever-present threat of DNF
via time-elimination, but it does not really emphasise
the personal experience of the rider. For the majority of
participants on a long event like this, there is a real fear
of being out of time where fatigue, weather conditions,
terrain and ‘mechanicals’ add to the unpredictability
of the challenge. The strategy of many is to ‘bank’
time by riding above the minimum speed limit to pro-
vide a buffer against unpredictable delays later in the
ride. This may be visualized as a ‘time-in-hand’ chart
where the horizotnal axis represents distance and the
vertical axis the difference between the rider’s control
arrival time and that calculated assuming the minimum
permitted speed. Figure 8 shows this for all riders
with a single interactively selected rider’s time-in-hand
highlighted.

The characteristic wave pattern shows the common
strategy of banking time by riding faster on the road
and then stopping for longer rests, including feeding
and sleeping at controls. The steepness in downward
parts of the curve shows how much time was spent
at the preceding control. It is apparent that those at
the front of the field who gain most time-in-hand (at
the top of the chart) spend very little time stopped at
controls. Those with least time in hand (towards the
bottom of the chart) show shallower drops at controls

77 Author post-print of Wood (2015) IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications, 35(4)



Personal Visualization and Personal Visual Analytics

Figure 6. Relative position of 1000 riders in the 2013 London-Edinburgh-London audax. The
relative ranking of rider C35 is highlighted.

Figure 7. Relative position of 1000 riders in the 2013 London-Edinburgh-London audax.
Riders who DNF shown in red.

78 Author post-print of Wood (2015) IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications, 35(4)



Personal Visualization and Personal Visual Analytics

Figure 8. Time in hand for all riders in the London-Edinburgh-London audax. Rider C35
highlighted.

Figure 9. Time in hand for all riders in the London-Edinburgh-London audax. Riders who DNF
shown in red.

79 Author post-print of Wood (2015) IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications, 35(4)



Personal Visualization and Personal Visual Analytics

Figure 10. Snapshot from animation showing frequency of riders on the road and at controls
(blue lines and circles). Densities above 50 riders per km are shown as numbered circles.
Thin red bars show the frequency of riders remaining who will DNF. Lower red bars show
number of riders who have DNFed at each control by this point in time (5:22am). Rider C35 is
highlighted as a purple circle, who at this time is riding between Moffat and Edinburgh.

as their slower riding speed means they have less time
banked in order to rest. The highlighted rider shows
a pattern typical of many who alternate the ride-sleep-
ride pattern (4 sleep or extended rest stops evident
from the curve) against a steadily declining moving
average speed. As the rider moves towards the end of
the event, they are able to ride increasingly close to the
elimination time as the scope for unpredictable delays
diminishes.

Figure 9 shows the same time-in-hand chart but
here highlighting those riders who did not complete
the whole event. As a depiction of the personal experi-
ence of riding it shows even more strongly how being
‘chased by the clock’ carries a very real risk of being
eliminated from the event.

PERSONAL AND SYNOPTIC VISUAL-
IZATION DESIGN
While the design of the visualizations here has been
to support the individual in understanding their own
progress, there is also benefit in using the same visual-
ization to support the organisers of such participatory
events. Knowing, for example, where and when the
peak flow of riders will be so as to provide adequate
food, bed space and efficient processing of riders is

helpful to both rider and organiser. Riders may wish
to avoid long stops at busy controls; organisers can
deploy resources more effectively to meet anticipated
demand. It is also true that for many participatory
sporting events such as these, organisers are volun-
teers who themselves are participants in other events.
As such, designs oriented around supporting the ‘per-
sonal’ may not be significantly different to those with
a more synoptic analytical perspective. Connecting the
‘personal’ with the ‘group’ as many of these visualiza-
tions illustrate is also part of the process of participant
volunteer-orientated organisations providing appropri-
ate support to others within the organisation.

One example of connecting the individual partic-
ipant’s personal visualization with the synoptic or-
ganisers’ perspective is to superimpose a rider’s own
progress through the event over the density of all riders
along the route and animate change over time. Ani-
mation was used as it allowed both distance (horizon-
tal axis) and time (animation time) to be visualized
concurrently. This was important because it is the in-
tersection of many riders in the same place that can
place particular demands on participation and event
management. The supplementary video1 shows one
such animation with a snapshot depicted in Figure 10.
In order to assist with managing the arrival and care of

1Animation available at vimeo.com/111463034

80 Author post-print of Wood (2015) IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications, 35(4)



Personal Visualization and Personal Visual Analytics

riders at each control, participants of larger events are
typically started in waves spread over several hours.
But the advantages afforded by group riding can mean
that riders will actively seek to cluster during an event.
The frequency animation shows how this complex dy-
namic affects demand for resources at each control
and how that changes over the length of the event.
These patterns were not visible in the relative position
and time-in-hand charts which were both standardised
with respect to the rider’s individual start time. Organ-
isers at controls who provide food and rest facilities
often describe a ‘bulge’ of riders arriving when their
support activity is most frantic. I wished to reflect
this in animation design by using the metaphor of an
oscilloscope representation sound wave ‘pulses’. By
additionally showing those riders who DNF, often stay-
ing for extended periods at the control at which they
retire, a picture of the demand on control facilities can
be created. This can be used as part of the planning
process both during the event itself and to anticipate
the pattern of demand in future events. Yet it also has
the characteristic of a piece of personal visualization.
As a rider, the idea of clusters of other riders strung
out ahead and behind on the road is a common mental
image, especially when riding alone. Being able to
locate one’s own progress in relation to these clusters
reinforces the connection between the individual and
the group.

CONCLUSIONS
The visualizations shown here were presented as an in-
teractive web application (gicentre.org/lel2013) shortly
after the 2013 London-Edinburgh London event and
made available to riders. There they could enter their
own rider ID to view their personal progress in relation
to others. Static views of the visualizations along with
selected statistics from the event were published in the
November 2013 edition of the Audax UK magazine Ar-
rivée5. Feedback from participants and organisers who
used the visualization suggests that some at least used
it to plan strategies for future events. In that sense they
fulfil the traditional role of visualization and visual an-
alytic systems. Yet the context of personal engagement
with data through visualization offers potential for a
more affecting experience.

Does personal visualization in a non-professional
context require designs that are distinct from more
traditional, often scientific, information visualization
and visual analytics? While there are some obvious
design requirements that relate to professional vs non-
professional audiences, a more interesting question
arises around how to reflect the individual’s experi-
ence in the design of the visualization. Is simply de-

picting data about an individual sufficient to do this? I
would argue that for personal visualization to resonate
it needs to do more.

In the designs presented here, I have tried to reflect
my experience as a participant in cycling events in the
visualization design process. This does not mean using
bicycle-related visual metaphors, as might be the case
in an infographic design, but instead, to make salient
something of the emotional responses that arise from
the experience. The tradition of participants in ultra-
endurance events reporting their experiences as stories
was reflected in the support of a spatial narrative in the
profile map. The idea that in a mass participation event
that can be a somewhat solitary experience, the design
of the position chart addresses a desire to be able to
compare one’s own situation with others. In participat-
ing in an event where a major part of the challenge is to
complete it within limited time, designs were chosen
that emphasise time-in-hand and the fear of ‘DNF’.
By tapping into those themes that have emotional res-
onance as a participant, good personal visualisation
design can engage the consumer of the visualization
in ways that might be more challenging in a more
traditional detached scientific context.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Thanks to Danial Webb of AudaxUK and Alex Green-
bank of YACF for providing the rider data during and
after the 2013 London-Edinburgh-London audax.

REFERENCES
[1] F. Amini, S. Rufiange, Z. Hossain, Q. Ventura,

P. Irani, and M. J. McGuffin, “The impact of inter-
activity on comprehending 2d and 3d visualizations
of movement data,” IEEE Transactions on Visual-
ization and Computer Graphics, vol. 21, no. 1,
pp. 122–135, 2015.

[2] A. Thudt, D. Baur, and S. Carpendale, “Visits:
A spatiotemporal visualization of location histo-
ries,” in Proceedings of Eurographics Conference
on Visualization (EuroVis), Short Papers, pp. 79–
83, 2013.

[3] D. Huffman, “A technique for encoding elevation
changes along a route,” Cartographic Perspectives,
no. 63, pp. 83–86, 2009.

[4] M. Batty, “Rank clocks,” Nature, vol. 444,
no. 7119, pp. 592–596, 2006.

[5] J. Wood, “London-Edinburgh-London info
sketches,” Arrivée, no. 122, pp. 32–33, 2013.

81 Author post-print of Wood (2015) IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications, 35(4)


