












































AGS_e_Proceedings_AM07 (1).pdf


su
pp

or
tin

g 
pa

pe
rs

31

9. UPCO2: A PROGRAM TO REDUCE THE GHG EMISSIONS IN 
THE UNIVERSITY

Albert Cuchí*, Érika Mata†, Anna Pagès◦
UPCO2. Program to reduce GHG emissions in the Technical University of Catalonia (UPC).

c/ Pere Serra 1-15, 08173 Sant Cugat del Vallès, Barcelona, Spain.
* alberto.cuchi@upc.edu, † erikamata@etsav.upc.edu, ° anna.pages@upc.edu

Key words: GHG emissions, energy effi ciency in buildings.

In the middle of 19th century, an outstanding Argentinean wondered how it was 
possible for the British men to pay the highest price for taking away the Argentinean 
wool and at the same time to import the cheapest coats in Argentina. Where was the 
trick? Now we know it: the British productivity that made this miracle possible was 
based on a system that released carbon from the lithosphere into the atmosphere. The 
secret was to externalize some costs for which all of us have to pay now.

The Kyoto Protocol has transformed the greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions in an 
aim of the economic activity. First of all because the emissions are limited. Then 
property titles are handed out by giving emission rights to the countries. And fi nally 
a market to exchange these emission rights would be created.

The development of any activity requires utilities which are provided by the 
consumption of different products. And these products are made by processes 
generating GHG emissions, normally due to the use of energy from fossil fuels. 
This means that any activity has associated GHG emissions and therefore it will be 
affected by the Protocol.

The manufacturer of the products and the supplier of the services will need to 
improve their production processes in terms of GHG emissions, reducing them per 
every unit of product or service provided. The Kyoto Protocol will force these agents 
to fi nd new processes considering the new costs of emissions.

Taking this context into account the whole Technical University of Catalonia 
(UPC) as an institution considers that it should adapt to the Kyoto Protocol new 
frame. As a result, the UPCO2 program has been created to reduce the GHG 
emissions associated to the UPC. It has the following objectives:

- to evaluate the emissions associated to the UPC activity

- to design the most effi cient strategies to reduce them (kg saved CO2 / invest €)

- to implement and to evaluate the strategies

- to introduce the emission reduction as a new value into the UPC

- to spread the results and the experience to the society



32

Basically, the sources of GHG emissions in the UPC are:

- the obligated mobility of its near 40.000 members (students, professors, 
administrative and service staff)

- the consumption of the necessary resources to carry out the activities of 
education and research, especially, the necessary energy for the buildings (near a 
hundred in 400.000 m2)

- the emissions due to material manufacture of the new constructions and 
equipment in the UPC

There are several reasons for UPCO2’s fi rst activities to specially focus on the 
emissions due to building:

- in the UPC Sustainable Plan 2015 arranging the environmental actions in the 
University, there is a preferential line about building and climate change, - in the 
fi eld of the emissions arisen by building, the UPC has an own know-how with 
large possibilities of development, there is the opportunity to get aids to invest in 
energy effi ciency in buildings

UPCO2 activities related to construction consist of analyzing which are the factors 
that affect the GHG emissions, which is their importance, which strategies would be 
possible to apply to reduce them and to reduce their cost. The factors that affect the 
emissions are: 

- energy demand of the building. It includes energy demand for air conditioning, 
artifi cial lighting and services.

- emissions effi ciency of energy installations: effi ciency of the systems and 
emissions depending on the kind of energy.

- use and management. Differences between occupancy rate designed and real. 
Management of energy resources by users and staff.

Specifi c assessment tools have to be developed in each area, and also the relations 
between them. Tools for the said demand and energy factors are already quite 
developed, while those for use and management still need to be found. There is no 
point in considering GHG prediction and evaluation separately, since management 
determines them. The fi nal result should articulate new global points of view, letting 
us to understand a building as an effi cient product according to GHG emissions 
needed to obtain building’s main utility: habitability.

Gaining experience in defi nition and use of prediction and measure systems for 
GHG in buildings and its standardization inside the Kyoto Protocol frame are some 
of the expected benefi ts from UPCO2 actuations in buildings. They could be used 
as clean development mechanisms (CDM) or any other saving measures considered 
inside the Protocol.

Design of buildings should be understood from the new GHG emissions effi ciency 
points of view. This knowledge could be therefore applied to other areas outside 
UPC.



su
pp

or
tin

g 
pa

pe
rs

33

10. DISPATCH MODELING OF A REGIONAL POWER SYSTEM  
- INTEGRATING INTERMITTENT POWER GENERATION

Lisa Edqvist*, Filip Johnsson 
Department of Energy and Environment, Energy Technology, Chalmers, Göteborg, Sweden,

*lisa.edqvist@chalmers.se

Key words: wind power, power system modeling

1. Summary
The past decade has seen a signifi cant growth in wind power in Europe, and 
wind power is by many considered to be a key technology in a sustainable power 
generation system. However, in order to make possible a large scale integration of 
wind power, while safeguarding a high security of supply, economically acceptable 
ways to handle the variations in wind power production need to be identifi ed. This 
paper presents a model, which has been developed to study the effect of large-scale 
integration of variable wind power in a power generation system which includes 
base load plants.

The model optimizes the power production of each power plant in the system so 
that the electricity demand is met at the lowest systems cost. As more wind power 
is introduced to a power generation system, periods during which other power 
plants are uneconomical to run become more frequent. Whether it is economically 
advantageous to shut down these plants in such a situation, or to keep them running, 
depends on the length of these periods. The model is designed to evaluate which 
alternative that is favorable from a systems perspective. Under the assumptions 
given, the model results suggest that power plants with low start-up costs or high 
load turn down ratio will maintain their production as the wind power production 
increases, while units with low load turn down ratio and high start -up costs have to 
decrease production.

2. Background
Since wind power production is subject to uncontrollable variations, wind power 
plants must be combined with other plant types to achieve an economically and 
socially acceptable power generation system. The result of the introduction of wind 
power in a typical power generation system can be seen as a bridging system, i.e. 
a system which typically is dominated by thermal units. When constructing the 
model an effort has thus been made to include the ability/inability of thermal power 
plants to respond to the wind power variations. The questions in focus have been; 
How should thermal units be run to balance the wind power variations in the most 
cost effective way and how will this way of running thermal units infl uence power 
system properties such as emissions and marginal costs? The work is a fi rst step in 
fi nding a methodology to study integration of variable RES based power generation 
in the AGS project “Pathways to Sustainable European Energy Systems”.



34

3. Model
A mixed integer programming approach has been used to model the alternative ways 
that the power plants can choose to handle variations in wind power production and 
power demand. The model assigns each thermal power plant with a minimum power 
production level and a start-up cost. In order to identify occasions of a startup an 
integer variable is introduced, which indicates whether the plant is running/ready 
to run or not. As long as the power plant is running/ready to run, the minimum 
power production level assures that the production does not take values lower 
than the physical limitations of the plant (i.e. corresponding to the load turn down 
performance of the plant). The possible increase in power production of a running 
unit is available to the system as reserve capacity.

The reserve capacity answers to production variations within 15 minutes. The 
more wind power that is

introduced to a power system the more reserve capacity has to be set aside. In this 
model the relation between reserve capacity and wind power developed in previous 
studies have been used, and each time step it is required that a suffi cient amount 
of capacity is set aside to form a reserve. A 15 minute time resolution can thus be 
avoided. The time resolution of the model is instead set to one hour in order to be 
able to consider the start-ups of the power plants. Western Denmark has been used 
as a case study for the work, i.e. the model simulations have been carried out for the 
power system of this region and with data from 2005.

4. Results
Initially wind power was assumed to be prioritized, as wind power producers in 
Western Denmark are guaranteed to sell the power they produce. Simulations 
suggest that in a situation where wind power is sold on the market the wind power 
plants would still be profi table to run at all times that power production is possible. 
This is explained by the low running costs of wind power plants compared to fuel 
consuming plants. In both the prioritized case and the market case it is thus up to the 
fuel consuming units to compensate for variations, both in wind power production 
and power demand.

Three scenarios have been applied to the region; one scenario without wind 
power, one with the present wind power capacity and one with a 50% increase 
in wind power capacity. Simulations suggest that the number of start-ups of the 
thermal units will increase with installed wind power capacity. Simulations also 
indicate that the utilization of units with low start-up costs or low minimum 
production levels is marginally affected by the wind power production, whereas the 
utilization of units with high start up costs and high minimum production levels will 
decrease as the wind power production increases.

In the study, units with high start-up costs and high minimum production levels 
(low load turn down performance) are large coal fi red plants designed for base load 



su
pp

or
tin

g 
pa

pe
rs

35

production. These units have low running costs, whereas gas fi red units have lower 
start-up costs but higher running costs. In the simulations, as described previously, 
the units with low start-up costs, and high running costs, were used to the same 
extent in a system with wind power as in a system without wind power. The 
marginal cost of electricity therefore did not decrease as the wind power capacity 
increased, despite the low running costs of wind power.

The model can also be used to visualize to what extent the wind power replaces 
domestic power production and to which extent it is exported. In the case of 
Western Denmark the simulations suggest that a 50% increase in wind power 
capacity would increase the amount of replaced domestic power production per 
unit of installed wind power (under the assumption that the transmission capacity 
remains unchanged). This would result in a larger decrease of carbon dioxide 
emissions per unit of installed wind power than today, despite the increased number 
of plant start-ups. Western Denmark can thus install wind power to get closer to its 
Kyoto undertakings also in the future.

5. Conclusions
A dispatch model of a regional power generation system has been developed and 
applied to Western Denmark. The model results suggest that wind power variations 
introduce aspects that infl uence the competitiveness of the thermal units in the 
power system relative one another. The infl uence of large scale wind power grid 
penetration can only be reviled if the power production of the system is optimized 
on an hour-to-hour basis, taking fl exibility aspects, such as start-up costs and 
minimum power production levels, into consideration. It is therefore suggested that 
models of this type is utilized when investigating bridging systems including large-
scale wind power.


