

























































Multifunctional, Transparent PV-Façade for the Energetic Rehabilitation of an Office Building in Barcelona


MULTIFUNCTIONAL, TRANSPARENT PV-FAÇADE FOR THE ENERGETIC
REHABILITATION OF AN OFFICE BUILDING IN BARCELONA

TORSTEN MASSECK
Dipl.-Ing (FH), Architect

CISol – Centre d’Investigació Solar
Escola Técnica Superior d’Arquitectura del Vallès (ETSAV)

Universitat Politécnica de Catalunya (UPC)
08190 Sant Cugat del Vallès

Catalonia, Spain
cisol@etsav.upc.edu
www.cisol.com.es

ABSTRACT

The present paper shows an example for an integrated
design process in the field of solar architecture, combining
the design work of the architect, the use of simulation tools
and the applied research on new combinations of materials
like amorphous silicium, semi-transparent PV panels and
coloured glass, with the aim of the energetic optimization of
an architectonical project.
This integrated design approach is promoted and applied by
CISol- Centre for Solar Research at the School of
Architecture ETSAV as a method for a sustainable building
design.

1.  INTRODUCTION

The presentation shows the case study of an energetic
rehabilitation of a five-story staircase and the adjacent zones
that suffered sever problems of overheating and cold due to
an insufficient ventilation, the lack of sun shading, and an
overall deficient thermal behaviour.

Industrial fixed glazing elements are substituted by an
multifunctional double-glazed facade consistent of a
combination of transparent PV panels and coloured and
printed glass elements.
An intelligent natural ventilation strategy is developed to
cope with the special condition of the staircase as
intermediate space between the air-conditioned office space
and the exterior.

Thermal measurements were made before and after the
intervention. Simulation tools were used to define the right
combination of materials in terms of sun shading, daylight
use, electricity production and architectonical quality.

Design, technologies and concepts were further developed
and validated by design studies and measurements realized
as applied research activity by CISol.
Base for this work is the concept of a Solar Network, seeing
research centres like CISol in the important role as
connecting elements between the different entities working
in the field of architecture, solar energy and sustainability.

Fig. 1: Scheme for networking and applied research in solar
architecture.



2. SITUATION

SCHOTT Ibèrica SA is a glass manufacturing company
situated in Sant Adria del Besos, a small community beside
Barcelona, within a mixed-use residential and industrial
area, approximately 500m from the seaside.

The office building, constructed in 2001 is located within
the fabric site, touching one of the manufacturing halls.
It is northeast / southwest orientated with a totally glazed
staircase on its southwest façade.

This staircase suffered a severe overheating problem in
summer, due to the fixed, industrial glazing element without
openings and without any shading device. Poor thermal
behaviour due to thermal bridges and high U-values of the
glazing created discomfort also in winter with very low
temperatures inside.

3.  OBJECTIVES

The overheating problem had to be solved, at the same time,
as the companies own products should be applied for this
purpose. In total the situations of discomfort in summer and
winter had to be smoothed, as the occupants of the building
to move between different offices frequently use the
staircase.

4.  APROACH

The first idea for the project was to develop a corporate
identity concept for SCHOTT, bringing together different of
their products in new combinations, solving in an innovative
way existing climatic problems and creating a piece of
remarkable architecture as best reference for the company.

5.  DESIGN PROCESS

In a first stage, a preliminary study was made, defining the
above mentioned problems of overheating, missing sun
protection, deficient natural ventilation possibilities, glare
problems, thermal bridges and deficient overall thermal
behaviour.

Monitoring was done by use of TESTO data loggers in 6
different points of the building, recording values of air
temperature and relative humidity every 30 minutes for
about 40 days in July and August and 40 days in December
and January.

Fig. 2: Building analysis and description of deficiencies.

Comparing measurements by hand at different moments
during the monitoring period controlled these results.

Results showed that in some parts of the staircase
temperatures of about 50 º Celsius were reached in August,
and normal air temperature of the staircase in summer could
easily be 10 to 15 degrees above ambient temperature.

In winter interior temperatures in the staircase in the
morning were only slightly above outside temperatures.

A second step was the study of the sun situation of the
façade, defining the amount of incident solar radiation
throughout the year and the shading situation due to the
adjacent building.

According to radiation data for Barcelona, there is a
maximum amount of 1600 kWh/m2a inciting on a south
orientated and 40º inclined plane.
Due to the verticality of the façade and the southwest
orientation the incident radiation on the façade is reduced to
approximately 67 % of this amount, which means around
1060 kWh/m2a.

A 3D modelling of the building with a sun study was
realized for different moments of the year to define
approximately the influence of shading on the façade and a
possible photovoltaic installation.

As a result, a division line was defined, dividing the façade
in two parts, one upper part, appropriate for a PV
installation as receiving sun throughout the whole year, and
one lower part, recommended to be realized without a PV
installation, due to the shading caused by the adjacent
building.



Fig. 3: Sun study and evaluation of shadowing by adjacent
buildings.

In a third step this results were translated into a first design
proposal with different materials in the façade.

For the upper part there was recommended the use of
ASITHRU semi transparent PV panels, product of RWE
SCHOTT Solar, in a double glazing element, whereas for
the lower part a combination of IMERA coloured glass,
product of SCHOTT AG, as double glazed element with an
white screen printing as additional sun protection and design
element was foreseen.

Fig. 4: First design proposal for a mixed colored glass and
PV facade

For natural ventilation there were proposed glass louvers in
different elements of the coloured glass façade and
additional ventilation openings in the upper part, to create a
chimney effect within the staircase.

An additional entrance hall was proposed as a climatic
buffer space between the staircase and outside.

From the architectonical point of view, this proposal created
a new corporate design for SCHOTT Ibèrica SA, combining
there own products in their building facade like two hands
reaching each other representing two (product) lines of the
company coming together to form one combined element.

As final step of the design process, a combination of PV
panels and coloured glass sheets was proposed to explore
ones more the creative potential of the companies products.

6.  PROTOTYPES

As there was so far no experience in the combination of
IMERA coloured glass with ASITHRU transparent PV
panels, prototypes of different colours and glass
combination have been produced, to evaluate their
architectonical potential.

Fig. 5: Prototypes of ASITHRU PV Elements with coloured
IMERA glass.

The semi-transparency of ASITHRU in combination with
coloured glass showed a promising effect of light and
shadow as well as from inside as from outside, by the way
that sun protection could be improved a little more.

Also for the IMERA double glazed elements prototypes
were produced with different kinds of screen printing,
finding a compromise between the sun shading properties
and design aspects in terms of the play of light and shadow,
opacity and transparency.

The effect of a negative screen-printing was used, allowing
to project with coloured light the printed writing on inside
surfaces.
Different sizes of writings and density of printings were
proved to achieve the best results in design and sun
protection.



Fig. 7: Simulation results for air temperature during summer
reference week before and after the intervention.

Fig. 6: Double-glazed IMERA element with screen-printing
as sun protection and design feature.

7.  THERMAL SIMULATION

A thermal simulation with TRNSYS was made to evaluate
the effect of the proposed design on the thermal behaviour
of the building and to optimize the proposed strategies in the
field of sun protection and natural ventilation.

Different sizes of openings were simulated to define the
requirements for sufficient natural ventilation.

The overall performance of the proposal showed to be
promising. Maximum temperatures in the staircase could be
dropped in summer to just 2-3º Celsius above the ambient
temperature.

In winter maximums on the other side dropped also from
about 26ºCelcius to about 21º Celsius, due to the improved
sun protection, which limits in winter the desired direct
solar gains, but the minimum temperatures did not change.

0,00

5,00

10,00

15,00

20,00

25,00

30,00

1 49 97 145 193 241 289 337 385 433 481 529 577 625 673

TAMB

TESC_123
CISOL_01
TESC_123
CISOL_02

Fig. 8: Simulation results of air temperature during winter
reference week before and after the intervention.

The chosen construction system, a semi-structural curtain
wall façade, already conditioned the possibility of
integration of openings. For design reasons there was a first
decision for so called Italian windows, opening towards the
outside, and in closed position almost invisibly integrated
like fixed glazing elements.

This façade system showed to be a problem in terms of
shadow projection on the PV panels in the upper part of the
façade. Even a 15-degree opening would have caused
shadow on some part of below installed ASITHRU
photovoltaic elements, causing a notable loss of productivity
of the whole PV installation.

So finally the decision was made to introduce a line of
windows in the upper part of the façade, which open to the
inside, permitting fully opened a free ventilation opening of
1,6 m2, required minimum according to the TRYNSIS
simulation results.

For visual aspects, but also as a weather protection, fixed
metal lamellas are used to cover these openings towards the
outside, reducing only slightly the free ventilation opening.
The effect of vegetation in front of the lower openings in the
façade was simulated and found as little significant.

One concern for safety reasons was the temperature that
could reach the semitransparent ASITHRU PV elements as
well as the screen printed coloured glass panels, as they are
in direct contact with the staircase.

Simulation showed that the surface temperature of PV
panels would not get higher than 48º Celsius, and the
temperature of coloured glass panels would be limited to a
maximum of 43º Celsius.
According to simulation results, with the new facade the
overall heating and cooling demand of the office building
could be reduced by 8 %, dropping from about 87 kWh/m2a
to approximately 80 kWh/m2a.



Fig. 9: Final design scheme.

8.  RESULTS

Results of thermal simulations have been introduced into the
project, finding an architectonically attractive solution for
each parameter.

The ASITHRU PV installation has a potential of about 1,5
kWp which is a rather small installation, but the project has
to be understood as an integrated answer to a whole row of
necessities. In this sense the PV installation contributes
positively in the field of daylight use, sun protection, visual
relation to the exterior, thermal behaviour of staircase and
building and last but not least as a corporate identity
element for the company.

The project is now under construction. Final results will be
presented at the conference.

9.  CONCLUSIONS

The presented project reflects the philosophy of the
integrated design approach, which the CISol- Centre for
Solar Research ETSAV, tries to implement into the
architectural education at the Polytechnic University of
Catalonia (UPC) but also in its work as a service and
research centre, offering services in the fields of energy
consultancy, technological education, solar design and
applied research on new solar building elements to public
and private entities.

The example of the Solar Façade for SCHOTT Ibèrica SA
shows how this concept can be put into practice by a close
and interdisciplinary collaboration between industry,
research centres and university.


	Main Menu
	Introduction
	Table of Contents
	Keyword Search
	Author Index
	Conversion Tables
	How to Use this CD



