


































































Living Labs in Architecture as Innovation Arenas within Higher Education Institutions


ScienceDirect

Available online at www.sciencedirect.comAvailable online at www.sciencedirect.com

ScienceDirect
Energy Procedia 00 (2017) 000–000

www.elsevier.com/locate/procedia

1876-6102 © 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.
Peer-review under responsibility of the Scientific Committee of The 15th International Symposium on District Heating and Cooling.

The 15th International Symposium on District Heating and Cooling

Assessing the feasibility of using the heat demand-outdoor 
temperature function for a long-term district heat demand forecast

I. Andrića,b,c*, A. Pinaa, P. Ferrãoa, J. Fournierb., B. Lacarrièrec, O. Le Correc

aIN+ Center for Innovation, Technology and Policy Research - Instituto Superior Técnico, Av. Rovisco Pais 1, 1049-001 Lisbon, Portugal
bVeolia Recherche & Innovation, 291 Avenue Dreyfous Daniel, 78520 Limay, France

cDépartement Systèmes Énergétiques et Environnement - IMT Atlantique, 4 rue Alfred Kastler, 44300 Nantes, France

Abstract

District heating networks are commonly addressed in the literature as one of the most effective solutions for decreasing the 
greenhouse gas emissions from the building sector. These systems require high investments which are returned through the heat
sales. Due to the changed climate conditions and building renovation policies, heat demand in the future could decrease, 
prolonging the investment return period. 
The main scope of this paper is to assess the feasibility of using the heat demand – outdoor temperature function for heat demand 
forecast. The district of Alvalade, located in Lisbon (Portugal), was used as a case study. The district is consisted of 665 
buildings that vary in both construction period and typology. Three weather scenarios (low, medium, high) and three district 
renovation scenarios were developed (shallow, intermediate, deep). To estimate the error, obtained heat demand values were 
compared with results from a dynamic heat demand model, previously developed and validated by the authors.
The results showed that when only weather change is considered, the margin of error could be acceptable for some applications
(the error in annual demand was lower than 20% for all weather scenarios considered). However, after introducing renovation 
scenarios, the error value increased up to 59.5% (depending on the weather and renovation scenarios combination considered). 
The value of slope coefficient increased on average within the range of 3.8% up to 8% per decade, that corresponds to the 
decrease in the number of heating hours of 22-139h during the heating season (depending on the combination of weather and 
renovation scenarios considered). On the other hand, function intercept increased for 7.8-12.7% per decade (depending on the 
coupled scenarios). The values suggested could be used to modify the function parameters for the scenarios considered, and 
improve the accuracy of heat demand estimations.

© 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.
Peer-review under responsibility of the Scientific Committee of The 15th International Symposium on District Heating and 
Cooling.

Keywords: Heat demand; Forecast; Climate change

Energy Procedia 115 (2017) 383–389

1876-6102 © 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
Peer-review under responsibility of the organizing committee of AREQ 2017.
10.1016/j.egypro.2017.05.035

10.1016/j.egypro.2017.05.035

Available online at www.sciencedirect.com 

ScienceDirect 
Energy Procedia 00 (2017) 000–000  

 www.elsevier.com/locate/procedia 

1876-6102 © 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. 
Peer-review under responsibility of the organizing committee of AREQ 2017.  

International Conference – Alternative and Renewable Energy Quest, AREQ 2017, 1-3 February 
2017, Spain 

Living Labs in Architecture as Innovation Arenas within Higher 
Education Institutions 

Torsten Masseck* 
aUPC BarcelonaTech, ETSAV, c/Pere Serra 1-15, 08173 Sant Cugat del Vallès, Spain 

Abstract 

Education at schools of architecture must attend the demand for a new profile for architects, integrating and fostering 
corresponding SD competences through new learning methodologies, tools and concepts. 
A series of recent developments in higher education, emerging fields of knowledge, as well as changing social and professional 
realities give relevance to the research on Living Labs in Architecture as new tools for a holistic Education for Sustainable 
Development (ESD) with a specific focus on renewable energies and Nearly Zero Energy Buildings. 
On the other hand, a newly strengthened social responsibility of university towards society in the development of innovative 
solutions for our environmental, social and economic conflicts must lead towards new processes in teaching, research and 
technology transfer based on a strong interaction with their local and regional communities. 
The LOW3 prototype solar house of UPC has been designed and built between 2008 and 2010 and converted and operated as a 
Living Lab for sustainable architecture and lifestyle since 2011 at the ETSAV campus at Sant Cugat del Vallés (Barcelona) under 
the responsibility of the author. This paper highlights the importance of Living Labs as innovation infrastructures in Higher 
Education and presents the specific educational experience of LOW3 within the institutional framework of UPC, drawing from 5 
years of action research regarding pluridisciplinary, experience based sustainability education.  
It shows that the diversity of activities related to one single platform like Living Lab LOW3, allows the creation of synergies 
between actors, programs and projects. Stakeholders have the opportunity to participate in a community of users beyond 
established academic structures. In this sense, Living Labs in Higher Education can be seen as social ecosystems or Innovation 
Arenas with a link to the surrounding socio-economic context, fostering the creation of transversal educational communities. 
 
© 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. 
Peer-review under responsibility of the organizing committee of AREQ 2017. 

Keywords: Living Labs; Education for Sustainable Development; Sustainable Lifestyle; Sustainable Architecture; Solar Architecture 

 

 
* Corresponding author. Tel.: +34 93 401 25 47 

E-mail address: torsten.masseck@upc.edu 

Available online at www.sciencedirect.com 

ScienceDirect 
Energy Procedia 00 (2017) 000–000  

 www.elsevier.com/locate/procedia 

1876-6102 © 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. 
Peer-review under responsibility of the organizing committee of AREQ 2017.  

International Conference – Alternative and Renewable Energy Quest, AREQ 2017, 1-3 February 
2017, Spain 

Living Labs in Architecture as Innovation Arenas within Higher 
Education Institutions 

Torsten Masseck* 
aUPC BarcelonaTech, ETSAV, c/Pere Serra 1-15, 08173 Sant Cugat del Vallès, Spain 

Abstract 

Education at schools of architecture must attend the demand for a new profile for architects, integrating and fostering 
corresponding SD competences through new learning methodologies, tools and concepts. 
A series of recent developments in higher education, emerging fields of knowledge, as well as changing social and professional 
realities give relevance to the research on Living Labs in Architecture as new tools for a holistic Education for Sustainable 
Development (ESD) with a specific focus on renewable energies and Nearly Zero Energy Buildings. 
On the other hand, a newly strengthened social responsibility of university towards society in the development of innovative 
solutions for our environmental, social and economic conflicts must lead towards new processes in teaching, research and 
technology transfer based on a strong interaction with their local and regional communities. 
The LOW3 prototype solar house of UPC has been designed and built between 2008 and 2010 and converted and operated as a 
Living Lab for sustainable architecture and lifestyle since 2011 at the ETSAV campus at Sant Cugat del Vallés (Barcelona) under 
the responsibility of the author. This paper highlights the importance of Living Labs as innovation infrastructures in Higher 
Education and presents the specific educational experience of LOW3 within the institutional framework of UPC, drawing from 5 
years of action research regarding pluridisciplinary, experience based sustainability education.  
It shows that the diversity of activities related to one single platform like Living Lab LOW3, allows the creation of synergies 
between actors, programs and projects. Stakeholders have the opportunity to participate in a community of users beyond 
established academic structures. In this sense, Living Labs in Higher Education can be seen as social ecosystems or Innovation 
Arenas with a link to the surrounding socio-economic context, fostering the creation of transversal educational communities. 
 
© 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. 
Peer-review under responsibility of the organizing committee of AREQ 2017. 

Keywords: Living Labs; Education for Sustainable Development; Sustainable Lifestyle; Sustainable Architecture; Solar Architecture 

 

 
* Corresponding author. Tel.: +34 93 401 25 47 

E-mail address: torsten.masseck@upc.edu 

© 2017 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V.
Peer-review under responsibility of the organizing committee of AREQ 2017.

http://crossmark.crossref.org/dialog/?doi=10.1016/j.egypro.2017.05.035&domain=pdf


384 Torsten Masseck / Energy Procedia 115 (2017) 383–3892 Torsten Masseck / Energy Procedia 00 (2017) 000–000 

1. Background 

Education at schools of architecture must attend the demand for a new profile for architects, integrating and 
fostering corresponding SD competences through new learning methodologies, tools and concepts (EDUCATE 
Project Partners 2012). A series of recent developments give relevance to the research on Living Labs in 
Architecture as new tools for a holistic Education for Sustainable Development (ESD) with a specific focus on 
renewable energies in housing and our daily lives: 

 A new educational reality, with redefined objectives in higher education based on competence-based learning 
and a more transdisciplinary approach 

 A new knowledge reality, with an urgent need for acquisition of new knowledge regarding specific subjects 
like low energy buildings, low-impact building materials and energy efficient technologies  

 A new social reality, shifting towards participation, constant social innovations and a higher demand for 
environmental standards 

 A new professional reality, requiring more interdisciplinarity, the ability to deal with complexity and 
uncertainty and new forms of project development processes based on collaboration  

 
Important considerations regarding the essence of ESD are furthermore the understanding of sustainability as a 

(socially constructed) reality, “… as a dynamic and/or evolving concept, as controversial and the source of 
conflict”, and as a “catalyst for change” (Wals & Jickling 2002), which in consequence needs places for its 
collective negotiation and definition. This might require a new form of collaborative and empathic learning in order 
to develop a new collective “biospheric consciousness” (Rifkin 2011). Finally ESD seems to require so-called 
“transformative learning” based on psychological, convictional and finally behavioral transformation (Wiek et al. 
2011, Boehnert 2012). 

On the other hand a newly strengthened social responsibility of university towards society in the development 
of innovative solutions for our environmental, social and economic conflicts must lead towards new processes in 
teaching, research and technology transfer based on a strong interaction with their local and regional communities 
and society in general (Cortese 2003).  

Living Labs seem to play here an interesting role as collaborative multi-stakeholder platforms. 

2. Introduction 
In the area of architecture, the ETSAV School of Architecture at Sant Cugat del Vallés can be considered a 

pioneering institution in understanding its campus and buildings as a laboratory to learn about energy efficiency in 
buildings, but also its community as an important stakeholder for a broader approach to sustainability regarding its 
socio-economic environment. 

Solar Decathlon is an international competition for 20 selected universities to plan and build prototypes of 
energy self-sufficient solar houses. In 2008 a first ETSAV team under the lead of the author started the development 
of the first prototype solar house LOW3 at the campus in order to participate in the Solar Decathlon Europe 2010 
competition in Madrid (Masseck 2011).  

The LOW3 project  (2008‐2010) demonstrated over a 2 year period the importance and impact of a new way of 
education in architecture, based on the development and construction of a prototype house at the campus with a high 
degree of team self-organization, individual responsibility, and a strong link between teaching and research.  

 



 Torsten Masseck / Energy Procedia 115 (2017) 383–389 385
 Torsten Masseck / Energy Procedia 00 (2017) 000–000   3

LOW3 has been reconstructed in 2011 and renamed Living Lab LOW3 – Laboratory for sustainable 
architecture and lifestyle (www.livinglab-low3@blogspot.com) at the ETSAV Campus at Sant Cugat del Vallès 
(Barcelona) with the objective of establishing an open platform for collaboration with companies, and an exploration 
of experience-based concepts for teaching, research and innovation activities.  

Living Lab LOW3 adds since then value to the academic offer at UPC-Barcelona Tech through its innovative 
transdisciplinary educational programs, transmitting experience-based knowledge about integrated energy design in 
architecture and a holistic approach to sustainability. This paper argues that Architecture Living Labs like Living 
Lab LOW3 make a positive contribution to architectural education in its approach to sustainability including the 
holistic paradigm shift towards solar architecture, renewable energies and standards like Nearly Zero Energy 
Buildings.   

3. Methodology 

The concept of Living Lab LOW3 is influenced by the concept of user involvement in research and innovation, 
derived from the definition of Living Labs, as well as the co-creation and open innovation in real-life settings 
through a multi stakeholder approach (academia, companies and research entities but also local administration), 
understanding both students, researchers as well as citizens as the “users” of this newly generated platform. 
(Masseck 2013) 

A special strength of these types of Architecture Living Labs is their immediate relation to the daily life of 
people regarding living and working, with a focus on housing and lifestyle. This opens important opportunities to 
innovate with users in sustainability related fields like technological innovations regarding the home, sustainable 
consumption and lifestyle or behavior change models.  

Architecture Living Labs can range from a small scale knowledge dissemination and experience homes, up to a 
city platform for social innovation regarding sustainability, or the city itself with it buildings and inhabitants as 
supporting ecosystem for user-centered innovation in real-life environments. 

The concept of Living Lab LOW3 is that of an activities platform with a participatory approach to teaching and 
learning based on a prototype solar house, offering its spaces, its equipment and its infrastructure to diverse user 
groups from both inside and outside the UPC. 

Teaching and learning activities take place in parallel with research projects and outreach activities in order to 
create synergies between sectors, people and disciplines. Finally, Living Lab LOW3 is also a place for the 
networking of people in order to engage in new sustainability projects and initiatives, fostering the human factor 
behind these activities. 

Living Lab LOW3 is an educational research project under continuous development since January 2011. During 
almost 5 years of its existence, a series of different innovative teaching and learning activates have been 
implemented. New teaching formats, methods and tools have been tested regarding the link between formal and 
non-formal learning, the exploration of the personal learning environments of participants and the synergies between 
teaching, research and innovation.  

Living Lab LOW3 applies a mixed-methods approach with quantitative and qualitative research methods. 
Phenomenological research has been used in the Live-at-LOW3 experiment, evaluating the experience of students 
living a sustainable lifestyle in the LOW3 solar house. The tools used are surveys, questionnaires, semi-structured 
interviews, amongst other formats like video documentaries and participant’s videos. 

 



386 Torsten Masseck / Energy Procedia 115 (2017) 383–3894 Torsten Masseck / Energy Procedia 00 (2017) 000–000 

4. Results 
Results of this innovative educational project can be described in the following areas:  

 General educational and research activities referring to a huge amount of diverse activities regarding 
teaching and learning as well as research and innovation at an university campus  

 Specific Living Lab teaching formats regarding innovative approaches to sustainability education applying a 
user-centered living lab approach, and 

 Activities as a higher education innovation platform, which contributes to a holistic sustainability transition 
of university and the society it is embedded. 

 

4.1 General teaching and research activities at Living Lab LOW3 

Since 2011 3 regular Living Lab LOW3 courses, 6 innovation seminars, 2 international sustainability seminars, 
1 house occupation experiment, 5 open doors days and around 25 educational visits have taken place at Living Lab 
LOW3, with links to different Master and PhD Programs both inside and outside the UPC and the ETSAV 
undergraduate program. Additionally more than 30 specific events opened up the house to user groups to 
disseminate knowledge to the academic community and beyond. 

Fig.1 shows an educational activities map of the project, resuming the areas of knowledge; disciplinary, 
transdisciplinary and ESD related initiatives, as well as the corresponding formats, methods, and outcomes: 

 
Fig. 1: Educational activities map Living Lab LOW3 

 



 Torsten Masseck / Energy Procedia 115 (2017) 383–389 387
 Torsten Masseck / Energy Procedia 00 (2017) 000–000   5

4.2 Innovative teaching and learning formats: The Live-at-LOW3 Experiment 

One of the most intensive, experience-based, transformative teaching and learning activities has been the ‘Live-
at-LOW3’ experiment, a house occupation experiment in 2012. The ‘Live-at-LOW3’ experiment was carried out 
within the elective course “Living Lab LOW3”, linked to the Master Program Sustainability (IS.UPC) and the 
ETSAV undergraduate program. This teaching and learning concept needed special commitment by the participating 
students. No regular timetable could be guaranteed during the course. The house-occupation experiment has been a 
holistic approach to user-centered research.  

Two selected students evaluated and tested the prototype solar house during 14 days with the participating 
course students preparing, accompanying and evaluating the experiment through the monitoring and evaluation of 
the inhabitant’s lifestyle with a holistic view on housing, consumption, food and mobility. 

This course had a transformative effect on its participants, as in parallel to the generated theoretical knowledge 
about sustainable lifestyles, the related experience-based learning showed to be highly effective.  

The experiment included: 

 Monitoring energy consumption (daily consumption, relation to daily activities, comparison with solar 
production)  

 Assessing water consumption (grey water recycling, dry toilet, water saving measures) 
 Measuring waste production (daily production, type and weight)  
 Assessing indoor comfort (day and night comfort in the house, privacy, air quality, noise) 
 Reporting about food habits (local market, own vegetable garden and even 2 hens at the campus) 
 Calculating the overall ecological footprint of the inhabitants 

Results were published in course reports, the experiment was filmed and published through a documentary as 
well as local newspapers, and television showed interest in the experiment and its outcomes. A holistic learning and 
user-centered research process was conducted in order to evaluate the LOW3 solar house, its concept, its 
technologies, and the resulting comfort for inhabitants. A wider engagement of the academic community, as well as 
society in general, could be achieved through open door days, media interest (national and local TV and radio 
emissions, digital newspapers) and the use of social networks and ICT (YouTube channel for video diary, 
documentary, live webcam). 

The educational experiment was very successful, with students evaluating their participation and related 
learning as very positive. Nevertheless the educational format had to overcome administrative and legal issues, was 
time consuming for all participants, depending on a special personal commitment of all participants, and needed a 
certain amount of economic resources, which is the reason why this format could not be repeated since then.  

 

4.3 Innovation Arenas: The role of Living Lab LOW3 as multi-stakeholder platform 

Living Lab LOW3 has shown to function as a multi-stakeholder platform for the following activities:
 Interchange between the professional and the academic world of architecture, bringing together professional 

associations interested in life-long learning and additional professional qualification programs, and the 
university (students, teachers, research groups), creating synergies between the academic and the professional 
world of architecture and building construction.  



388 Torsten Masseck / Energy Procedia 115 (2017) 383–3896 Torsten Masseck / Energy Procedia 00 (2017) 000–000 

 Link to the productive sector of the building industry, allowing synergies in the knowledge dissemination 
about materials, products or services, within an environment which allows critical reflection, in-situ 
evaluation and as a consequence, a creative approach to innovations.  

 Link to public administration, allowing collaboration between municipalities and academia regarding 
knowledge generation and dissemination, consultancy services, formative activities as well as specific project 
developments. 

 Link to society, offering a place for knowledge dissemination and critical reflection, learning and 
experiencing different aspects related to a more sustainable lifestyle like the resource consumption in 
buildings, the environmental impact of materials, alternative forms of living such as co-housing, or the 
amount and impact of food and water consumption in private households. 

 Innovation Arena for the academic community, serving as a place for meeting, working and innovating for all 
kind of groups of the academic community (and beyond), generating synergies and allow the creation of new 
initiatives e.g. for HE transition projects towards SD, or community outreach projects, organized by student 
teams or even administrative staff. This approach reflects the idea of Living Labs as Transition Arenas e.g. 
for SD transition of HEIs. (Masseck 2016) 

Figure 2 shows the diversity of uses of Living Lab LOW3 for research, teaching and outreach. 

 
Fig. 2: Diversity of uses of Living Lab LOW3 for research, teaching and university outreach 

 
 

Living Lab LOW3 today forms part of a new, emerging educational ecosystem at ETSAV, which links formal 
teaching with informal learning and established educational courses to a whole series of outreach initiatives 
supported by non-formal learning environments at the campus.  

Many fields of knowledge related to sustainability, like energy efficiency, sustainable lifestyle, and in general 
all technological or social innovations related to our living environments, can be explored, researched and developed 
in Architecture Living Labs like Living Lab LOW3 through an open and co-creative approach to innovation together 



 Torsten Masseck / Energy Procedia 115 (2017) 383–389 389
 Torsten Masseck / Energy Procedia 00 (2017) 000–000   7

with users, benefitting from both, its academic setting and its real-life context. 
 

5. Conclusions 
Architecture Living Labs can serve as multi-stakeholder platforms, which connect the academic world with its 

surrounding - the professional world of architecture and building construction, the productive sector, public 
administration, and last but not least, society as a whole. Through its experimental character, Living Labs can offer a 
place to meet, reflect, discuss, learn, explore and develop ideas, concepts and strategies with regard to sustainability 
in a most holistic way, not only limited to architecture but also considering the lifestyles adopted by society which 
include existing consumption and production models, political and economic issues, as well as social processes and 
innovations. 

The diversity of activities related to one single platform like Living Lab LOW3, allowed the creation of many 
synergies among actors, programs and projects. Stakeholders have the opportunity to participate in a community of 
users beyond established academic structures, with transversality from high school students up to senior researchers.  

In this sense Living Labs can be seen as social ecosystems or Transition Arenas within the specific context of 
university and with a strong link to the surrounding socio-economic context, fostering the creation of transversal 
educational communities with an important impact on the transition towards a more sustainable society. 

Acknowledgements 

The Living Lab LOW3 project has received funding from the European Union through the Intelligent Energy 
Europe (IEE) program as participant in the 10ACTION project. Further funding has been received by KIC 
InnoEnergy SE through its Educational Program in 2012, the Municipality of Sant Cugat del Vallès and other 
collaborating companies and institutions. 

References 
[1] Boehnert, J., 2012. The visual communication of ecological literacy: designing, learning and emergent ecological perception. University of 

Brighton, UK. Available at: http://visecology.wordpress.com/\nhttp://ethos.bl.uk/OrderDetails.do?uin=uk.bl.ethos.566147. 
[2] Cortese, A.D., 2003. The Critical Role of Higher Education in Creating a Sustainable Future. Planning for Higher Education, March-May, 

pp.15–22. 
[3] EDUCATE, 2012. Environmental Design in University Curricula and Architectural Training in Europe: Framework for Curriculum 

Development, S. Altomonte (ed.) 
[4] Masseck, T., 2011. LOW3 – a Mediterranean Net Zero Energy Building. In ISES Solar World Congress 2011- Conference Proceedings  
[5] Masseck, T., 2013. Teaching Sustainability through Living Labs in Architecture : The case study of the UPC-LOW3 prototype solar house. 

In EESD 2013 – Engineering Education for Sustainable Development - Conference Proceedings. Available at: http://www-
eesd13.eng.cam.ac.uk/proceedings. 

[6] Masseck, T., 2016. Teaching sustainability: living labs in architecture.
[7] A framework proposal for living lab eco-systems for teaching, research and innovation in the field of sustainable architecture and ESD in 

higher education. Specific case study : Living Lab LOW3 (UPC - BarcelonaTech), Chapter 5.2.2, http://hdl.handle.net/10803/387819 
[8] Rifkin, J., 2011. The third industrial revolution - How lateral power is transforming energy, the economy, and the world, St. Martin’s Press. 
[9] Wals, A.E.J. & Jickling, B., 2002. “Sustainability” in higher education: From doublethink and newspeak to critical thinking and meaningful 

learning. International Journal of Sustainability in Higher Education, 3, pp.221–232. 
[10] Wiek, A., Withycombe, L. & Redman, C.L., 2011. Key competencies in sustainability: a reference framework for academic program 

development. Sustainability Science, 6, pp.203–218. 


