
















































LOW3 - A Mediterranean Net Zero Energy Building


LOW3 – A MEDITERRANEAN NET ZERO ENERGY BUILDING 
Torsten Masseck 

UPC – Barcelona Tech, Sant Cugat del Vallès, Barcelona (Spain) 
 

 

 

ABSTRACT 

The LOW3 (low energy – low impact – low cost) prototype developed by UPC-Barcelona Tech for the Solar 
Decathlon Europe 2010 competition is a energy self sufficient solar house based on three main principles: a 
low energy demand, a low impact on environment and a low cost architecture with a strong focus on the 
economy of means.  

LOW3 explores the thermal capacity of intermediate spaces in contributing to a low energy architecture as 
well as it explores spatial qualities, creating in-between spaces for innovative ways of living. 

The first building shell of LOW3 is based on an industrialized greenhouse structure with a lightweight 
polycarbonate skin, optimized in its bioclimatic performance through openings for cross ventilation, shading 
devices, vegetation, an evaporative cooling system and integrated solar systems. As a microclimatic skin it 
modifies the thermal behaviour of the interior, where a highly insulated, minimum housing unit of 42 m2 is 
located.  

Whereas the interior housing unit is actively conditioned through a radiant heating and cooling system and a 
ventilation system with heat recovery, the intermediate space of LOW3 is designed to create comfort 
conditions exclusively through passive strategies. 

The bioclimatic mechanisms of LOW3 work well, although temporary overheating of its upper intermediate 
spaces cannot be avoided solely through passive strategies. Thermal simulation programs shows difficulties 
in their performance prediction of this spaces mainly due to unpredictable and generally high ventilation 
rates. Monitoring results of LOW3 obtained during the competition in June 2010 in Madrid and since 
January 2011 at Sant Cugat del Vallès (Barcelona) confirm their good thermal performance.   

Through the analysis of its bioclimatic performance, energy efficiency, space quality and cost aspects LOW3 
contributes to the knowledge generation in the field of Mediterranean net zero energy buildings. 

LOW3 actually starts working as a LIVING LAB platform for sustainable architecture at the UPC-Barcelona 
Tech Campus in Sant Cugat del Vallès (Barcelona) with an ongoing research and evaluation agenda.  

 

KEYWORDS 

Solar Architecture, Net Zero Energy Building, Intermediate Spaces, Bioclimatic Architecture, Passive Solar 
Design, Integrated Solar Technologies  



1. INTERMEDIATE SPACES IN DOMESTIC ARCHITECTURE 

Intermediate spaces in housing are an issue as long as architecture exists. The transitional spaces between 
interior and exterior are defined through their special qualities in the field of light, temperature, as well as 
visibility, privacy and security. In terms of energy demand and building comfort, intermediate spaces have a 
long tradition in domestic architecture. One of the first bioclimatic elements was the south orientated porch 
with a roof overhang as shading device like the solar house described by Socrates around 400 B.C.(Figure 1) 
[1]  

With the availability of glass as building material, closed sunspaces like the glazed galleries of the Pescadia 
at La Coruña (Figure 2), dated in the 18th century, found their way into domestic architecture. Later on, 
experimental housing projects like The growing house (1932) by Martin Wagner (Figure 3) or the 
Regensburg housing units (1982) by Thomas Herzog (Figure 4) explored intermediate spaces as energy 
saving means as well as functional elements in the residential building sector. [2]  

From the 1990’s on concepts for low energy architecture like Passive House or Minergie buildings 
questioned the energetic function of sunspaces whereas solar technologies got integrated more and more into 
the building skin. 

    
Fig 1: Socrates Fig 2: Pescaderia Fig 3: Martin Wagner  Fig 4: Thomas Herzog 

 

The LOW3 (low energy – low impact – low cost) prototype, is a energy self-sufficient solar house or net zero 
energy building based on three main principles: a low energy demand, a low impact on environment and a 
low cost architecture with a strong focus on the economy of means.   

As an experiment it explores the conversion of a standard agriculture greenhouse into a microclimatic 
building skin which creates intermediate spaces as well as it integrates active solar technologies. 

 

2. THE LOW3 PROTOTYPE SOLAR HOUSE 

Today’s flexible and changing social constellations in our society, new ways of living and working, as well 
as frequent changes of use led the UPC team to explore a alternative, growing housing concept based on 
modularity in space, structure and installations, as well as the combination of interior highly insulated 
housing modules with a lightweight microclimatic building shell. The resulting intermediate spaces enrich 
the spatial concept of LOW3 and create through their bioclimatic optimization additional useful space and 
volume for the occupants. 

The main 3 concepts of LOW3 are: 

LOW ENERGY: Passive solar architecture and effective bioclimatic design minimises the energy demand of 
the LOW3 house. 

LOW IMPACT: The use of sustainable and reusable materials allows minimizing the environmental impact 
of the project in construction and during use. LOW3 aims to fulfil the important objective of closing the 
water and material life cycles.  

LOW COST: Low-cost and low-tech solutions together with dry construction methods allow a modular and 
quick assembly, converting a green house structure into an innovative solar housing concept.  



The sequence of interior, intermediate and exterior layers creates singular and special living spaces.  

  
Fig.5: General view LOW3 south facade       Fig. 6: Interior view LOW3 

 

The bioclimatic design prolongs the period of time the occupants can enjoy the intermediate spaces of their 
house at zero cost and zero energy, doubling the available space of the dwelling. For the cost of one house, 
they obtain another intermediate dwelling space. 

 

2.1 BIOCLIMATIC CONCEPT OF LOW3 

The microclimatic building skin of LOW3 employs a standard industrialized greenhouse structure, based on 
galvanized steel profiles and polycarbonate panels as skin. The polycarbonate panels used, specially treated 
for resistance against UV radiation, have a thickness of 10 mm with 4 layers (3 chambers) and a U-value of 
2.8 W/m2K with a visual light transmission of 42% and a solar factor of 0.52 for white or “opale” modules, 
and a visual light transmission of 72% and a solar factor of 0.77 for translucent or ”cristal” modules. 
Constructive detailing allows an elevated air-tightness of the building shell in comparison with standard 
agricultural green houses. (Figure 7)  

  
Fig.7: General view LOW3 Fig. 8: Thermo graphic image LOW3 

 

Through basic bioclimatic mechanisms, mainly adapted from the agricultural sector like movable sun 
protections, evaporative cooling, cross ventilation through extensive openings and passive solar use, the 
intermediate space can be thermally regulated and its period of use expanded during the year without any 
kind of additional energetic or economic cost. Figure 8 shows a thermo graphic image of LOW3 indicating 
surface temperatures of the outer building shell. 

The dwelling space expands towards the intermediate space, when its climate conditions meet the comfort 
requirements for a certain activity or uses. Every façade or roof segment contributes through its design and 
function to this objective. 



2.2 INNER LIVING MODULES 

The inner living modules of LOW3 form the minimum housing unit of 42 m2, basic requirement of the 
competition. 3 living modules and 1 wet module, containing bathroom, kitchen and all main installations of 
the prototype, are placed strategically inside the greenhouse, taking advantage from the generated 
microclimate and other services like solar hot water and electricity generation of the microclimatic building 
shell. (Figure 9) 

The living modules consist of a micro laminated wood structure and OSB board cladding and are highly 
insulated through 20-25 cm of wood fibreboards and cellulose with an overall U-value of 0.15 W/m2K and 
an elevated air-tightness.  

 

 

Fig.9: Floor plan of LOW3 Fig. 10: Kitchen module with direct access from 
intermediate spaces 

Small window openings and one main access door at the north side contrast with the complete glazed south 
façade.  

As Figure 10 shows, the kitchen module opens to the intermediate space, allowing evacuating internal 
thermal loads from cooking as well as access to the wet module from outside, turning it into the core of the 
house and a shared infrastructure for different constellations of use.  

 

2.3 SOUTH FAÇADE 

The south façade of the LOW3 prototype is designed to convert from a closed translucent collector façade 
into an open porch of the house. 3 of its 4 façade segments allow being opened through folding doors. 
Automated sunscreens protect the intermediate and interior spaces from excess of direct solar radiation. The 
screens, composed of resistant glass fibre, have a solar transmission value of 7% and a visible light 
transmission value of 8%. (Figure 11) 

The façade segment corresponding to the “wet” module, containing bath and kitchen, consists of a façade 
integrated solar flat plate collector of 7,2 m2 which due to its vertical integration and dimension allows to 
achieve a solar fraction for domestic hot water of 87,3%. (Figure 12) 

The combination between opened or closed façade as well as opened or closed sun screens, allows to convert 
the greenhouse from a open and ventilated shading roof into a closed buffer space which captures solar 
energy. 



  
Fig 11: South façade open with shading device Fig. 12: South façade closed 

 

Direct solar radiation can be captures by the inner living modules in winter, whereas in summer glazed areas 
of the inner modules are consequently shaded through the geometry of the construction. 

 

2.4 SOUTH ORIENTED PITCHED ROOF SEGMENT WITH BACK-VENTILATED 
PHOTOVOLTAIC INSTALLATION 

LOW3 integrates a 4.2 kWp photovoltaic installation with an annual production of 6.000 kWh of electricity 
to provide energy self-sufficiency for the house.  In accordance to the principles “LOW cost” and “LOW 
impact” standard polycrystalline PV technology has been used.  

The PV modules are integrated into the roof structure using a galvanized steel framework creating a double 
skin which allows free circulation of air through a gap of 20 cm between inner polycarbonate roof cladding 
and PV array. 

The photovoltaic installation is oriented south with an inclination of 19º, close to the optimum. The PV array 
shades the south oriented roof surface and avoids overheating of the intermediate space below. By having a 
high degree of back ventilation through a natural stack effect, heat is carried away, allowing modules to work 
nearer to their optimum temperature and efficiency.  

  
Fig.13: Thermo graphic image solar installations Fig. 14: Thermo graphic image roof construction 

 

Figure 13 shows the elevated temperature of the PV array (M1=46.5ºC) whereas figure 14 shows a 
significantly lower inside surface temperature of the south roof of (M1=37.7 ºC).  

PV modules are organized in strings of 6, thus allowing an easy modular preassembly on the ground and an 
efficient roof installation with electrical connection points in the lower part of the roof accessible from the 
façade. Back ventilation evacuates higher thermal loads caused by the PV array. 



2.5 NORTH ORIENTED ROOF SEGMENT WITH OPENING MECHANISM FOR CROSS 
VENTILATION 

The north part of the roof consists of a curved polycarbonate surface on metal substructure, with a standard 
green house opening mechanism, based on one central single phase motor and a horizontal mechanical axe 
which allows very slow lifting and closing of the whole roof segment. A movable outer shading device 
would be the most effective strategy to prevent overheating. Inside, easy accessible and movable solar 
protection has been planned. In combination with an opened roof and a cross ventilation, heat evacuation has 
been considered to be sufficient, as well as easy maintenance is assured. Due to technical reasons this 
shading devices have not been installed during the competition week in Madrid, leading to higher thermal 
loads through incident solar radiation. Figure 14 shows the thermal performance in general and the difference 
of inner surface temperatures between the two roof segments. 

 

2.6 NORTH FAÇADE 

The north façade of LOW3 consists of fix polycarbonate cladding only interrupted by small window 
openings and a door. A 20 cm air gap between inner living modules and outer building shell allow all main 
installations between modules to be placed, easy accessible from the outside. No shading device is foreseen, 
thermal loads are evacuated through the roof opening above. 

 

2.7 EAST AND WEST FACADES 

East and west façade consist of fixed white polycarbonate cladding without openings. Outer solar protection, 
through a back-ventilated textile sunscreen have been foreseen to mitigate the high quantity of undesired 
solar radiation at morning and evening hours in summertime, but due to technical reasons could not be 
mounted during the competition week in Madrid.  

 

2.8 ACTIVE MECHANISMS FOR CLIMATE CONTROL 

Besides the mentioned roof and facade openings, movable and fixed sunscreens, or bioclimatic optimization 
of the prototype, a row of active mechanisms contributes to the viability of the concept. Temperature Sensors 
at different spaces of the prototype, sensors for relative humidity, as well as a meteorological station, send 
their data to a building management system, which controls automatically shading devices as well as the roof 
opening or adiabatic cooling devices, to optimize the microclimatic building shell and its contribution to the 
overall energy performance and comfort of the prototype. (Figures 15 and 16) 

  
Fig.15: Building Control system and sensors Fig. 16: Microclimatic building skin with opened roof 

At the intermediate space an evaporative cooling system has been installed especially for the competition 
week in Madrid, due to the effectiveness of adiabatic cooling at the dry summer climate there. 



3. THERMAL DYNAMIC BUILIDNG SIMULATION OF LOW3 

For the thermal dynamic simulation of the prototype in the pre-competition stage the program Bioclim with 
the simulation motor Comfi has been used to analyze and optimize the thermal performance especially in the 
field of its bioclimatic mechanisms. At the post-competition stage actually DesignBuilder and EnergyPlus 
are used for a more exact evaluation of the prototype and a comparison between simulated and real building 
performance. 

 

3.1 BOUNDARY CONDITIONS, LIMITATIONS OF THE PROGRAMMES 

Due to the special concept of intermediate spaces of LOW3 and certain limitations of the Bioclim program, it 
was not possible to simulate winter and summer conditions within one unique building model, as the exterior 
skin transforms from a closed translucent facade in winter into a almost dematerialized shadow spending 
roof with wide openings at the south façade as well as at the roof in summer. As a result, the summer 
simulation was realized considering the outer building shell almost totally inexistent, a boundary condition 
that does not correspond exactly to the prototype.  

 

3.2 RESULTS OF BUILDING SIMULATION 

Building simulation showed that through an optimization of bioclimatic features (Figure 17) like shading 
devices, cross ventilation and evaporative cooling, intermediate spaces could be prevented from overheating 
in summer, maintaining inside air temperature almost at the level of outside air temperature. Together with 
the protection of the interior living modules from direct solar radiation, this leads to a calculated annual 
overall cooling demand of around 70 kWh/m2/y (Bioclim) and 30 kWh/m2/y (EnergyPlus), considering 22-
25ºC air temperature as comfort condition.  

A maximum cooling power of 2.500 W resulted to be necessary to maintain comfort conditions inside the 
living modules during summer. 

 
Fig.17: Bioclimatic features of LOW3 

 

For the winter case, intermediate spaces work as a greenhouse with a high absorption of solar radiation 
mainly through the south facade and a corresponding rise of the air temperature up to 35-40 ºC during sunny 
winter days. Due to the relatively good air tightness and U-value of 2.8 W/m2K of the polycarbonate 
building skin, roof or south façade must be opened to prevent overheating.  

During the day intermediate spaces can be used at comfort conditions, inner living modules can be opened or 
generated hot air can be used for the mechanical ventilation system. At night intermediate spaces work as 
buffer space, reducing the heat losses of the interior living modules, maintaining their temperature slightly 
above outside temperature. 



Both programs calculated an annual overall heating demand of 15 kWh/m2/y, with a maximum heating 
power of 2.000 W necessary to maintain comfort conditions inside the living modules in winter. 

 

3.3 CRITICAL DEBATE OF RESULTS 

Results of the Bioclim simulation helped to compare and define basic strategies of bioclimatic mechanisms 
within the LOW3 project at an early design stage. Nevertheless due to the use of complex intermediate 
spaces, difficult to be simulated correctly especially for the summer case with high cross ventilation rates, 
more sophisticated simulation tools like EnergyPlus led to more detailed and adjusted results.   

In a third stage simulation results will be analyzed critically and compared to field measurements of LOW3 
over a period of 2 years at Barcelona Tech. Only this feedback through performance evaluation under real 
conditions and through a longer period will allow to describe the capacity of building simulation tools like 
Bioclim or EnergyPlus in the performance prediction of complex intermediate spaces. 

 

 

4. BUILDING PERFORMANCE IN MADRID – JUNE 2010 

During the competition week from 17th to 25th of June 2010, different monitoring activities were carried out 
at the LOW3 prototype. The SDE organization realized measurements of the interior air temperature at two 
different zones of the building, the main living room and the subsidiary area or bedroom. The LOW3 team 
installed data loggers type TESTO 175-T2 and TESTO 175-H2 in the inside of the living area as well as in 
the intermediate spaces of LOW3 to monitor the thermal behaviour of the building during the competition. 
Ambient air temperature of the Vila Solar was given by the organization.  

 

4.1 BOUNDARY CONDITIONS 

The LOW3 prototype was located at the north end of the Vila Solar (lot Nº2) near the “Kings Bridge” with a 
direct south orientation and without any significant shading from the surrounding. Due to the deadlines of the 
competition, fixed exterior sunscreens at the east and west façade of the prototype as well as interior 
sunscreens under the northern roof segment could not be mounted. This resulted in a considerably higher 
thermal impact of incident solar radiation during the day, getting the thermal comfort conditions to its limits.  

The roof opening of the prototype was limited due to the competition regulations regarding the maximum 
height of the building, resulting in a limitation of the cross ventilation.  

Another important aspect were the frequent public visits to the house, resulting in an non optimized use of 
shading devices, and additional inner heat loads. Also the evaporative cooling system described did not work 
constantly due to technical problems of the pump, reducing its contribution to a moderate micro climate. 

 

4.2 RESULTS OF MEASUREMENTS 

Figure 18 shows the air temperature performance of the lower intermediate space (main terrace) and upper 
intermediate space (upper floor) in comparison to the outside air temperature and interior air temperature 
inside the living modules during the competition week in Madrid. 

Analysing the critical moments of midday and afternoon hours, for the upper intermediate space (upper 
floor) a 2-3 ºC higher air temperature than the exterior air temperature can be stated, due to the mentioned 
boundary conditions mentioned in 4.1.  



On the other side the lower intermediate space (shaded terraces) benefits naturally more from the stack effect 
and cross ventilation, as well as from the evaporative cooling mechanism, resulting in a of 2-3 ºC lower air 
temperature in comparison to the exterior temperature during the competition week. 

 

 
Fig.18: Measurements competition week in Madrid, June 2010 

 

The inside temperature shows strong variations due to the circumstance that the living modules were totally 
opened during large periods of the day for public visits. 

  

4.3 CRITICAL DEBATE OF RESULTS 

The measurements carried out in Madrid show a slightly higher air temperature in the intermediate spaces of 
LOW3 than the thermal dynamic simulation predicted. This seems to be mainly caused by the not optimized 
realization of the prototype as well due to a not optimized utilization and performance of the bioclimatic 
mechanisms as described in 4.1. A significant improvement can be expected, once all designed bioclimatic 
features of LOW3 are correctly installed and managed by the building management system.     

 

 

5. SUBJECTIVE PERCEPTION OF THE INTERMEDIATE SPACES IN MADRID 

Besides thermal dynamic simulation and the monitoring of the prototype during the competition week, a 
more subjective and personal evaluation of the quality of the created intermediate spaces is important to 
complete this first evaluation. 

 

5.1 SPACE QUALITY  

The intermediate spaces of LOW3 have been explored by the international jury of the architecture contest of 
SOLAR DECATHLON EUROPE, Glenn Murcutt, Louisa Hutton and Patxi Mangado, which stated in their 
final verdict that these spaces in LOW3 are useful as well as poetic, and traditionally a very important feature 



in the transition between interior and exterior in Mediterranean architecture. The flexibility for different uses 
of these spaces, created through the use of a low-budget, off-the-shelf greenhouse where another reason for 
the jury to give a first prize in this category to LOW3.  

Figure 20 shows the transition between interior, intermediate and exterior spaces at the ground floor of 
LOW3.At the same time, the availability of a second floor showed to be useful as space for storage, 
horticulture, relax or especially for social events, offering another “free” 45 m2 of very special quality. 
(Figure 21) 

 

  
Fig.20: Lower floor space LOW3   Fig. 21: Upper floor space LOW3 

 

5.2 COMFORT CONDITIONS  

The terraces of LOW3 as well as the upper floor space showed to be attractive areas during the competition 
week in Madrid. The entrance of visitors from the outer terrace into the covered and protected greenhouse 
space at the south façade was generally perceived as a significant improvement in terms of thermal comfort. 
The upper floor space was perceived as a fresh, ventilated area with its very special character between inside 
and outside, making higher air temperature acceptable. Only during the 3 hot and sunny days at the end of 
the competition week, and especially between 14.00 and 20.00 hours, the thermal conditions were perceived 
as “at the limit” or uncomfortable, with temperatures temporarily above 33ºC.   

 

5.3. EVAPORATIVE COOLING AND CROSS VENTILATION STRATEGY  

The evaporative cooling system was installed on a stop and go basis, as its continuous function would have 
resulted in an elevated consumption of fresh water. The subjective perception could be described as a 
temperature drop of 3 to 5 degrees when water was dissipated nearby. In combination with shading devices 
as the south façade and a constant cross ventilation of the building, the greenhouse terrace spaces offered 
good comfort conditions during the whole competition week.   

 

6. NET ZERO ENERGY BALANCE 

LOW3 can be considered as a Net Zero Energy Building as the amount of energy generated through 
renewable energy sources on-site, in this case through solar thermal and solar photovoltaic systems, is equal 
to the amount of energy the building needs throughout the year as residential unit for 2 to 3 persons. With a 
PV electricity production of 6.000 kWh/y and a solar thermal production of 2.850 kWh/y this balance is 
made for the average calculated energy demand of the unit and does not include the embodied energy of 
materials or the energy needed for construction. 

 



7. GLOBAL RESULTS 

The intermediate spaces of LOW3 show to be useful, economic and energetically efficient. Nevertheless 
their bioclimatic performance has to be designed carefully to prevent overheating and reduce undesired heat 
loads on the building, although their definition as temporary spaces includes the acceptance of temporary 
discomfort.  

The monitoring results of the competition week are giving a first impression of the performance of LOW3, 
but further evaluation is undergoing to quantify the thermal contribution of its intermediate spaces to the 
overall energy performance of the prototype. 

Industrialized steel construction and low cost technology from the agriculture greenhouse industry offer an 
economic way of creating intermediate spaces for new constructions as well as for refurbishment projects.  

 

8. CONCLUSIONS 

The exploration of alternative housing programs mainly based on shared facilities, co-housing, or adaptive 
housing typologies gives a special meaning to intermediate spaces as community, connection and temporary 
areas in housing. 

Intermediate spaces within innovative housing concepts like LOW3 are therefore relevant to be explored 
regarding their economic characteristics, their energetic performance and their spatial qualities, following a 
large tradition in domestic architecture. 

The potential activation of intermediate spaces through a combination with geothermal systems or heat 
recovery and air preheating for interior spaces are further interesting aspects to be explored in the field of 
energy efficiency on the way towards net zero energy buildings in Mediterranean climates. 

LOW3 will be monitored and evaluated during 2011 and 2012 as Living Lab for energy efficiency and 
sustainable architecture at the ETSAV School of Architecture at its Campus Sant Cugat and will hopefully 
contribute to this important field of research. 

 

  

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

The LOW3 project has been possible due to the collaboration of more than 25 companies, 15 academic and 
professional consultants as well as 50 students involved during almost 2 years in the design, development 
and construction of LOW3. Special acknowledgements for their contribution to the development of the 
intermediate space concept of LOW3 must be given to PAUS (Coque Claret, Dani Calatayud) and the 
companies AISLUX, ININSA, BEC, KLEIN, Svensson, Arqintegral and Humiambiente, which contributed 
to their realization. The thermo graphic images have been possible due to the collaboration of Prof. Nacenta 
and TESTO. BIOCLIM contributed to the thermal dynamic simulation of LOW3 through consultancy and 
advice, coordinated by Aurora Suñol, who realized the thermal dynamic simulation within the LOW3 team. 
During the evaluation of LOW3 as Living Lab at the Sant Cugat campus and the simulation with EnergyPlus 
collaborated Antoni Fonseca, and Alfonso Godoy, as well as Esther Graells, Inmaculada Rodriguez and 
Anna M. Lacasta (EPSEB). 

 

REFERENCES 

[1] Humm, O. ,1998, Niedrig Energie Häuser, ed. Ökobuch, Freiburg 

[2] Haller A., Humm O., Voss K.,, 2000, Renovieren mit der Sonne, ed. Ökobuch, Freiburg 


