
















































U-S1-R-J-Conocer el lugar_baixa.pdf


Connaître le lieu avant d’intervenir

Conocer el lugar antes de intervenir

Knowledge prior to intervention

36

The role of resources management on 

shaping the landscape patterns:  the 

water in the Royal Estates of Lisbon 

region

Teresa Marat-Mendes1  and Albert Cuchi2

Teresa Marat-Mendes is a Professor of Architecture and Urban Design 

at ISCTE, Lisbon- Portugal. Major research interest is in the area of sus-

tainable development and rehabilitation of traditional landscapes and 

urban areas. Albert Cuchi is a Senior Profesor  in Technological Design 

at the Department of Architectural Technology, School of Architecture 

of the Valès, Barcelona.

Address:  
1 Secção Autónoma de Arquitectura e Urbanismo. Instituto Superior de 

Ciências do Trabalho e da Empresa (ISCTE), Av.a das Forças Armadas 

1649-026 Lisboa, Portugal 
2 Departament de Construccions Arquitectòniques I de la Universitat 

Politècnica de Catalunya (UPC), ETS Arquitectura del Vallès. c/. Pere 

Serra, 1-15

08173 Sant Cugat del Vallès, Spain

E-mail address: 

teresa.marat-mendes@iscte.pt and alberto.cuchi@upc.edu

Introducción

Landscape is always the result of the resources management model 

from the society that occupies it. The analysis of the traditional 

landscape, as source of resources and expression of the technical 

system that produces them, has a determinant interest both to suitably 

take part on that patrimony, and to the acknowledge of the necessary 

lessons to define a sustainable future. 

On the traditional systems, the resources use to be obtaining through 

the managements of the biosphere in order to transform the solar 

radiation - the power plant of the system - into materials organized 

properly for social use (Tello, 1999). That management forces to a 

transformation of the biosphere by means of the human work that 

entails, in most of the cases, transformations on the territory form in 

order to make that transformation even more efficient.

This paper proposes, through the presentation of a paradigmatic 

case study of a model of territory occupation that moves forward to 

an extensive scale, a model that allows to approach the study of the 

landscape - of the form of the territory - from the resources management 

point of view. Though, it is possible to identify the different scales to be 

considered and their organization, in order to understand the landscape 

as a formal expression of that management. 

Like in other cases, the analysis of the water management as resource 

is enormously useful for the proposed analysis (Laureano, 1995), for the 

reason that the water represents the most substantial material flow 

for whoever manage with traditional systems, for being always a very 

reduce and limited element for the agricultural production capacity, 

because its complete distribution through the territory is necessary, and 

because its mobility depends - when in absence of the modern power 

sources - of the existing topography and its possible transformation. 

The resource capture, its delivery right to the place of the agricultural 

production, moreover its storage and distribution do not only determine 

the majority of the technical elements of the system – that usually are 

recognized as the elements that conform the patrimony and treaties 

independently - but also their functional articulation, its disposition 

throughout the territory and, mainly, the interpretation - and often the 

transformation - of the topography to receive them. 

The Royal Estate of Caxias

 The Royal Estate of Caxias is situated in the surroundings of Lisbon, just 

at the north seaside of Tagus River, at its mouth; however its roots are 

too difficult to trace. Although the works of the Royal Palace, ordered 

by D. Francisco, brother of King John V, were initiated in 1739 and 

concluded in 1845, there are traces of former occupations in the area 

where the Estate is situated nowadays, such as a “Cartuxa”, as described 
by the Priest António de Carvalho in 1712 (Gonçalves, 2003). Despite 

the unclear past, it is possible to verify that the Royal Estate of Caxias 

development took place throughout different phases, though the 

successive and continuous annexations of neighbourhood walled 

properties situated in its environs, the “casais”.
The garden is the most distinguished element of the Estate. Broad and 

rectilinear avenues, fountains and different elements of the surrounding 

countryside do all contribute to take part of the garden environment 

that together with its monumental Cascade, that occupies the totality 

of the east wall of the garden, obfuscates the simplicity of the palace 

architecture. 

During its productive times, the Estate, with benefit of microclimate 

enrichment, due to its proximity to the river and to a water stream, used 

to supply the Royal Palace of Queluz with fresh fruit, mainly oranges. 

Together with the orchard a vineyard completed the agricultural 

production of the Estate. Indeed, the history of the Estate of Caxias can 

not be isolated from the history of Royal Palace of Queluz. Both Palaces, 

with their respective farms, were integrated in the vast patrimony of the 

Infantado House that administrated together both Queluz and Caxias 

Estates (Miranda, 2002). While Queluz was chose as the permanent 

Royal Residence, Caxias was preferred for short stays, being mainly 

used during spring and summer times for rest and therapeutically 

sea baths proposes. Nevertheless, both uses, the productive and the 

leisure, needed to be secured with water supply and an accurate water 

management in order to satisfy the Estates needs.

As one can testify from the legend of the 1844 plan of the Royal 

Estate of Caxias this enumerates several water elements, such as 

the great cascade, the aqueduct the well and a well house. Through 

theses elements one can easily identify how the water do arrives into 

the Estate, nevertheless it is not so easy to identify how the water 

distribution works within the Estate, even if it is possible to recognise the 

water deposits system that regulates it. From this perspective one can 

assume that great consideration was being given to the territory scale.

The Territory Scale

From the plan “Planta das Minas e Encanamentos d’agua do Almoxaridado 
de Caxias”, from 1901, one can identify different water proveniences to 
the Royal Estate of Caxias. Whereas the Royal Estate has its own borders, 



Connaître le lieu avant d’intervenir

Conocer el lugar antes de intervenir

Knowledge prior to intervention

37

delineated by its high walls, it depends from resources, such as water 

that emanates from a wider scale rather that the local one. In fact, the 

water that supplies the Royal Estate of Caxias arrives not only from two 

water quarries located at the mediations of the Royal Estate east side 

limits, but also from a water quarry located at Queijas, at the Carnaxide 

Mountain, a territory further north to Caxias. 

The emphasis attributed to the above water supply system reveals a 

Sustainable Agenda that should be recovered. This Agenda embraces 

recognition to land use planning with great respect for its biophysical 

environment - such as climate, soil, vegetation – in order to enhance 

an appropriate exploitation of its natural resources. This strategy should 

be regarded at a much superior scale rather than the one of the water 

fountains and the cascade situated at the Royal State of Caxias.

During XVIII century, several Lisbon surrounding areas assisted to great 

landscape transformation, with the endeavour of numerous farms and 

recreation gardens – Estates – of vast dimensions from which the Royal 

Estate of Caxias is one of these examples. This landscape order, through 

the planning of agro productions and its adaptability to the land use, 

as one can testify in the Royal Estate of Caxias seems to testify a very 

secure agronomic knowledge.

The image of Lisbon’s environments shows a topographic map of the 

North Coast of Tagus  river mouth, in which the geographic structure 

of that coast can be regarded as a plane surface undulated by water 

streams that crosses it from north to south and that finally drains 

the continuous mountains situated northwards between Sintra and 

Montejunto mountains. Such strategic situation of the mountainous 

area allows taking hold of the humidity of the marine air and therefore 

granting the clouds formation that after rain allows the feed of the 

water streams and the increment of the ground water levels. 

Quarries, water wells, aqueducts, deposits and other technical 

elements punctuate this territory allowing both water extraction and 

the creation of a network of Estates (more than one hundred) that feed 

all an irrigated agricultural system – vines, fruit trees and orchards- that 

complements the cereal use that forms the base of the agrarian system 

(Da Silva, 1993) 

That morphologic structure exploration with the technical systems 

not only determined the Estates site implantation- and with them 

the organization of Lisbon’s landscape - that in the mid XVIII century 

allowed to establish, by means of a remarkable change of scale, one 

infrastructure that transported water for urban purpose uses to the 

capital with the erection of the “Águas Livres” Aqueduct, gathering at 

the same time good part of the water of the city nearest western river 

basins. 

 

Conclusions

The present value of the patrimony consists in the reference that today 

the traditional knowledge conveys as a model to develop a sustainable 

technical system, when facing the un-sustainability that our industrial 

system model has already proved. Understand the most adequate 

manner to approach such knowledge is determinant to extract the 

lessons that we must retain and learn. 

The presented case study calls attention to an essential question 

such as the scale that the patrimony should be analysed, as to the 

proposition of a methodological approach to the study of the territory 

and the traditional landscape as an expression of a sustainable model 

of obtaining of the resources. 

It is also argued that there is no sense in the current perception of the 

patrimony that approaches the technical elements independently, 

constructions, quarries, canals, deposits, etc. - like a set of operative 

techniques - of construction, agriculture, etc. - or of material resources 

has sense not even. The object of the study and of the rehabilitation - 

and reutilisation - of the patrimony should not be each element treated 

as in an individual manner. 

The patrimony must be understood and rehabilitated as an articulated 

set of techniques, and its application throughout the territory should 

show us the scale to which we must realize the analysis of such 

articulation. And, reading in the opposite direction, the territorial scale 

is the most suitable scale to intervene on the patrimony in order to 

raise a sustainable technical system. 

As confirmed with the case study, moreover as the patrimony is 

somewhat evolutionary (Laureano, 2001), pressed by innovation and 

re-interpretations of its elements and readjustments of scale in order 

to face new needs, the territorial analysis scale should also be dynamic, 

diachronic. That dynamism grants us, in exchange with our effort to 

understand it, the capacity of the traditional knowledge to be used in 

the definition of our sustainable future. 

REFERENCES 

DA SILVA, A (1993) Propriedade, família e trabalho no ‘hinterland’ de Lisboa, Ediçóes Cosmos, 
Lisboa.

DIAS, R (2000) Quintas de Recerio e Prazer no século XVIII. Modelação e Apropriação da Paisagem 
em Oeiras, in Actas dos Encontros de História Local do Concelho de Oeiras, III e IV, Câmara 
Municipal de Oeiras, ISBN 972-8508-44-1.

GONÇALVES, R. O. (2003) Caxias. Das origens à freguesia, Câmara Municipal de Oeiras, 
Oeiras.

LAUREANO, P (1995) La piramide rovesciata. Bollati Boringheri. Torino.

LAUREANO, P (2001) Atlante d’acqua. Bollati Boringheri. Torino.

MIRANDA, J (2002) Paço Real de Caxias (II). Uma residência de praia, Jornal da Região. Recantos 
de Oeiras, 14th November 2002, Oeiras, p.5.

TELLO, E (1999) La formación histórica de los paisajes agrarios mediterráneos: una aproximación 
evolutiva. Historia Agraria, núm. 19 pp, 195-212. 



Connaître le lieu avant d’intervenir

Conocer el lugar antes de intervenir

Knowledge prior to intervention

38

The cascade of the Royal estate of Caxias and its gardens

Carta Corográfica dos Arredores de Lisboa, Guerin de Lamotte, 1821, IGP

Planta da Real Quinta de Caxias, José António Abreu 1844, IGP

Planta das minas e encanamentos d’agua do Almoxarifado de Caxias, 1901, BNL


