




























































1 

 

 

62. Teaching Sustainability through Living Labs in Architecture:   

The case study of the UPC-LOW3 prototype solar house 
T. Masseck 

ETSAV School of Architecture, Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya, UPC-Barcelona Tech 

torsten.masseck@upc.edu 

 

Abstract 

Sustainability is currently one of the most important issues to be integrated at all levels of teaching 
from kindergarten through to university up to lifelong learning activities of society as a whole. 
Specific disciplinary knowledge should be taught by adopting a holistic method, with a 
transdisciplinary approach towards the environmental, economic and social aspects of sustainability. 
The term “Sustainability Science” describes the corresponding concepts and methodologies. Within 
the career of Architecture and Architecture-related disciplines, new teaching formats are needed for 
this holistic approach for knowledge generation and transmission. Living Labs in architecture can be 
tools towards achieving a holistic approach in teaching sustainability, using real built environments for 
user-centred research and collaborative learning in a university campus. LOW3 is the 2010 Solar 
Decathlon Europe solar house of UPC Barcelona Tech that since 2011 serves as Living Lab at the 
ETSAV campus at Sant Cugat del Vallés (Barcelona). As a Net Zero Energy Building (NZEB), Living 
Lab LOW3 allows active teaching, research and innovation activities in the field of sustainable 
architecture and lifestyle. The present article describes the different stages of implementation of 
Living Lab LOW3 at the campus, a first evaluation of teaching and applied research activities through 
questionnaires and interviews with the participants and a critical analysis of the overall project concept. 
It shows that after 2 years of step-by-step implementation, Living Lab LOW3 has greatly contributed 
to a holistic-based sustainability education at the ETSAV School of Architecture. The knowledge 
generated was broadly disseminated and important generic competences were fostered through the 
project. Living Lab LOW3 is an ongoing project, which aims to innovate in sustainability education. 
Its outcomes and lessons learned can serve as an example for similar activities at other universities. 

Key words: Solar Architecture, Teaching, Sustainability, Living Labs, Net Zero Energy Buildings, 
Collaborative Learning Environments, User-centred Research and Innovation 

1 Introduction 
Our society nowadays needs a redefinition of its productive model that integrates bottom-up 
environmental, economical and social aspects of sustainability. Radical changes towards Net Zero 
Energy Buildings and consideration for much more energy efficient lifestyles are urgently required. 
Holistic thinking professionals with well-developed generic competences are needed to solve complex 
problems.  

By employing a holistic view to our complex environmental, economical and societal systems and 
their corresponding interrelations, Sustainability Science – a new holistic and scientific model – could 
be the right approach to address the problems of today’s society. Sustainability Science focuses on the 

mailto:torsten.masseck@upc.edu


Engineering Education for Sustainable Development, Cambridge, UK. September 22 – 25, 2013 2 

 

 

 

complex and dynamic interactions between society and nature and is based on transdisciplinarity, 
integrated analysis and the development of knowledge for action (Komiyama et al. 2011).  

In order to transfer this new scientific approach to the academic world, multi-stakeholder 
collaborations between university, society and companies must be intensified thereby fostering 
synergies in the fields of learning, research and innovation in the field of sustainability. 

1.1 State of the art – Living Labs for Architecture and Lifestyle 

Existing laboratories for building construction, building physics or technological research and 
development traditionally focus on specific areas of knowledge and less on a holistic multidisciplinary 
approach. They therefore have limited capacity to generate relevant output in fields of research where 
user interaction is an important factor. For example, regarding the user acceptance of technology, user-
technology interaction or the field of a holistic impact analysis of technological innovations on life-
style and society. The development of “Living Labs” has been a step forward in bridging this gap. 

Living Labs or living laboratories are defined as real world environments which focus on user-centred 
research and user co-creation with the aim of accelerating innovation processes (Almirall & Wareham, 
2008). In the late 1990’s the term Living Lab was first used for innovation activities related to ICT, 
such as mobile appliances for improving elderly healthcare or improvements in proceedings and work 
flows in city administrations. Using real world environments for implementation, evaluation and 
improvement cycles they then allowed the development of the first solutions within an iterative 
process towards a final product, application or service (Almirall & Wareham, 2008). 

With regard to the Living Lab approach, several Living Lab networks and platforms have been 
founded since approximately the year 2000. 

One of the fastest growing networks of Living Labs is the ENoLL (European Network of Living Labs). 
It was founded in 2006 and today (May 2013) has more than 450 Living Lab initiatives linked to it. 
EnOLL describes the need for Living Labs with the necessity of fastening the market availability of 
innovations through user-centred research and user co-creation (Open Living Labs. The First Step 
Towards a New Innovation System, 2013). These concepts are based on the idea that, through 
immediate user feedback in real world environments, researchers and developers in collaboration with 
users are able to create and improve innovations and assure market viability within very short periods. 
This is an efficient alternative to traditional research and innovation processes. Only a small part of the 
ENoLL initiatives are focused on sustainable architecture and lifestyle, with a strong emphasis on 
social research and a culture of change. 

In the last years, specific research and innovation infrastructures and projects have been created that 
focus on Net Zero Energy Buildings (NZEB) and Sustainable Lifestyle. One is the Norwegian 
Research Centre on Zero Emission Buildings at NTNU (Trondheim, Norway). It focuses not only on 
zero emission technologies but also on user behaviour and lifestyle (ZEB - the Research Centre of 
Zero Emission Buildings, 2013). 

Another important initiative is the LIVING LAB project, a funded European FP7 project for Living 
Labs, directed by the Wupperthal Institute which had the idea of creating a network of standardized 
living labs in different climatic and social-economic environments in Europe, thereby allowing the 
comparison of results through similar physical settings (Liedtke et al, 2012). 

Since 2002, the international Solar Decathlon competition promotes the development of energy self-
sufficient solar houses by universities; fostering during the latest competitions, especially in Europe, a 
holistic view on sustainable architecture, including the aspects of urban density, shared facilities and 



Engineering Education for Sustainable Development, Cambridge, UK. September 22 – 25, 2013 3 

 

 

 

infrastructure as well as energetic renovation processes. More than 120 prototypes have been 
developed and built during the last decade (Solar Decathlon 2010: UPC, 2010). 

The efficiency of the Living Lab approach, together with the transdisciplinary and holistic concept of 
the Solar Decathlon solar houses, invite one to analyze the potential of these prototypes being 
converted into living laboratories in the field of sustainable architecture and lifestyle.  

The present article describes the case study of a widened concept for a Living Lab in architecture: 
linking innovation to collaborative learning and co-creation activities, fostering synergies between the 
knowledge triangle of teaching, research and innovation in the field of sustainable housing and 
lifestyle. 

1.2 Background 

The ETSAV School of Architecture of UPC-Barcelona Tech regularly contributes to important 
innovations in teaching strategies towards participating models. They, in turn, foster the generic 
competences of students and look for interaction with the local socio-economic environment of the 
school. 

Since 2008, one of the projects with a mayor impact has been participation in the Solar Decathlon 
Europe competition, starting with the 2010 prototype solar house LOW3. Today LOW3 is a Living 
Lab at the campus and serves as a place for implementing Living Lab strategies and activities, 
integrating all three fields of teaching, research, and innovation. 

The main hypothesis of the Living Lab LOW3 project is that the establishment of Living Labs in 
architecture as collaborative learning environments, innovation arenas, and places of social 
interchange, learning and progress can be a mayor contribution to a holistic and effective education in 
sustainability at schools of architecture and beyond. 

1.3 Research Questions 

Considering Living Labs based on prototype buildings as new tools or infrastructures within academia, 
with a special focus on architecture and architecture-related disciplines, the main questions for this 
ongoing research work are the following: 

Is the use of Living Labs in architecture useful and efficient for education in sustainability and a 
holistic knowledge about architecture, technology and lifestyle?  

Which activities can be efficiently linked to a Living Lab, and which generic and specific competences 
can be better attended to through the Living Lab approach compared to traditional teaching formats?  

How can a teaching and research infrastructure like a Living Lab be created, financed, managed and 
maintained within the administrative and academic context of a university? 

What are the lessons learned and future recommendations of the Living Lab LOW3 project at UPC – 
Barcelona Tech? 

2 Methodology  

2.1 Type of research 

The methodology applied for analysing the Living Lab approach of the LOW3 project is based on 
participatory action research with a regular analysis of activities, evolution, and outcomes. This way, 



Engineering Education for Sustainable Development, Cambridge, UK. September 22 – 25, 2013 4 

 

 

 

we can evaluate the success of all related initiatives and their contribution to the holistic overall Living 
Lab concept. 

The documentation of activities, enquiries and interviews of participants and stakeholders, as well as 
the development of Living Lab indicators, are further tools for the analysis of progress and outcomes. 

A comparison with similar projects - such as the HOME+ prototype of Hochschule für Technik (HfT) 
Stuttgart, or the 2007 and 2009 SD solar houses of Universität Darmstadt as well as other similar 
Living Lab projects all over the world - will allow a critical discussion of the achieved results. 

2.2 Object of research –living lab activities 

The main focus of the present research work is the analysis of the development, implementation and 
activation of the Living Lab LOW3 project since the end of the SDE 2010 competition. Three official 
Living Lab LOW3 courses and several complementary activities have been completed since then. 
Figure 1 shows the development over time of Living Lab LOW3 project and its related activities. 

 
Figure 1: Development over time of the Living Lab concept of Living Lab LOW3  

 

Main activities since 2011: 

• Living Lab LOW3 course 2011: re-construction, installation works, analysis, first measurements 
of the LOW3 prototype solar house at the campus 

• Living Lab LOW3 course 2011/12: installation works, bioclimatic measurements, holistic 
evaluation, knowledge dissemination 

• Living Lab course 2012: LIVE AT LOW3 experiment – activity based on user-centred research: 
house occupation with 2 students during 2 weeks and holistic evaluation of their lifestyle and 
impact through the participating student team 

• Related final career projects, Master and PhD thesis work: Natural ventilation in buildings (2011), 
The house management system of LOW3 (2012), Personal Learning Environments (2012), Grey 
water recycling materials (2012) and Living Labs in Architecture (2012) 

• 1st co-creation and innovation seminar: activities platform for new student projects, initiatives and 
participatory research activities (2013) 

• Collaboration in industrial research project on concentrated solar power systems and energy 
storage in buildings (2013) 

• Several other activities related to teaching, projects and dissemination with more than 1200 
participants in more than 2 years 



Engineering Education for Sustainable Development, Cambridge, UK. September 22 – 25, 2013 5 

 

 

 

 

Figure 2 shows the diverse activities linked to the Living Lab LOW3 project, from formal teaching 
and applied research activities, to social events, knowledge dissemination and less formal co-learning 
activities. 

 
Figure 2: Living Lab LOW: Teaching, research and Innovation activities regarding sustainable 

architecture and lifestyle 

 

Each activity has been documented. An individual analysis and evaluation has been carried out in 
order to evaluate the success of each initiative, analyse the lessons learned, and gather information 
about possible improvements. 

2.3 Indicators 

One important issue for the comparison and the overall evaluation of the success of the Living Lab 
initiatives is to find the right indicators for the evaluation of a Living Lab approach in Architecture as 
a holistic project for teaching, research and innovation. During the analysis of similar projects, with a 
special focus on the post-competition use of Solar Decathlon solar houses, the following main 
indicators for success and impact of Architecture Living Labs have been identified: 

• Total amount of stakeholders involved: number of persons, companies and public institutions 
linked to the project 

• Transdisciplinarity: number of different disciplines involved into the project 
• User-centred innovation and co-creation activities: Type and amount of activities linked   
• Outcome: Publications of results such as communications in congresses, thesis work related, 

articles 
• Financial concept and support: total amount of funding and type of stakeholder contracts 

These indicators are a first approach for the analysis and comparison of Living Lab initiatives and will 
be further developed, weighted and discussed in future research. 



Engineering Education for Sustainable Development, Cambridge, UK. September 22 – 25, 2013 6 

 

 

 

2.4 Regular questionnaires of students  

Regular questionnaires were given to students at the start and after finishing the Living Lab courses. 
These serve to: obtain and analyse the feedback about the concept of each course, determine which 
competences students consider important at the start of the course, and to see whether these identified 
competences became strengthened through the Living Lab approach. Opinions given about deficits 
perceived by students regarding their regular studies and possible improvements through the use of 
Living Lab completed the questionnaires. 

Table 1 shows an example of the initial questionnaire of the 2011 and 2012 Living Lab courses. 

Table 1: Extract of participant initial questionnaire Living Lab LOW3 2011 and 2012 

A. For your future work life, which 
competences, abilities and 
knowledge do you think are most 
important? 

Teamwork abilities and communication skills 

Transdisciplinary communication and understanding 

Holistic view and specific knowledge on sustainability  

Use of virtual learning environments and resources 

B. What do you think a Living Lab 
in Architecture could stand for? 

Collaborative and participatory learning environment 

Transdisciplinary teaching and research in sustainability  

Holistic education on sustainable construction and energy efficiency 

Platform for user co-creation and innovation 

C. What aspects of your current 
studies do you think could be 
significantly improved through a 
Living Lab at the campus? 

Practical construction and evaluation experience 

Transdisciplinary work experience 

Project based learning on a real building 

Interactive Learning Platform virtual/presential 

 

After finishing the course, Living Lab students were asked to which degree (1-5 scale) the course 
would have attended the previously identified competences, knowledge and other aspects. Figure 3 
shows an example of answers given by the 38 participating students of the 2011/12 and 2012 Living 
Lab courses regarding competences in teamwork, leadership and decision-making. 

 
Figure 3: Example of results of participant’s enquiries about the Living Lab course and the attended 

competences regarding teamwork, leadership and decision-making 

 



Engineering Education for Sustainable Development, Cambridge, UK. September 22 – 25, 2013 7 

 

 

 

Interviews were conducted with the participants to discuss special issues such as their personal 
learning environments. Additionally, open group conversations were held after concluding each 
activity for feedback on its success, critics and proposals for improvement. 

3 Results 
The following results of the research conducted show the outcomes of the Living Lab LOW3 project 
within its university context. 

3.1 Teaching Sustainability through Living Lab courses 

All three Living Lab courses held since 2011 proved to be highly participative, developing many 
generic competences, skills and knowledge of students that had to collaborate and co-design the 
individual objectives and working plans for each course. The questionnaires confirmed that 
competences such as transdisciplinary collaboration and understanding (valued 3,46 in a 1 to 5 scale), 
a holistic view and specific knowledge on sustainability (valued 3,86) and especially teamwork and 
communication skills (valued 4,05) have been fostered broadly throughout the course. 

The students identified the following special qualities common to all Living Lab courses, 
differentiating them from other regular teaching formats: The transdisciplinary teaching and research 
approach (3,84), and especially the collaborative and participatory learning environment (valued 4,22). 
They further valued positively the project-based learning approach related to a real building (valued 
3,86) and the practical construction and evaluation experience (3,92). 

Self-organization of different construction and installation works as well as monitoring activities 
demanded a real commitment from each participant. This caused minor conflicts due to time intensive 
nature of works out of regular schedule, for example regarding the collaboration with external experts 
or installers. Different individual attitudes of students towards the common goal of the courses also 
caused some tensions. 

3.2 Live-at-LOW3 Experiment 

The ‘Live-at-LOW3’ experiment of the 2012 course needed a special commitment of the participating 
students. No regular timetable could be guaranteed during the course. The house-occupation 
experiment has been a holistic approach to user-centred research. A pair of students evaluated and 
tested the prototype solar house during 14 days with the participating course students accompanying 
and evaluating the experiment through monitoring and lifestyle evaluation of the inhabitants with a 
holistic view on housing, consumption, food and mobility. 

Results were published in research documents, the experiment was filmed and published through a 
documentary as well as local newspapers and television showed interest in the experiment and its 
outcomes. 

A holistic learning and user-centred research process could be conducted with interesting results. A 
wider engagement of the academic community, as well as society in general, could be achieved 
through open door days, media interest (national and local TV and radio emissions, digital newspapers) 
and the use of social networks and ICT (youtube channel for video diary, documentary, live webcam). 

3.3 Management, financing, stakeholder participation and indicators 

A Living Lab like LOW3 at a university campus is a complex infrastructure that needs regular funding 
for its installation, maintenance and management. Stakeholders like local, public administration and 



Engineering Education for Sustainable Development, Cambridge, UK. September 22 – 25, 2013 8 

 

 

 

private companies are ideal partners to contribute to their diversity and the necessary funding. 
Organizational difficulties can arise regarding responsibility, university regulations, maintenance costs, 
property rights, and many other aspects. 

LOW3, as with many other Solar Decathlon projects, lacked resources. After the competition 
voluntary student collaborations, interest from the university, and media attention retreated, 
accompanied by a peak of exhaustion of administrative staff and collaborators. No clear planning for 
the “after use” of the project was developed before and during the SDE competition. 

All stakeholder participations, teaching and applied research activities as well as co-creation seminars 
and additional initiatives have been organized step-by-step after the competition. 

Indicators are important instruments to assess the performance of a Living Lab. The number of 
students, teaching staff, researchers and stakeholders involved, number of projects and activities 
linked, documents generated (reports, documentaries), people reached (open doors day, news on 
television, publications in newspapers, visits on website and blog, newsletters etc.) are some of the 
indicators that really confirm the contribution of the project to the school’s academic profile, and will 
help to compare Living Lab LOW3 with other similar living lab projects. 

4 Discussion 
After more than 2 years of implementation, field experience and continuous evaluation, the following 
lessons could be learned from the Living Lab LOW3 project: 

• SDE prototype houses like LOW3 are ideal objects to be converted into Living Labs for 
sustainable architecture and lifestyle at universities, but proven methodologies and documented 
experiences on strategies, tools and outcomes are still rare.  

• Students value positively the innovative teaching approach and especially the participatory 
teaching model of the Living Lab LOW3 courses, but also ask for clear course structures. 

• Living Lab LOW3 facilitates the generation of participatory co-learning activities that allow 
collectively generating and distributing new knowledge. A dynamic learning environment with 
formal and informal activities from workshops and seminars up to co-creation sessions, user-
centred research activities and knowledge dissemination for the general public has been created. 

• The development of ICT technologies and societal changes are happening today very fast and 
universities need to respond to these phenomena (new teaching subjects like NZEBs or smart 
cities, collaborative learning environments, e-learning, MOOCs, social media, social networks). 
Living Lab LOW3 shows itself to be an ideal infrastructure for experimenting and integrating 
these issues into the academic agenda. 

• University organizations need to adjust some of their organizational structures and administrative 
mechanisms to handle smoothly activities like SDE, Living Labs or similar projects regarding 
organization, financing, management and integration in curricula. 

• Indicators are needed to describe and compare Living Lab projects and their structure, allowing 
benchmarking of different Living Lab initiatives. 

5 Conclusions 
Sustainability science in research and education is still a young discipline and it is in constant flux and 
evolution. Transdisciplinary thinking and collaboration are fields yet to be developed within our 
disciplinary-organized universities.  

Collaboration, co-creation or synergies cannot be forced to happen within the diverse academic 
context of universities. Nevertheless, places and infrastructures can be created that facilitate these 



Engineering Education for Sustainable Development, Cambridge, UK. September 22 – 25, 2013 9 

 

 

 

essential educational processes. This seems to be one of the most important contributions that Living 
Labs can make to Architecture. 

Further development of this relatively new Living Lab approach is necessary. Methodologies and tools 
are in constant change, and experiences on a national and an international level will generate new 
knowledge that helps evolve the initial concepts. 

6 Acknowledgements 
The project has been possible due to the collaboration of UPC, ETSAV, IS.UPC, KIC InnoEnergy, 
IDAE – 10Action – Intelligent Energy Europe, City of Sant Cugat del Vallès, Schneider Electric, TU/e, 
LOW3 and Living Lab LOW3 students as well as many other institutions, companies, individuals and 
colleagues. 

7 References 
Solar Decathlon 2010: UPC (last update: 2010). Available: 
http://www.solardecathlon.upc.edu/house-es.html 

ALMIRALL, ESTEVE; WAREHAM, JONATHAN (2008) . "Living Labs and Open Innovation: 
Roles and Aplicability" in eJOV - the Journal for Networks and Virtual Organizations, vol.10, nº. 
"Special Issue on Living Labs" [viewed: 12 april 2011]. Available: http://www.ejov.org/ . ISBN: 
1442-9331.  

ALMIRALL, ESTEVE; WAREHAM, JONATHAN (2008) . "The Role of Living Labs in Open 
Innovation" in European Living Labs. A new approach for human centric regional innovation. p. 
147-157. ed.Wissenschaftlicher Verlag Berlin. ISBN: 978-3-86573-343-6.  

CHRISTA LIEDTKE, MARIA JOLANTA WELFENS, HOLGER ROHN, JULIA NORDMANN 
(2012). "Design study for the living lab research Infrastructure, to research human interaction 
with, and stimulate the adoption of, sustainable, smart and healthy innovations around the home 
" in International Journal of Sustainability in Higher Education, vol.13, nº. 2. p. 106-118. [viewed: 
may 2013] dx.doi.org/10.1108/14676371211211809.  

European Union. Open Living Labs. the First Step Towards a New Innovation System (last update: 
2013). Available: http://www.openlivinglabs.eu/.  

Gunnarshaug Lien, Anne. ZEB - the Research Centre of Zero Emission Buildings (last update: 
2013). Available: http://www.zeb.no/.  

KOMIYAMA, HIROSHI; et al. (ed.) (2011). Sustainability Science: A Multidisciplinary Approach. 
(pub.) UNITED NATIONS UNIVERSITY PRESS. ISBN: 978-92-808-1180-3.  

  

 

http://www.solardecathlon.upc.edu/house-es.html
http://www.ejov.org/
http://www.openlivinglabs.eu/
http://www.zeb.no/

	1 Introduction
	1.1 State of the art – Living Labs for Architecture and Lifestyle
	1.2 Background
	1.3 Research Questions

	2 Methodology
	2.1 Type of research
	2.2 Object of research –living lab activities
	2.3 Indicators
	2.4 Regular questionnaires of students

	3 Results
	3.1 Teaching Sustainability through Living Lab courses
	3.2 Live-at-LOW3 Experiment
	3.3 Management, financing, stakeholder participation and indicators

	4 Discussion
	5 Conclusions
	6 Acknowledgements
	7 References

