












































AGS_e_Proceedings_AM07 (1).pdf


94

35. CISOL: INTEGRATION, RESEARCH AND EDUCATION IN 
PHOTOVOLTAICS AS KEY TECHNOLOGY TOWARDS THE 

SUSTAINABLE ENERGY SYSTEM “BUILDING” 
Torsten Masseck 

CISOL – Centre d’Investigació Solar ETSAV, Escola Técnica Superior d’Arquitectura del Vallès 
(ETSAV), Universitat Politécnica de Catalunya (UPC), 08190 Sant Cugat del Vallès, Catalonia, Spain

cisol@etsav.upc.edu, www.cisol.com.es

Key words: photovoltaic, building integration, integrated energy design, sustainable 
architecture

1. Photovoltaic as key technology in sustainable buildings
CISOL is the Solar Research Centre of the Faculty of Architecture ETSAV of the 
Polytechnic University of Catalonia (UPC). Within its research activities it develops 
innovative building skins for the architectural integration of solar technologies, with 
a special focus on photovoltaic.

CISOL has realized in 2005 an innovative PV façade in Barcelona based on 
colored, semitransparent thin fi lm modules, within the energetic refurbishment of 
the SCHOTT Ibérica offi ce building. (Figures 1,2,3)

Thermal measurements have been realized and advanced simulation tools have 
been used to optimize the combination of façade materials, the natural ventilation, 
sun shading, daylight use, electricity production and the overall architectonical 
quality and energy performance of the building. [1]

For the applied research and innovation in renewable energies in this project 
CISOL received different prizes like the Environmental Prize of Catalonia 2006 and 
the EUROSOLAR Solar Prize 2006.

For a second project, a kinder garden in the city of Sant Celoni (Barcelona), 
a colored, semitransparent PV–panel with polycrystalline silicon cells has been 
developed for the architectural integration as a south oriented sunscreen in front of 
the building. The installation will function as a colored fi lter of the natural sunlight 

Figure 1: Façade exterior              
                

Figure 2: Façade interior Figure 3: Module detail



su
pp

or
tin

g 
pa

pe
rs

95

creating a unique interior atmosphere for the children’s rooms and the offi ce areas. 
First prototypes with colored glass-glass modules have been realized and evaluated. 
Thermal performance measurements will be evaluated.

A row of design studies shows the variety of possible colored PV module 
confi gurations for this project, understanding photovoltaic modules integrated in the 
building skin as a natural material and design resource for architects.

2. Integrated Energy Design
Integrated Energy Design or Climate Design must be the key issue for 
understanding buildings as potential energy generating systems. The building skin 
plays a mayor role in this.

Approximately 50 % of all consumed energy world wide is used in the building 
sector, related to the extraction, transport and transformation of materials, the 
construction process, the use of buildings through their life span and fi nally their 
reutilization, recycling or demolition.

This role of buildings as a main energy consumer has to be inverted. Buildings 
as net-energy producers are no longer utopia. They already exist as shown with the 
“Plus Energy Houses” by Rolf Disch in Freiburg, Germany. This buildings proof 
their effi ciency in an annual positive energy balance due to electricity generating 
solar roofs and a very effi cient passive solar architecture.

These kinds of buildings need a careful design process with an energy 
optimization in every stage. This can only be done by the so-called integrated 
energy design with a close collaboration of architects, engineers and simulation 
experts. Only this multidisciplinary approach allows the energy optimization of a 
whole project, the early implementation of the right energy system and the best use 
of existing resources for bioclimatic architecture like sun, wind and microclimate.

3. Political actions and decisions – obstacles and possibilities
New building legislations in the fi eld of improvement of energy effi ciency in 
buildings, ranging from local solar legislations up to the new national building code 
are implemented in Spain and most European countries, but far to weak in their 
requirements.

The building sector, dominated by big companies is not interested in energy 
effi ciency, being low building costs and high profi ts their main objectives. This will 
only change when there is a demand for this kind of architecture in the market.

Awareness raising, education and dissemination of environmental and also 
economic advantages of energy effi cient architecture must create this demand.

The introduction of an energy pass for buildings and the direct relation between 
building standards and energy costs will help in this fi eld and incite society 



96

to demand for low energy architecture. An active tax policy would also be an 
important instrument to compensate the slightly higher building costs of sustainable 
buildings.

4. Education
CISOL is focused in his research and educational activities on low energy 
architecture and renewable energy systems as key factors for a sustainable building 
culture. Applied research and consultancy on innovative solar technologies for 
building integration and the optimization of the building skin are main issues of 
our work (Figure 4). The CISOL - Solar Workshops focus on the integrated energy 
design as tool towards sustainable architecture. (Figure 5)

This type of planning procedure should be implemented as a general methodology 
in architectural and urban design to enhance the synergies between renewable 
energy systems and the complexity of architectural and urban planning parameters 
like function, form, density, materiality and esthetics. As another educational project 
a participated PV installation, the “ESTAV Solar garden” will be realized by CISOL 
at the Campus Sant Cugat.

5. Conclusion
Energy effi ciency and renewable energy technologies have to be seen together 
as the most important parameters in sustainable architecture and urban planning. 
Integrated solar technologies within multifunctional building envelopes will play a 
key role in buildings understood as renewable energy systems, which generate more 
energy than they consume. An outstanding concept in our search for pathways to a 
sustainable energy future.

References
[1] T.Masseck, Monitoring results and overall evaluation of a multifunctional, 

transparent, colored PV.Façade for the energetic rehabilitation of an offi ce 
building in Barcelona, Proceedings of EUROSUN 2006, Glasgow, Great Britain, 
pag.134-135, The International Solar Energy Society (2006)

Figure 4: CISOL – Research and 
Consultancy 

Figure 5: CISOL-Solar Workshop 
2007


