


















































Challenges of the recreational use of Amazon beaches

Luci Cajueiro Carneiro Pereiraa,1, Rosigleyse Corrêa de Sousa-Felixb, Rauquírio 

Marinho da Costac, José António Jimenezd.

aInstituto de Estudos Costeiros, Universidade Federal do Pará, Alameda Leandro 

Ribeiro, s/n, Aldeia, 68600-000, Bragança, Pará, Brazil. Email: cajueiro@ufpa.br.

b Instituto de Estudos Costeiros, Universidade Federal do Pará, Alameda Leandro 

Ribeiro, s/n, Aldeia, 68600-000, Bragança, Pará, Brazil. E-mail: 

rosigleyse@yahoo.com.br mailto:rosigleyse@yahoo.com.br

cInstituto de Estudos Costeiros, Universidade Federal do Pará, Alameda Leandro 

Ribeiro, s/n, Aldeia, 68600-000, Bragança, Pará, Brazil. E-mail: raucosta@ufpa.br

dLaboratori d’Enginyeria Marítima, Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya· 

BarcelonaTech, c/Jordi Girona 1-3, Campus Nord ed D1, 08034 Barcelona, Spain. E-

mail: jose.jimenez@upc.edu.

1Corresponding Author: L. C. C. Pereira. E-mail address: cajueiro@ufpa.br, luci.pereira@pq.cnpq.br
Permanent address: Instituto de Estudos Costeiros, Universidade Federal do Pará, Alameda Leandro 
Ribeiro, sn, Aldeia, 68600-000, Bragança, Pará, Brazil. Ph: 55 91 34251209. Fax: 55 91 34251593.

mailto:cajueiro@ufpa.br
mailto:rosigleyse@yahoo.com.br
../Downloads/raucosta@ufpa.br
../../Downloads/Paper%202/jose.jimenez@upc.edu
../../Downloads/Paper%202/cajueiro@ufpa.br
mailto:luci.pereira@pq.cnpq.br


1

1. Introduction

The sandy beaches of the Brazilian Amazon coast have considerable 

potential for the tourism industry, with their natural and well-preserved 

environments distributed along a coastline of 3,900 km. Approximately 650 

sandy beaches are found on the coasts of the Brazilian states of Pará and 

Maranhão (Pereira et al., 2016a, 2016b). The development of recreational and 

tourism activities on these beaches is limited primarily to the prolonged rainy 

season, which lasts approximately six months. Access to many rural and semi-

urban beaches is also restricted, especially in the areas dominated by the large 

tract of mangrove, one of the most extensive in the world (Kjerfve and Lacerda, 

1993), and most sites have low-quality infrastructure and services, often lacking 

such basic amenities as a public water supply or sewage disposal system. 

These limitations, in addition to the turbidity of the local waters caused by the 

region’s extensive fluvial discharge (Geyer et al., 1996), tend to restrict the 

development of the local tourism industry (Pereira et al., 2014; Silva et al., 

2013; Sousa et al., 2016).

Located on or near the equator, the sandy beaches found in the vicinity 

of the Amazon estuary are exposed to a complex landscape dominated by a 

diversity of rivers, islands, and tidal creeks exposed to meso-macro-hyper tides 

and moderate wind-wave energy, with tide-dominated characteristics. To the 

east and south of the estuary, the heavily indented macro-tidal coast is 

composed of dozens of estuaries, separated by low, mangrove-dominated 

peninsulas surrounded by dynamic barrier islands with tide-dominated or tide-

modified beaches (Pereira et al., 2016a). At around 2.5°S, in Maranhão, the 



2

coast is less indented, with less pronounced tides, and wave-dominated 

beaches (Pereira et al., 2016b). 

The Amazon coast is characterized by a heterogeneous landscape, 

ranging from zones of intense urban development to sparsely-populated areas 

with little or no infrastructure or public services (Szlafsztein, 2012). The most 

popular beaches are subject to unplanned development, which has created a 

range of natural and anthropogenic hazards, related primarily to the erosion 

provoked by inadequate constructions, bacteriological contamination from 

sewage outfalls, litter pollution, and oil spills (Andrade et al., 2010; Pereira et 

al., 2014; Sousa et al., 2017). As these processes can affect the development 

of the tourism industry, effective regulation and planning is urgently required for 

the whole Amazon coast, in order to guarantee the establishment of a secure 

and sustainable tourist industry, with a minimum of hazards and risks for beach 

users. In this context, the principal objective of the present study was to 

describe the natural and social characteristics of sandy Amazon beaches, 

evaluating their recreational potential and the challenges for the development of 

the recreational use of those beaches.

The following description outlines the environmental and social features 

of these sandy beaches that determine their potential for recreational and 

leisure activities, and the challenges for the development of the local tourism 

industry. Finally, a number of recommendations are presented for the 

improvement of the recreational use of coastal Amazon beaches. 

2. Geomorphological and physical features

The Brazilian Amazon coast (Figure 1) encompasses approximately 35% 



3

of the whole Brazilian coastline, without taking its numerous islands and 

indentations into account, and includes parts of the states of Amapá, Pará and 

Maranhão. The most popular sandy beaches are located on the coasts of the 

latter two states, given the large amounts of muddy sediments deposited on the 

Amapá coast by the Amazon River (Anthony et al., 2010). The sandy beaches 

in Pará and Maranhão are influenced by both estuarine and oceanic waters, 

which create ecologically rich and diverse environments (Nittrouer and 

DeMaster, 1996).

<Insert Figure 1>

The sandy beaches of Pará reach 350 km inland from the mouth of the 

Amazon River (0°), and extend 650 km eastward to Gurupi Bay (1°S). The 

western half of this zone is centered on the lower Amazon River and its 

numerous tributaries, islands and bays, including the world’s largest fluvial-

marine island, Marajó Island, and its elongated bay, Marajó Bay, whereas the 

eastern sector is the highly indented coast between Marajó and Gurupi bays 

(Figure 1), which is part of the Amazon Macrotidal Mangrove Coast, or AMMC 

(Souza-Filho, 2005). Pará has a coastline of approximately 2700 km, with more 

than 450 tide-dominated estuarine and oceanic sandy beaches (Pereira et al., 

2016a).

In western Marajó Bay, that is, Marajó Island (Figure 2A), the shoreline is 

dominated by mangroves and interrupted by small rivers and creeks (Figure 

2B). Most of the local recreational beaches are composed of fine to very fine 

sand, and the beach profile is typically fronted by ridged sand flats, hundreds of 



4

meters wide, with recurved spits (Figure 2B-C). Other areas are gently sloping 

and less broad, with the Barreiras Formation establishing coastal bluffs in many 

places. The presence of intertidal rocks also is a characteristic of this sector 

(Figure 2D). Muddy sediments can be found in part of the intertidal zone, mainly 

within the tidal channels. The most popular local beaches are in the towns of 

Soure (e.g., Pesqueiro, Figure 2B) and Salvaterra, e.g., Joanes (Figure 2E). 

This sector is between the Pará River and the Atlantic Ocean, and is dominated 

by fluvial waters during the rainy season and estuarine waters (with salinity 

normally below 10 PSU) during the dry season. Spring tides can reach 3 m and 

tidal currents run at up to 2 m.s-1 (Costa et al., 2013).

<Insert Figure 2>

Estuarine beaches can be also found on the eastern margin of Marajó 

Bay (Figure 3A), where the coast is dominated by mangroves, interspersed with 

large rivers and creeks, which dissect the coast into large bays, islands, and 

extensive tidal shoals (Figures 3B, E). Longshore sand bars with southward 

migration may be found in many places (Figure 3D).

The local beaches are also embayed between low headlands, where the 

low-lying coastal plateau of the Barreiras Formation reaches the shore. 

Intertidal rocks are found in this sector (Figure 3E). These estuarine beaches 

are typically narrow (< 200 m) and composed of fine to very fine sand. Muddy 

sediments may be found in the intertidal zone, limiting the recreational use of 

the beach during low tide (Sousa et al., 2017). The most popular beaches are 

located on Mosqueiro, Outeiro, Cotijuba, and Colares islands, and in Barcarena 



5

and Icoraci. The tidal range is approximately 3 m during spring tides (DHN, 

2017), and wave heights (Hs) of more than 1.5 m may occur on some beaches, 

e.g., Marahú (Figure 3C).

<Insert Figure 3>

The highly indented shoreline between Marajó Bay and the Gurupi River 

(Figure 4A) consists of approximately 15 major bays associated with rivers and 

tidal creeks (Pereira et al., 2016a). These bays are separated by the drowned 

plateau which slopes seaward into low regressive barriers and mangroves, 

terminating in highly dynamic recurved tide-modified barrier islands. 

The bays are filled with sandy tidal shoals and channels, and the 

beaches facing into the waves of the Atlantic Ocean are fronted by extensive 

tidal shoals formed mainly by fine and very fine sand, which extend for up to 2 

km offshore (Souza Filho et al., 2006; Trindade et al., 2016). Extensive dune 

fields (Figures 4B-C), low-tide deltas (Figure 4D), and extensive ridged sand 

flats with recurved spits (Figure 4E) are present at some locations (Souza-Filho 

and Paradella, 2002, 2003). Due to the influence of the local macrotides (4-6 m) 

and moderate waves (Hs up to 2 m), the condition of the beaches varies 

considerably, with tide-modified beaches (3<RTR<15) being found on the more 

exposed sections, and tide-dominated beaches (RTR > 15) on the more 

sheltered sections (Pereira et al. 2016a). The most popular beaches are 

Atalaia, Ajuruteua, and Princesa. During low spring tides, these sandy beaches 

are normally between 200 and 400 m wide, with a low intertidal gradient, of ~1° 

(Pereira et al., 2014). 



6

<Insert Figure 4>

The 1240 km coastline of Maranhão (Figure 5A), the second longest in 

Brazil, is located between the Gurupi River (1°S) and the Parnaíba Delta 

(2.5°S). This littoral is divided into three sectors, which contain more than 200 

beaches (Pereira et al., 2016b). The western coast extends for 520 km from the 

state border at the Gurupi estuary (1°) to the Gulf of Maranhão (2.1°), and 

contains 42 sandy beaches. This coast is also part of the AMMC, and is 

composed of some 20 funnel-shaped, tide-dominated estuaries, separated by 

low mangrove-dominated peninsulas fronted by barrier islands and tide-

modified or tide-dominated beaches (Pereira et al., 2016b). The entire coast 

presents evidence of barrier regression in the form of inner beaches and 

foredunes terminating as spits extending into the estuaries, as observed at 

Alcântara (Figure 5B).

The central sector is occupied by the four channels of the funnel-

shaped tide-dominated Gulf of Maranhão, which has an outer shoreline of 490 

km, which includes Cumã, São Marcos and Arraial bays. In this area, the tidal 

range may reach 7 m during during spring tides, and tidal currents may run at 

up to 2 m.s-1 (Pereira et al., 2011). This sector includes 144 modified tide-

dominated beaches, located primarily along the outer 50 km of the estuarine 

shore, facing into the estuaries (Pereira et al., 2016b). These beaches can be 

classified as barrier systems backed by mangrove, and systems backed by 

bluffs carved from the Barreiras Formation, as observed at Olho d’Água beach 

in São Luís (Figure 5C). 



7

The eastern coast extends east for 230 km from the Gulf of Maranhão to the 

state border at the Parnaíba Delta. This relatively straight coastline has 26 

exposed wave-dominated beaches backed by extensive transgressive dune 

fields formed during the Holocene and Pleistocene (Figure 5D). These beaches 

include Caburé and Atins, as well as Barra do Tatu, Moitas, Morro do Boi, 

Ponta do Mangue and Vassouras. In this sector, wave heights (Hs) can reach 3 

m height, while tides decrease from 7 to 3 m toward the Parnaíba Delta (Figure 

5E).

<Insert Figure 5>

3. Alluring environments and tourist attractions 

The principal attraction of the region’s rural and semi-urban beaches are 

their well-preserved, natural landscapes. Untouched, paradisiacal beaches can 

be found anywhere between the world’s largest fluvial-marine island (Marajó) 

and the Parnaíba Delta. Other local attractions include arts and crafts, 

gastronomy, and cultural events such as folklore dances. 

Some of the rural beaches are located in the vicinity of protected areas. 

These reserves include many Extractive Marine Reserves (EMRs), such as the 

Soure EMR, Mãe Grande EMR in Curuça, Maracaña EMR, São João da Ponta 

EMR, Tracuateua EMR, Caeté-Taperaçu EMR, Araí-Peroba EMR, and Gurupi-

Piriá EMR, all located in Pará, and the Cururupu and Delta do Parnaíba EMRs, 

in Maranhão. Other types of protected area include the Environmental 

Protection Areas (EPAs) of Algodoal-Maiandeua, Urumajó, and Canelas Island, 

in Pará, and the Lençóis Maranhenses National Park in Maranhão.



8

4. Limitations on the tourism industry

A number of natural features of the region, derived in particular from its 

climate and the high turbidity of its waters, limit the potential for the 

development of the local tourism industry. The relative isolation of the majority 

of Amazon beaches is also a major limitation.

The local climate is humid equatorial, with well-defined dry and rainy 

seasons. The recreational use of beaches in Pará and Maranhão is intense 

during the month of July (school vacation) and holiday periods, primarily during 

the second half of the year, which coincides with the dry season. The 

fluctuations in the Intertropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ) are the principal factor 

responsible for local rainfall patterns (Marengo, 1995). During the dry season, 

the ITCZ shifts to the Northern Hemisphere (> 2°N latitude), resulting in lower 

rainfall rates (normally below 100 mm per month) on the coasts of Pará and 

Maranhão.

The high turbidity of the region’s coastal waters is a negative feature for 

visitors to Amazon beaches. This turbidity is determined primarily by the 

region’s enormous fluvial discharge, which results in high levels of suspended 

material (Geyer et al., 1996). Turbidity tends to be lower than 200 NTU when 

winds are relatively weak, typically during July (vacation period, Figure 6), or 

when fluvial discharge is lowest, at the end of the dry season, in November and 

December (Pereira et al., 2013; Silva et al., 2013; Sousa et al., 2016). During 

July month, water salinity varies between 2 and 18 PSU in estuarine beaches 

(Figure 6).

The majority of Amazon sandy beaches are relatively isolated due to the 

extensive areas of mangrove forest, and other natural features such as rivers, 



9

creeks and estuaries or, in the case of eastern Maranhão, extensive dune fields 

(Figures 4 and 5). Many beaches can only be reached by boat or, in some 

cases, airplane. 

In addition to these natural features, the local tourism industry is also 

limited by a lack of infrastructure and public services (see above). In recent 

decades, while the local authorities have invested in improvements to the 

highway network, making many areas more accessible, little has been done to 

upgrade local infrastructure or services. At many beaches, while the number of 

private establishments – bars, restaurants, hotels, and guesthouses – has 

increased rapidly in recent years, public services (such as sanitation) have not 

been improved, and are generally insufficient to cope with the increase in 

demand, in particular during vacation periods. 

<Insert Figure 6>

5. Beach development and beach user profiles

Rural beaches have only rudimentary services and infrastructure. As 

some of these beaches are located within conservation units, specific legislation 

prohibits the construction of new buildings and even the access of motor 

vehicles. These beaches include Pesqueiro beach in the Soure EMR on Marajó 

Island (Figure 7A), Princesa beach in the Algodoal-Maiandeua EPA on 

Algodoal Island, and Caburé beach, in the Lençóis Maranhenses National Park. 

These beaches attract younger visitors interested in enjoying the local natural 

scenery. The isolation of some localities, which may require transportation by 

off-road vehicles, boats or even airplanes, often increases the costs of tourism 



10

significantly (Sousa et al., 2013).

As semi-urban beaches, e.g., Murubira (Mosqueiro Island), Atalaia 

(Salinópolis), and Olho d’Água (São Luís), offer more facilities than rural 

beaches, they tend to attract visitors more interested in the quality of the 

infrastructure than the natural features of the beach (Silva et al., 2013; Sousa et 

al., 2016).

At both rural and semi-urban beaches, the waterfront infrastructure 

includes bars and restaurants, private houses, and guest houses and hotels. In 

general, there are few streetlights, shops, and there is no public water supply or 

sanitation system (Figure 7B), and only intermittent garbage collection and 

street cleaning. Public toilets and showers, and car parking facilities are found 

only at a few beaches. At many beaches, in particular in rural areas, buildings 

are often precarious wooden structures built on inadequate sites, such as 

mangroves, restinga, dunes, and the intertidal zone (Figure 7B-C). More solid 

buildings, including mansions, can be found at many semi-urban or urban 

beaches (e.g., Farol-PA and Ponta de Areia-MA), located on intertidal and dune 

zones, cliffs or a few meters from the backshore or foreshore zones (Figure 7D-

E). The most urbanized coastal beaches are located in São Luís. These 

beaches offer good logistics and a diversity of privately-owned facilities, which 

provide beachgoers with amenities and leisure options, including hotels, 

restaurants, bars, and residential and commercial buildings (Silva et al., 2011a). 

However, the lack of an adequate public sanitation system (Figure 7F) has led 

to the prohibition of bathing on the beaches of São Luís (Silva et al., 2013).

<Insert Figure 7>



11

6. Recreational Use

The recreational use of Amazon beaches depends primarily on tidal 

conditions (high/low, spring/neap). Promenade and backshore areas are 

characterized by the presence of bars and restaurants, and during vacation 

periods, musical attractions are often available.

During the high spring tides, the intertidal zone, which normally 

accommodates practically all of a beach’s visitors, disappears. The recreational 

use of the intertidal zone begins during the ebb tide, when the area is used for 

activities such as sports (football and volleyball), sunbathing, and the 

consumption of food and beverages at the tables provided by the owners of 

local bars and guesthouses. At many beaches, such as Atalaia, Olho d’Água, 

and Araçagi (Maranhão), cars are driven onto the beach and parked in this 

zone (Figure 7G). At many estuarine beaches, part of the intertidal zone is 

covered with mud, as observed at Colares and Pesqueiro, and during low tides, 

beachgoers tend to avoid bathing in these areas. 

The surf zone, located at the water’s edge, is used by bathers and 

enthusiasts of other aquatic leisure activities, such as surfing (including the 

estuarine beaches), jet skiing, kite surfing, and motor boating. In São Luís, 

however, the surf zone is rarely used for bathing because of the prohibitions 

enforced due to the contamination of the water, as discussed above (Silva et 

al., 2011a; 2013). 

7. Safety

Natural (e.g., high hydrodynamics and fluvial discharge, the presence of 

rocks, intertidal channels, and dangerous animals) and anthropogenic (e.g., 



12

lack of services and infrastructure, unregulated land use) hazards result in a 

number of problems, such as erosion and contamination, and other risks for 

beachgoers. We outline below a number of the most important hazards that can 

affect beachgoers on Amazon beaches.

7.1 Natural Hazards

Physical hazards include strong tidal currents (> 1.5 m s-1), rocks in the 

intertidal zone, cliffs, tides, which attain considerable heights (3–7 m, Figure 8), 

and moderate wave energy (Hmax up to 3 m during high tide, Figure 9). The 

stings of stingrays and the barbed fins of the catfish known locally as the 

“uricica” can provoke extremely painful injuries to bathers that step accidentally 

these fish. Jellyfish stings can also cause bathers extreme pain (Sousa et al., 

2017).

In Marajó Bay, the strong tidal currents and the presence of cliffs and 

rocks in the intertidal zone are considered to be the principal physical hazards. 

On the less sheltered beaches, such as some of those on Mosqueiro Island, the 

moderate wave heights can be suitable for surfing, but dangerous for other 

beachgoers. Accidents involving animals, principally stingrays can be frequent 

on many beaches (Sousa et al., 2017).

Between Marajó Bay and the Gulf of Maranhão, the principal physical 

hazards are related to the strong tidal currents, moderate wave energy, 

macrotides (4-6 m), intertidal channels (Figure 7H), the presence of rocks in the 

intertidal zone (Figure 7I), and animals such as the uricica catfish (Pereira et al., 

2014; Brito et al., 2016). In the central and eastern sectors of the Maranhão 

coast, strong tidal currents, cliffs, tides of up to 7 m at São Luís, and waves 



13

increasing to 3 m in the Parnaíba Delta are considered the principal physical 

hazards for beachgoers (Pereira et al., 2016b). Jellyfish have caused some 

accidents, mainly involving children, in São Luís.

<Insert Figure 8>

<Insert Figure 9>

7.2 Human Hazards

Erosion has caused serious problems on most of the touristic beaches, 

where natural features and buildings or other infrastructure have been partially 

or completely destroyed by erosive processes. These processes occur mainly 

during the equinoctial spring tides, in March and September, and may result in 

the loss of dunes and mangroves, roads, power lines, and buildings (Alves and 

El-Robrini, 2006; Pereira et al., 2011, 2014). On rural beaches, intense erosion 

has led to the relocation of wooden structures further inshore, as observed on 

Ajuruteua and Vila dos Pescadores beaches (Pereira et al., 2009). In Ajuruteua 

rockwalls are been used to protect edifications and infrastructure. Precarious 

structures are found on some semi-urban beaches, and groins have been built 

in São Luís (Ponta de Areia beach). 

Solid waste and sewage are the principal sources of contamination on 

the most popular Amazon beaches. Firstly, the lack of refuse collection or public 

sanitation, associated with the general lack of environmental consciousness of 

beachgoers, has negative results, such as unpleasant sights and odors, 

particularly during the vacation period and some bank holidays. The solid waste 



14

found typically on the beach and in the water include plastics (bags, bottles, 

cups, plates), drink cans, leftover food, paper, and human and animal 

excrement. Depending on the tidal range and refuse collection services, solid 

waste deposited on a beach may remain in place or be transported by local 

currents to adjacent coastal environments, such as mangroves. The 

accumulation of waste can also lead to infestation by flies and other insects 

(direct observation).

The inaccessibility of many island beaches, in particular those reachable 

only by boat, may also hamper the removal of waste. On Princesa beach, for 

example, part of the solid waste is deposited in the local dunes (Pinto et al., 

2011). 

Polluted water from local rivers also contributes to an increase in the 

contamination of coastal Amazon beaches. In fact, the lack of a public 

sanitation system throughout practically the whole Amazon coast, and the 

construction of rudimentary cesspits (Figure 7B) at buildings located within the 

intertidal zone, on the backshore or in the dunes, has an extremely negative 

effect on the quality of the water of the most popular Amazon beaches. As rural 

and semi-urban beaches are visited primarily during vacation periods, pollution 

by sewage peaks when the number of beachgoers reaches maximum levels, in 

particular at high tide, when the water level reaches the cesspits, and the 

beginning of the ebb tide. On urban beaches, such as those of São Luís, the 

disposal of sewage directly onto the beach has resulted in a universal ban on 

bathing since 2009 (Silva et al. 2013). This prohibition has had a considerable 

impact on recreational activities in the area, and consequently, on its economy. 



15

The presence of sewage also results in contamination by pathogenic 

organisms, such as fecal coliforms. 

Risk levels on Amazon beaches increase during vacation periods, when 

local lifeguards (personal communication) record an increase in the number of 

drownings and other injuries. On rural and semi-urban beaches, risk levels 

increase primarily in July, during the school vacation, when beachgoer numbers 

increase dramatically, even though hydrodynamic energy decreases, as well as 

during the Easter (March-April) and Brazilian Independence Day (September) 

holidays, when equinoctial tides occur and hydrodynamic energy is higher. 

While lifeguards are posted daily on the urban beaches of São Luís, bathing 

has been banned due to sewage contamination. Surfing, kite surfing, and jet 

skiing are practiced on the most popular beaches and can be dangerous for 

other beach users, due to the lack of appropriate zoning.

While safety equipment (life buoys, lifejackets and life rafts) can be found 

on the most popular beaches, emergency and first aid services are restricted 

mainly to the urban beaches. At many rural and semi-urban beaches, 

emergency services or hospitals are typically found at distances of dozens of 

kilometers, reinforcing the need for first aid equipment (Pereira et al., 2014; 

Brito et al., 2016). 

Another manmade hazard on many Amazon beaches is the presence of 

motor vehicles. Cars, buses and even trucks are driven onto many beaches and 

serious problems have been recorded, including accidents and traffic jams. 

During vacation periods, in particular at the weekend, vehicles are often trapped 

by the rapid surge of the incoming tide, as observed frequently on Atalaia beach 

(Silva et al., 2011b).



16

The natural and social characteristics of Amazon beaches, focusing the 

limitations (challenges), attractions (potential for recreation) and hazards are 

summarized in Figure 10.

<Insert Figure 10>

8. Coastal Management actions

Certain climatic features (e.g., temperatures, high rainfall, and strong 

winds) limit recreational activities at different latitudes. In the equatorial zone, 

the prolonged rainy season is the principal climatic feature limiting recreational 

activities. On the Amazon coast, however, recreational activities tend to be 

concentrated during July and other holiday periods, and normally involve local 

beachgoers. This use pattern may be related primarily to the preference of local 

beachgoers for freshwater sites, such as rivers or streams, which are abundant 

and accessible. This is reinforced by the turbid water found on most coastal 

beaches, and the general lack of adequate infrastructure or services, which 

tends to deter visitors from other Brazilian regions or countries. These problems 

are exacerbated by a lack of effective coastal management, in terms of both 

planning and actions, associated with population growth, which has even 

increased in many Amazon coastal cities (IBGE, 2018). However, the local 

authorities have created protected areas in some areas to control and mitigate 

the innumerable human activities that affect this coastal zone.

Both Pará and Maranhão have been working on the development of 

their respective state coastal management plans, although effective 

management strategies need to be implemented urgently to guarantee 



17

improvements for the recreational use of some beaches, primarily given the 

need to minimize the issues described above.

As natural features (i.e., prolonged periods of rainfall, high turbidity, low 

salinity, high hydrodynamic energy) cannot be controlled by human measures, 

the recreational use of Amazon beaches should be improved through the 

adoption of the following measures:

a) Adequate planning of land use to avoid erosion processes and 

morphodynamic changes, environmental degradation (dunes, mangrove, cliffs), 

and the destruction of infrastructure.

b) Beach zoning, to minimize the risk of accidents. This will require: 

-  the prohibition of cars and aquatic vehicles from specific areas; 

-  the zoning of aquatic activities, with areas for bathing and other aquatic 

sports being delimited by flags, buoys and signs; 

- Signs, maps and pamphlets should be provided to alert visitors to the 

presence of natural hazards (waves, currents, rocks, etc.). 

(c) Investment in local infrastructure and services. This should include:

- the construction of sewage treatment systems and the immediate closure of all 

sewage outlets that discharge effluents directly onto the beach;

- the monitoring of water quality to avoid bacteriological contamination, 

accidents and illness;

- the installation of an efficient system of waste collection, which should include 

an increase in the number of bins and disposal points on all beaches.

The specific characteristics of Amazon region, its social-economic and 

environmental trends, and the fragile nature of its infrastructure and services, in 



18

both the public and private sectors, should be used as guidelines for the 

development of an integrated coastal management plan for the entire Amazon 

coast, taking the development level of each beach into account. 

9. Conclusions

The sandy beaches of the Amazon coast are located just south of the 

equator, adjacent to the mouth of the Amazon River, and set within a complex 

coastline of estuaries, inlets, and bays exposed to meso-macrotides and 

moderate wave energy. These well-preserved environments and their natural 

landscapes are their principal attractions for beachgoers, although the 

prolonged rainy season, the highly waters, and the lack of development of these 

beaches are all factors limiting their use. While the natural features of these 

beaches are the result of the climatic and hydrographic conditions, the lack 

development is a consequence of the minimal investment in infrastructure and 

public services by the local authorities. These services are insufficient, in 

general, and in particular during vacation periods. The natural features of these 

beaches, associated with the unplanned development, have resulted in 

widespread erosion and contamination, frequent accidents. During the 

equinoctial periods when hydrodynamic energy is at its highest, erosive 

processes have destroyed many buildings and some natural features, primarily 

in areas of unplanned development. The region’s high hydrodynamic energy, 

associated with a lack of beach management plans, has led to an increase in 

the risk of accidents involving beachgoers, even on the beaches patrolled by 

lifeguards during vacation periods. Coastal planning and regulation is urgently 

required to ensure the development of a safe and sustainable tourism industry, 



19

and to reduce the hazards and risks for beachgoers. The strategies outlined in 

this paper may also be adapted to other coastal zones in other regions of the 

world that have similar natural and social characteristics.

Acknowledgments

The authors Sousa (141551/2012-7), Pereira (310909/2014-7 and 

200629/2014–0) and Costa (309527/2014-7 and 200622/2014–5) would like to 

thank CNPq for research grants. We are also indebted to Stephen Ferrari for his 

careful correction of the English.

References

Alves, M.M.S., El-Robrini, M., 2006. Morphodynamics of a macrotidal beach: 

Ajuruteua, Bragança North Brazil. J. Coast. Res. SI 39, 949-951.

Andrade, M.M.N., Szlafstein, C.F., Souza-Filho, P.W.M., Araújo, A.R., Gomes, 

M.K.T., 2010. A socioeconomic and natural vulnerability index for oil spills in an 

Amazonian harbor: a case study using GIS and remote sensing. J. Environ. 

Manage. 91, 1972-1980.

Anthony, J.E., Gardel, A., Gratiot, N., Proisy, C., Allison, M.A., 2010. The 

Amazon-influenced muddy coast of South America: a review of mud-bank–

shoreline interactions. Earth Sci. Rev. 103, 99-121.

Brito, W.C., Pereira, L.C.C., Short, A.D., 2016. Beach Hazard and Risk 

Perception of Lifeguards Working in a Macrotidal Amazon Beach. J. Coast. 

Res. SI 75, 1217-1221.

Costa, K.G., Bezerra, T.R., Monteiro, M.C., Vallinoto, M.N., Berredo, J.F., 

Pereira, L.C.C., Costa, R.M., 2013. Tidal-Induced Changes in the Zooplankton 

Community of an Amazon Estuary. J. Coast. Res. 289, 756-765.

DHN. Diretoria de Hidrografia e Navegação, 2017. Tábuas de maré para o 

fundeadouro de Salinópolis (Estado do Pará). 

http://www.dhn.mar.mil.br/chm/tabuas (accessed 08 April 2017).

Geyer, W.R., Beardsley, R.C., Lentz, S.J., Candela, J., Limeburner, R., Johns, 

http://lattes.cnpq.br/5201196149691406
http://lattes.cnpq.br/6845109158020476


20

W.E., Castro, B.M., Soares, I.D., 1996. Physical oceanography of the Amazon 

shelf. Cont. Shelf Res. 16, 575-616.

Instituto Brasileiro de Geografia e Estatística – IBGE, 2018. Brasília. 

http.://www.ibge.gov.br/cidadesat/ (accessed 05 May 2018).

Kjerfve, B., Lacerda, L.D., 1993. Mangroves of Brazil, in: Lacerda, L.D. (Ed.), 

Conservation and sustainable utilization of mangrove forests in Latin America 

and Africa regions. International Society for Mangrove Ecosystems, Okinawa, 

pp. 245-272.

Marengo, J., 1995. Interannual variability of deep convection in the tropical 

South American sector as deduced from ISCCP C2 data. Int. J. Climatol. 15, 

995-1010. 

Nittrouer, C.A., DeMaster, D.J., 1996. The Amazon shelf setting tropical, 

energetic, and influenced by a large river. Cont. Shelf Res. 16, 553-574. 

Pereira, L.C.C., Oliveira, S.M.O., Costa, R.M., Costa, K.G., Vila-Concejo, A., 

2013. What happens on an equatorial beach on the Amazon coast when La 

Niña occurs during the rainy season? Estuar. Coast. Shelf Sci. 135, 116-127.

Pereira, L.C.C., Ribeiro, C.M.M., Monteiro, M.C., Asp, N., 2009. Morphological 

and sedimentological changes in a macrotidal sand beach in the Amazon littoral 

(Vila dos Pescadores, Pará, Brazil). J. Coast. Res. SI 56 (1), 113-117.

Pereira, L.C.C., Silva, N.I.S., Costa, R.M., Asp, N.E., Costa, K.G., Vila-

Concejo A., 2012. Seasonal changes in oceanographic processes at an 

equatorial macrotidal beach in northern Brazil. Cont. Shelf Res. 43, 95-106.

Pereira, L.C.C., Trindade, W.N., Silva, I.R., Vila-Concejo, A., Short, A.S., 

2016b. Maranhão Beach Systems, Including the Human Impact on São Luís 

Beaches, in: Short, A.D., Klein, A.H.F. (Eds.), Brazilian Beach Systems. 1st edn. 

Springer, Suíça, pp. 125-152.

Pereira, L.C.C., Vila-Concejo, A., Costa, R.M., Short, A.D., 2014. Managing 

physical and anthropogenic hazards on macrotidal Amazon beaches. Ocean 

Coast. Manage. 96, 149-162.

Pereira, L.C.C., Vila-Concejo, A., Short, A.D., 2016a. Coastal morphodynamic 

processes on the macro-tidal beaches of Pará state under tidally-modulated 

wave conditions, in: Short, A.D., Klein, A.H.F. (Eds.), Brazilian Beach 

Systems. 1st edn. Springer, Suíça, pp. 95-124.

Pereira, L.C.C., Vila-Concejo, A., Trindade, W.N., Short, A.D., 2011. Influence 

http://lattes.cnpq.br/8918676727498060
http://lattes.cnpq.br/6845109158020476
http://lattes.cnpq.br/7113886150130994
http://lattes.cnpq.br/5393264898435715


21

of high-energy conditions on beach changes in tide-dominated (Amazon, Brazil) 

and wave-dominated (NSW, Australia) coastal environments. J. Coast. Res. 64, 

115-119.

Pinto, K.S.T., Pereira, L.C.C., Vila-Concejo, A., Gorayeb, A., Sousa, R.C., 

Costa, R.M., 2011. Effects of the lack of coastal planning on water quality and 

land use on a macrotidal beach (Atalaia, Pará) in the amazon region. J. 

Coast. Res. SI 64, 1401-1405.

Silva, I.R., Pereira, L.C.C., Sousa, R.C., Oliveira, S.M.O., Guimarães, D., 

Costa, R.M., 2011a. Amazon beaches (São Luís, Brazil): recreational use, 

environmental indicators, and the perception of beachgoers. J. Coast. Res. 64, 

1287-1291.

Silva, I.R., Pereira, L.C.C., Trindade, W.N., Magalhães, A., Costa, R.M., 2013. 

Natural and anthropogenic processes on the recreational activities in urban 

Amazon beaches. Ocean Coast. Manage. 76, 75-84.

Silva, N.I.S., Pereira, L.C.C., Vila-Concejo A., Gorayeb, A., Sousa, R.C., Asp 

N.E., Costa R.M., 2011b. Natural and social conditions of Princesa, a 

macrotidal sandy beach on the Amazon Coast of Brazil. J. Coast. Res. SI 64, 

1979-1983.

Sousa, R.C., Pereira, L.C.C., Costa, R.A.M., Jimenez, J.A., 2017. 

Management of estuarine beaches on the Amazon coast though the 

application of recreational carrying capacity indices. Tourism Manag. 59, 216-

225.

Sousa, R.C., Pereira, L.C.C., Costa, R.M., 2013. Water quality at touristic 

beaches on the Amazon coast. J. Coast. Res. SI 65, 1057-1062.

Sousa, R.C., Pereira, L.C.C., Jiménez, J.A., 2016. Estuarine beaches of the 

Amazon coast: environmental and recreational characterization. J. Coast. 

Res. SI 70 (1), 705-709.

Souza Filho, P.W.M., Martins, E.S.F., Costa, F.R., 2006. Using mangroves as a 

geological indicator of coastal changes in the Braganc-a macrotidal flat, 

Brazilian Amazon: A remote sensing data approach. Ocean Coast. Manage. 49, 

462-475 

Souza Filho, P.W.M., Paradella, W.R., 2002. Recognition of the main 

geobotanical features along the Bragança mangrove coast (Brazilian Amazon 

Region) from Landsat TM and RADARSAT-1 data. Wetl. Ecol. Manag. 10, 123-



22

132.

Souza Filho, P.W.M., Paradella, W.R., 2003. Use of synthetic aperture radar for 

recognition of Coastal Geomorphological Features, land-use assessment and 

shoreline changes in Bragança coast, Pará, Northern Brazil. An. Acad. Bras. 

Cienc. 75 (3), 341-356.

Souza-Filho, P.W.M., 2005. Costa de manguezais de macromaré da Amazônia: 

cenários morfológicos, mapeamento e quantificação de áreas usando dados de 

sensores remotos. Rev. Bras. Geofísica. 23(4), 427-435.

Szlafstein, C.F., 2012. Development projects for small rural communities in the 

Brazilian Amazon region as potential strategies and practices of climate change 

adaptation. Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change 19, 143-

160. 

Trindade, W. N.; Pereira, L. C. C.; Vila-Concejo, A., 2016. Tidal Modulation of 

Moderate Wave Energy on a Sandy Tidal Flat on the Macrotidal Amazon 

Littoral. Journal of Coastal Research, SI75, 487-491.



23

Figure Captions

Figure 1. Brazilian Amazon Coast, showing the mouth of the Amazon Estuary, 

Marajó Island, Marajó Bay, the indented coast of eastern Pará and western 

Maranhão, and the eastern Maranhão coast, highlighting São Marcos Bay and 

Lençóis Maranhenses (Source: Google Earth). 

Figure 2. Marajó Island and its main beaches (A), highlighting Pesqueiro, which 

is fronted ridged sand flats, hundreds of meters wide (B), the shoreline at 

Soure, with recurved spits (C), Salvaterra showing intertidal rocks indicated by a 

red line (D) and Joanes, with a high-tide beach (E) (Source: Google Earth).

Figure 3. Principal beaches on Mosqueiro Island, on the eastern margin of 

Marajó Bay (A), with details of Marahú beach (B) and waves breaking in a 

recreational sector (C), longshore sand bar with southward migration at 

Carananduba beach (D), and Farol beach, showing an embayment between 

low headlands (E) (Source: Google Earth).

Figure 4. The indented shoreline between Marajó and Gurupi bays (A), showing 

ridged sand flats adjacent to the dune fields at Princesa (B) and Atalaia (C) 

beaches, creeks and channels at both beaches and at Ajuruteua (D), and 

recurved spits at Vila dos Pescadores (E) (Source: Google Earth).

Figure 5. Coastline of Maranhão (A), showing the recurved spits at Alcântra (B), 

urban beaches in São Luís (C), the extensive dune fields in Lençóis 

Maranhenses (D) and the Parnaíba Delta (E) (Source: Google Earth).

Figure 6. Turbidity and salinity values recorded in vacation period within three 

bays influenced by different levels of fluvial discharge: low (Caeté Bay), 

intermediate (São Marcos Bay), and high (Marajó Bay). Col Colares, Mur 



24

Murubira, Pesq Pesqueiro, SM São Marcos, Cal Calhaus, OA Olho d’Água, VP 

Vila dos Pescadores, Aju Ajuruteua.

Figure 7. Pesqueiro beach on Marajó Island, in the Soure EMR (A), rudimentary 

cesspits (B), a rural beach on Marajó Island (C), buildings on an erosive area in 

Salinópolis (D), buildings on dunes at Ponta de Areia (E), presence of sewage 

at Olho d’Água (F), cars driven onto Atalaia beach (G), intertidal channels on 

Ajuruteua beach (H), presence of rocks in the intertidal zone (I).

Figure 8. Tidal ranges on estuarine and oceanic Amazon beaches. PB Porto de 

Belém, IM Ilha de Marajó, PT Porto de Tutóia, Mur Murubira, Col Colares, Gur 

Gurupi, Par Paracauari, IG Ilha dos Guarás, Mar Marudá, Pri Princesa, FS 

Fundeadouro de Salinas, Tap Taperaçu, Aju Ajuruteua, VP Vila dos 

Pescadores, TA Terminal Alumar, TPM Terminal Ponta da Madeira, PI Porto de 

Itaqui, SL São Luís. Data in red symbols are from DHN and in green colours 

from previous studies (Pereira et al. 2012, 2013, 2014; Silva et al. 2013; Sousa 

et al. 2017). Tidal ranges in Pará state are arranged inside the green circle and 

in Maranhão inside the orange circle.

Figure 9. The relationship between the Hmax and Hs on some recreational 

Amazon beaches. Col Colares, SM São Marcos, Mur Murubira, Cal Calhaus, 

OD Olho d’Água, Mar Marudá, Pri Princesa, Pesq Pesqueiro, Ata Atalaia, Aju 

Ajuruteua. 

Figure 10. Limitations, attractions, and natural and anthropogenic hazards 

found on rural, semi-urban and urban Amazon beaches. 













0 10 20 30 40

Salinity (PSU)

0

100

200

300

400

500

Tu
rb

id
ity

 (N
TU

)

Col

Mur Pesq
SM

Cal
OA

VP
Aju

Marajó
Bay

São Marcos
Bay

Caeté
Bay

Oligo
haline

Mesohaline Polyhaline Euhaline



A B C

D F

G H I

E

Figure 7.



2 3 4 5 6 7 8
Tidal Range (m)

42

43

44

45

46

47

48

49

Lo
ng

itu
de

 (d
eg

re
es

)

Mesotides        Macrotides          Hypertides

PB

IM
IG

FS

SL

TPMTA
PI

PT

ParMur

Col

Pri
Mar

Gur

Tap
Aju

VP

ESTUARINE BEACHES      OCEANIC BEACHES

Figure 8.



0.4 0.8 1.2 1.6
Hs (m)

0.8

1.2

1.6

2

2.4
H

m
ax

 (m
)

Col

Mur
SM

Mar

Cal

OD

Pesq

Pri

Ata

Aju

Figure 9.



Limitations

- Prolonged rainy season     - Difficult access
- High turbidity
- Lack/inefficient services
and infrastructure

Attractions
- Cultural and                 - Well-preserved
gastronomical                environments
richness

Natural Hazards (accidents)

- Strong tidal currents
- Macrotides
- Waves
- Animals (stingrays*, Jellyfish, catfish)

Anthropogenic Hazards

- Erosion processes (environmental
degradation and destruction of
infrastructure: +, ±. -)
- Solid Waste (accidents, illness: +, ±. -)
- Sewage (unpleasant sights and doors,
illness: +, ±. -)
- Presence of cars or aquatic motor
vehicle (accidents)

Rural beaches
(-)

Semi-urban beaches
( ±)

Urban beaches
( +)

Oceanic and estuarine* beaches Oceanic beaches

Figure 10.


