






































Managing coastal environments under climate change: Pathways to adaptation


Science of the Total Environment xxx (2016) xxx–xxx

STOTEN-19137; No of Pages 17

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Science of the Total Environment

j ourna l homepage: www.e lsev ie r .com/ locate /sc i totenv
Managing coastal environments under climate change: Pathways
to adaptation
Agustín Sánchez-Arcilla a,b, Manuel García-León a, Vicente Gracia a,⁎, Robert Devoy c,
Adrian Stanica d, Jeremy Gault c

a Laboratori d’Enginyeria Marítima, Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya, C/ Jordi Girona, 1-3 Ed. D1 Campus Nord, 08034 Barcelona, Spain
b Jordi Girona, 1–3, Ed. D1, 08031 Barcelona, Spain
c MaREI Centre, Environmental Research Institute, University College Cork, Ringaskiddy, Co. Cork, Ireland
d Natl. Institute of Marine Geology and GeoEcology — GeoEcoMar, Str. Dimitrie Onciul 23-25, Sector 2, 024053 Bucharest, Romania
H I G H L I G H T S G R A P H I C A L A B S T R A C T
• It is addressed how to sustainably
manage coastal systems under changing
climates.

• Adaptation for long-term trends and
short-term events is analysed through
DPSIR.

• Physical and socio-economic pressures
are included.

• High and low sustainability practices
are analysed.

• It focuses on a sequence of interven-
tions that enhances the natural resil-
ience.
⁎ Corresponding author at: Jordi Girona, 1–3, Ed. D1, 08
E-mail addresses: agustin.arcilla@upc.edu (A. Sánchez

astanica@geoecomar.ro (A. Stanica), J.Gault@ucc.ie (J. Gau

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2016.01.124
0048-9697/© 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

Please cite this article as: Sánchez-Arcilla, A.,
viron (2016), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.scit
a b s t r a c t
a r t i c l e i n f o
Article history:
Received 29 March 2015
Received in revised form 21 January 2016
Accepted 21 January 2016
Available online xxxx
This paper deals with the question of how to manage vulnerable coastal systems so as to make them sustainable
under present and future climates. This is interpreted in terms of the coastal functionality, mainly natural services
and support for socio-economic activities. From here we discuss how to adapt for long term trends and for short
terms episodic events using the DPSIR framework.
The analysis is presented for coastal archetypes from Spain, Ireland and Romania, sweeping a range of meteo-
oceanographic and socio-economic pressures, resulting in a wide range of fluxes among them those related to
sediment. The analysis emphasizes the variables that provide a higher level of robustness. That means mean
sea level for physical factors and population density for human factors. For each of the studied cases high and
low sustainability practices, based on stakeholders preferences, are considered and discussed. This allows pro-
posing alternatives and carrying out an integrated assessment in the last section of the paper. This assessment
permits building a sequence of interventions called adaptation pathway that enhances the natural resilience of
the studied coastal systems and therefore increases their sustainability under present and future conditions.

© 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Keywords:
Coastal management
Climate change
Integrated assessment
European coast
031 Barcelona, Spain.
-Arcilla), manuel.garcia-leon@upc.edu (M. García-León), vicente.gracia@upc.edu (V. Gracia), r.devoy@ucc.ie (R. Devoy),
lt).

et al., Managing coastal environments under climate change: Pathways to adaptation, Sci Total En-
otenv.2016.01.124

mailto:J.Gault@ucc.ie
Journal logo
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2016.01.124
www.elsevier.com/locate/scitotenv
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2016.01.124


2 A. Sánchez-Arcilla et al. / Science of the Total Environment xxx (2016) xxx–xxx
1. Introduction
The dynamic state of the coastal fringe affects societies by providing a
variety of resources. These natural services differ inmagnitude and timing
with end-users' demands, thus generating conflictive interactions. Coast-
al engineering provides a path to modulate these interactions, whose
management needs a balance among different functionalities (natural,
protection and support for socioeconomic activities). Coastal infrastruc-
tures such as harbours and coastal works are able to withstand meteo-
oceanographic drivers and a growing sediment scarcity (Marchand
et al., 2011). Design plus maintenance criteria are strongly related to
the extreme values of hydrodynamic drivers, whose sharp gradients un-
leash a number of coastal hazards associated to erosion and flooding
(Sanchez-Arcilla et al., 2014).

The maintenance of coastal functionality has been addressed with
hard and soft solutions, both separately or in conjunction (Hamm
et al., 2002). Traditionally, hard solutions comprise breakwaters, groins
or revetments whereas beach nourishment, sediment by-pass and
back-pass are considered as soft interventions (Hanson et al., 2002). De-
spite the local efficiency of hard structures at short term scales, they re-
sult in a permanent barrier which may exacerbate erosion or accretion
patterns. Although hard interventions have alleviated some local prob-
lems they have also become the origin of new conflicts. Soft solutions
provide a more flexible approach to undesired interactions but they re-
quire periodic maintenance and they are limited by progressive sedi-
ment starvation in many coastal tracts and river catchment basins
(Ibáñez et al., 2014).

Changes in natural pressures can further distort beach functions,
mainly at human-squeezed zones. Sea level rise (Church et al., 2013;
Devoy, 2015b; Jevrejeva et al., 2014a), changes in wave patterns
(Casas-Prat and Sierra, 2013; Wang et al., 2014) and storminess
(Nissen et al., 2014) plus enhanced subsidence rates (Brown and
Nicholls, 2015; Ibàñez et al., 1997, 2010) alter the natural coastal resil-
ience and hamper a sustainable long-term coastal management. The
high degree of uncertainty of these changesmay hinder long-termplan-
ning and demands a flexible roadmap, able to adapt throughout its life-
time (Haasnoot et al., 2013).

These flexible roadmaps should combine impact mitigation and ad-
aptation at two time-scales: long-term and episodic (storm related).
The first one deals with relatively steady trends whereas the second
one aims to transiently hinder storm impacts (Garcia-Leon et al.,
Fig. 1. Coastal archetypes from the Iris

Please cite this article as: Sánchez-Arcilla, A., et al., Managing coastal envir
viron (2016), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2016.01.124
2015; Sanchez-Arcilla et al., 2015a). The use of transient defence mea-
sures (TDM) seeks to reduce storm hazards below a given threshold.

The overarching aim of this paper is to structure with objective
criteria a set of interventions that could constitute an adaptive pathway
to coastal sustainability. These interventions are based on a selection of
case studies which show the range of physical/environmental factors
(energy levels, biological habitats and geometric/geologic controls)
and socio-economic/political settings present in our coastal systems.

This allows defining a number of coastal archetypes which illustrate
the effect of climate factors on coastal systems, affecting drivers (D),
pressures (P), coastal state (S), impacts (I) and responses (R). This
DPSIR framework (OECD, 1993; EEA, 1995; Kristensen, 2004; Pacheco
et al., 2006) can be used to evaluate impacts and responses from a num-
ber of standpoints, including stakeholders’ preferences.

The case studies span three European countries (Fig. 1): Spain,
Ireland and Romania. The coast of Ireland represents the high energy
range in terms of tides and waves while the NW Mediterranean coast
and Danube delta (Black Sea) are examples of fetch-limited micro-
tidal environments of moderate energy conditions mainly controlled
by episodic extreme events. Although the legal and administrative set-
tings are presently different they are subject to convergence under
European Union common legislation and policy.

The range of hydrodynamic pressures and morphodynamic
responses runs in parallel to a shared growth in human uses and infra-
structures (see e.g. Woodroffe, 2002). This is the basis for an inter-
comparison thatwill serve to assess the relative success of various adap-
tation practices. Their efficiency under future climatic scenarios is
controlled by the level of coastal squeezing (Cooper and Pilkey, 2012)
and dominant physical features, being thus simultaneously dependent
on climate change and human pressures. From here we shall recom-
mend some criteria for more sustainable adaptation pathways in
terms of cost, energy consumption and user preferences.

2. Coastal archetypes

The analysis of vulnerable coastal sectors requires a careful consider-
ation of the dominant time/space scales to define domain boundaries
for any subsequent assessment. For example, short term solutions
may give rise to considerations about their compatibility with long
term planning and policies. The vulnerability considered here will be
that linked to short term or storm scales plus that due to decadal or
h, Spanish and Romanian coasts.

onments under climate change: Pathways to adaptation, Sci Total En-

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2016.01.124


3A. Sánchez-Arcilla et al. / Science of the Total Environment xxx (2016) xxx–xxx
long term evolution of climatic drivers such as mean sea level. Within
this context, the geological settings partly control the physical impact
due to climatic variables. In the same manner the social and economic
uses control up to a point the level of damages experienced by the coast-
al sector, since the underlying assumption is that natural systems, un-
less prevented by human action, are able to adapt to a varying climate
until reaching a no return (tipping) point.

Any assessment needs a management unit which ensures that pro-
cesses and functionalities are properly bounded. The littoral cell concept
has been chosen as such unit because it represents a relatively closed
system where emerged and submerged zones exchange sediment
fluxes.Windwaves, tides and surges drive sedimentary transport, mod-
ulated by natural and anthropogenic barriers. Impounded transport
coasts can be illustrated by pocket beaches or embayments where any
conflict would be local, whereas free transport coastswould correspond
to more general conflicts.

Sediment properties (grain size, cohesion, degree of organic materi-
al) constrain mobility, thereby bounding the impact level. In that sense,
cliff coasts composed by hard rocks (e.g. volcanic) present the maxi-
mum resilience (Viles and Spencer, 1995), whilst fine sandy coasts
show the maximum vulnerability and coarse clastic sedimentary set-
tings (e.g. cobble or gravel dominated systems) characterise an inter-
mediate situation (Orford et al., 1996; Duffy and Devoy, 1999; Devoy,
2008).

Social and economic uses control the consequences of such impacts,
mainly for economic and social (cultural) values. Squeezed coasts
feature higher vulnerability levels, due to the lack of space to retreat
or adapt or the societal/political inability to make room for natural
dynamics. Adaptable coasts with enough space to evolve represent sec-
tors with a lower vulnerability and the capacity to develop a higher
natural resilience. In what follows some examples of adaptation will
be discussed, focusing on relatively extreme situations to be more
illustrative.

Coastal areaswith a higher energetic level, for a given geological set-
ting, will experience a higher degree of mobility and therefore vulnera-
bility, considering that human uses and infrastructures trend to be
static. And yet coastal environments subject to a higher level of incom-
ing energy are more naturally prepared to deal with climatic variability
or change. As an illustration, for a given distribution of storm surge
levels, a more vertical curve such as, for instance, the Irish coast will re-
flect a lower decrease of flooding return periods than a flatter surge
curve such as for instance the Mediterranean or the Black Sea cases.

The selected coastal cases (typologies) present a variety of physical
pressures, responses and suggest a range of possible interventions,
which depending on scale and resource availability can be considered
as sustainable or mal-adaptation practice, depending on the resulting
vulnerabilities. Sustainability is here considered as the capacity tomain-
tain the coastal system status atmid to long term (decadal scale), there-
fore with socio-economically acceptable impacts and costs. Low
sustainability makes reference to a low probability of maintaining the
coastal system while high sustainability makes reference to higher
levels of the same probability. Because of that we have considered as
low sustainability practices those that, although efficient in the short
term, do not provide a plan for the mid to long term maintenance nor
any assessment of the capacity to maintain the required human inter-
ventions. High sustainability has been considered as those practices
that internalize costs and impacts at short to long time scales and there-
fore enhance the capacity for the coastal system for self-maintenance or
facilitates the required human interventions. They can be illustrated by
interventions associated to reducing sediment mobility by means of
vegetation or increasing the available sediment volumeby an integrated
river catchment basin management.

The analysis performed in this paper does not intend to be compre-
hensive, but only to illustrate some of the pitfalls and limits of common-
ly employed coastal interventions and how to make them more
compatible with future climate change.
Please cite this article as: Sánchez-Arcilla, A., et al., Managing coastal envir
viron (2016), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2016.01.124
The study focuses on different coastal archetypes across Europe, de-
fined by the following criteria (Table 1): (i) sediment transport and
budget features, (ii) capacity of drivers to mobilize (erode and deposit)
sediment and (iii) level and type of socio-economic uses. The NWMed-
iterranean sea case presents wave-driven impounded beaches in a
squeezed littoral, representative of other zones such as Italy, Southern
France or Greece. The Irish case has longer littoral cells and its hydrody-
namic drivers are mixed (waves plus tides) and similar to other North
Sea coastal tracts in Europe (UK, Netherlands). The Romanian case pre-
sents drivers comparable to those of the NW Mediterranean case, but
with a lower level of coastal occupation.

Some of the proposed interventions can be considered asmilestones
towards an adaptive plan for coastal sustainability under climate
change. In countries where there is not such an adaptive strategy,
these individual actions can highlight the need for a more ambitious
plan to manage properly the entire coast and not particular transects.
3. Climate and human change factors

Coasts (globally) are recording increasing changes in their function-
ing and vulnerability under a range of environmental drivers (Carter
and Woodroffe, 1994; Devoy, 2008, 2015b; Cooper and Cummins,
2009; Masselink et al., 2011). These include changes in sea-level rise
(SLR) and associated marine flooding (Fang et al., 2014), changes in
wave climate regimes (Wang et al., 2014), in river liquid discharges
(Alfieri et al., 2015) andmodified sediments fluxes (Hinkel et al., 2013).

Low-lying coasts are one of the most vulnerable zones due to these
climate issues with deltas representing historically highly populated lit-
toral systems (Brown et al., 2013). In this latter case subsidence poses an
additional threat, caused by both natural (tectonics, compaction, degree
of organicmaterial, etc.) and anthropogenic (land-uses, groundwater or
hydrocarbon extraction, erosion control structures, etc.) factors. In some
cases, the relative-sea-level-rise (RSLR) doubles or even triples the SLR.
For instance, in the Ebro Delta wetlands (Section 4), the RSLR ranges
from 5 to 8mm/yr (Ibáñez et al., 2010). Together, all these factors result
in accelerated levels of erosion and may force retreat in significant sec-
tors of the world coasts (Hinkel et al., 2013; Syvitski et al., 2009;
Woodroffe, 2002).

Direct human impacts (urbanization, structures, river regulation)
condition coastal vulnerability and are the primary factors for the evolu-
tion of developed (e.g. European) coasts (Cooper and Pilkey, 2012).
Climatic change, linked to global warming of the Atmosphere–Ocean
(A–O) system, results in thermal expansion of ocean water (steric ef-
fect) and the addition of land-based ice meltwater. This causes most of
the observed SLR (Church et al., 2013; Devoy, 1987, 2015b).

Recent past observations show global mean sea-level changes
(GMSL) since the 1880s of circa 0.2 m (0.19m, 1901–2013) at averaged
rates of 1.7–1.8 mm/year, though with strong temporal (decadal scale)
and regional variations (Devoy, 2015b; EEA, 2014; Jevrejeva et al.,
2014b; Menéndez and Woodworth, 2010). During this interval mean
global sea-surface temperatures (SST) have also risen by circa 0.8 °C , al-
tering storminess in many ocean regions (IPCC, 2013; IPCC, 2014; EEA,
2014).

Future climate projections for European coasts, based on model en-
sembles, show SLR rates similar to global values (Lowe et al., 2010;
Church et al., 2013). For low greenhouse gas (GHG) emission scenarios
(SRES B2-A1B; RCP 2.6) mean SLR is likely to be in the range of 0.26–
0.54 m above 1990 levels by 2080–2100. For higher emissions (SRES
A1F; RCP 8.5)mean SLRwill be in the range 0.45–0.81m and continuing
to rise between 1–3m by 2300 (EEA, 2014), depending on levels of con-
tinued GHG emissions.

Current satellite altimetric observations of SLR rates for European
waters, also supported by tide gauge data, commonly show values
above 3.2–3.4 mm/yr (EEA, 2014), except for regions of significant geo-
tectonic subsidence (e.g., deltas and seismically active platemargins) or
onments under climate change: Pathways to adaptation, Sci Total En-

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2016.01.124


Table 1
Physical and socio-economic features characterising the selected coastal cases (archetypes for similar littoral systems)

Western Europe
(Catalonia — Spain)

Northern Europe
(Ireland)

Eastern Europe
(Romania)

Sediment connectivity Impounded Partial Open
Meteo-Oceanographic pressures • Gradient storms

• Transient surges
• Composite sea-swell
• Tidal ranges and surges

• Gradients storms
• Transient surges

Socio-economic pressures • High population density.
• Developed economy

• Median population density
• Developed country

• Low population density
• Developing economy

4 A. Sánchez-Arcilla et al. / Science of the Total Environment xxx (2016) xxx–xxx
affected by continuing postglacial isostatic uplift (Fig. 3). These rates are
likely to accelerate beyond 4–5 mm/year by the mid 21st century.

Model projections indicate anomalies in wind fields whose av-
erage intensity tend to a poleward shift in Northern Europe
(Lionello et al., 2008; Nissen et al., 2014). However, at the Mediter-
ranean basin there is a less definite trend (Planton et al., 2012).
These wind anomalies may imply changes in wind wave patterns,
affecting directionality and mean significant wave height (Casas-
Prat and Sierra, 2013). The same authors, through outputs from
AR4 scenarios and for the 2071–2100 period at the NWMediterranean
Sea, presented a significantwave height variation around±10%where-
as the same variable for a 50 year return period varied within a ±20%
interval.

Similar evolution trends apply to storm surges although in all cases
due attention should be paid to the different behavior of mean trend
and variance characterizing storms (Lowe et al., 2010). For instance,
(Conte and Lionello, 2013) presented variations up to±5% for both pos-
itive and negative surges in the Mediterranean Sea.

The downscaling for semi enclosed basins (e.g. the Mediterranean
Sea) is complex, becoming more difficult for smaller sub-basins (e.g.
the Black Sea and Danube Delta, see Stanica and Panin, 2009; Stanica
et al., 2013). Coastal processes and SLR at such local scales are driven
by regional steric (temperature) effects, precipitation–evaporation bal-
ance, river inflows and other oscillations at various frequencies (e.g.
water exchanges between the Mediterranean and North Atlantic)
(Tsimplis et al., 2004; Dan et al., 2009; Valchev et al., 2012).

Sea levels in the Black Sea have risen by 2.5 mm/yr since the 1990s
and by 1.5 mm/yr in the Western Mediterranean, with current satellite
records showing an acceleration of SLR commensurate with the wider
European and global patterns of SLR curves (EEA, 2014). Although
downscaled A–O GCM experiments are not well developed for the
Mediterranean/Black Sea region, model projections show the continua-
tion of this SLR trend up to 2100, coupledwith regional rises in temper-
ature (Church et al., 2013).
Fig. 2. Projected regional rise in sea level up to 2100

Please cite this article as: Sánchez-Arcilla, A., et al., Managing coastal envir
viron (2016), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2016.01.124
In Fig. 2, SLR projections for the RCP 2.6, 4.5 and 8.5 scenarios are
presented at the nearest node of the selected case studies. TheWestern
Irish Coast (Fig. 2b) is the zone where higher SLR and uncertainties ap-
pear. The 90% confidence interval presents values near 1.1m for RCP 8.5,
whereas the Mediterranean zone show less uncertainty and lower
mean values. The NWMediterranean has lower values than the Eastern
Mediterranean, following the trend that the altimeter observations
(EEA, 2014) highlighted.

Note also that the mean trends of RCPs tend to diverge in the
second part of the twenty-first century. This behavior (discussed
also in Section 7) can, thus, convey a misleading message at the begin-
ning of this century and can even justify postponing response decisions,
since the larger part of the uncertainty (and impacts) will start to
happen by 2040–2050.

The likely future increase in population for our studied coasts
(Neumann et al., 2015), associated to industrialization, urban growth
and expanding tourism, will bring the numbers of people living in the
littoral closer to the levels elsewhere in Europe. This means more than
25% of Europe's current population living at the coast (IPCC, 2014). Con-
tinuation of the established upward trend in this population growthwill
increase the vulnerability of coasts to the impacts of future SLR and
storminess under climate warming.

In Fig. 3 the population growth projections are presented (from
1960 to 2010, the historical data is fromWorld Bank country database)
based on the (IIASA, 2012) database. Each projection belongs to a SSP
(O’Neill et al., 2014) family, covering the following pathways: SSP1
(sustainability), SSP2 (middle of the road), SSP3 (regional rivalry),
SSP4 (inequality) and SSP5 (rapid growth).

Lower population is expected in the SSP3 narrative, because its rep-
resents a future in which the countries are almost self-sufficient with
minor trades and exports. However, SSP5 represents a rapid growth
with expenditure for mitigation strategies. Note that the SSP5 in the
Spanish and Irish case follow the same population gradient than the
last decade (2000 onwards) in which both have experienced a rapid
at the nearest node of the selected case studies.

onments under climate change: Pathways to adaptation, Sci Total En-

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2016.01.124


Fig. 3. Projected population from 2010 to 2100 at the three analyzed countries.
(Source: IIASA, 2012)

5A. Sánchez-Arcilla et al. / Science of the Total Environment xxx (2016) xxx–xxx
growth. Nevertheless, the common trend in Spain is towards stabiliza-
tion (except in SSP5 and SSP3); Ireland presents mild growth and
Romania shows depopulation gradients (by migration) similar to the
previous two decades.

4. The Spanish case

4.1. Coastal description

The Spanish coastline has an approximate length of 7900 km, 50% of
which consists of hard and soft cliffs (especially present at the Atlantic
border) and about 25% is comprised of sandy beaches. This situation of
geo-diversity is well represented by the Catalan coast, 800 km long
and located in the Spanish Mediterranean.

The Catalan coast presents almost all type of littoral environments.
The northern sector is composed by the presence of cliffs (about
280 km of the total length) and prominent headlands delimiting pocket
beaches that span a vast range of dimensions and are typically of coarse
sediment. The southern part is typically represented by low lying
beaches of fine sediments. The central part is under the influence of
the metropolitan area of Barcelona and concentrates most of the ma-
rinas and urban settlements which have created a segmented coastal
landscape due to an important coastal protection activity. The main
morphological features are the Ebro delta unit at the south (a 50 km
sandy fringe), the straight segmented and relatively coarse sand
beaches at the centre (represented by the Barcelona–Maresme system)
and the Tordera delta and Costa Brava pocket beaches and cliffs at the
North tract (see Fig. 1).

This coast is located in a micro-tidal and fetch limited environment.
The astronomical tidal range is less than 0.4 m although during storms
the associated surge can reach values up to 1 m. The mean offshore sig-
nificant wave height for the area is 0.7 mwith an associated wave peri-
od of 7 s. The directional distribution of waves at the Northern and
Southern parts of the coast show a predominance of NW and N compo-
nentswhereas at the central part the East and South directions are dom-
inant. There are two main meteorological patterns for wave storminess
(Bolanos et al., 2009): an intense high-pressure centre on the British
islands which induces strong NE and E winds and a Mediterranean
cyclo-genesis in front of the Catalan coast generating Ewinds. Themax-
imum recorded Hs is about 6 m (with Hmax up to 10 m) and peak pe-
riods of about 14 s. Fig. 4 shows the wave directional diagrams at
different locations along the coast obtained from the existing wave
buoys for the period 1984 to 2007. As it can be seen north-eastern and
Eastern components feature the highest waves whereas the southern
Please cite this article as: Sánchez-Arcilla, A., et al., Managing coastal envir
viron (2016), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2016.01.124
component, although present, has typically lower values. There is no di-
rect correlation between wave storms and surges, meaning that storms
can be found in wave records with and without an associated mean
water level surge.

Natural and artificial barriers modulate sediment dynamics and di-
vide the coast into 22 littoral cells (CIIRC (2010)). The average beach
has a width of about 37 m, with a mean sand size from 0.2 to 1.8 mm
(median value of about 0.7 mm) and a foreshore slope steeper than 1/
10. The spatial distribution of sediment along the coast reflects the dif-
ferences in river basins, which have historically provided solid dis-
charges to the coast, later reworked by wave action. Beaches located
close to the mouth of the main rivers present sediment finer than for
beaches fed by ephemeral streamflows (usually very short). This gener-
al pattern has been modified in the last decades by the supply of
allocthonus sediments (of marine and terrestrial origin) in a consider-
able number of beach nourishment operations that have created an ar-
tificialmorphodynamic signature inmost of the beaches. As an example
of this alteration, only in the central part of the Catalan coast more than
10 millions of sand have been supplied in different beach nourishment
operations during the last 20 years (Gracia et al., 2013b).

Urban sandy beaches are typically bounded in their backside by a
seafront promenade and infrastructures like streets, roads, railways
and houses. In the last years, the maintenance and development of
promenades has been one of the major investments undertaken by
the Spanish government, with more than 50 M€ only in Catalonia dur-
ing the last two decades (CEDEX, 2013; Hamm et al., 2002).

The shoreline changes for the period 1995–2004 show a general re-
treat, with more than 70% of Catalan beaches eroding (CIIRC, 2010),
with average rates of about −2.1 m/yr and of about −3.3 m/yr when
the Ebro delta is considered. Only 24% of the beaches have experienced
accretion with an average rate of about +1.5 m/yr. and mainly corre-
spond to areas located at the end of coastal cells which bank up the sed-
iment from the upstream part of the cell or, in the particular case of the
Ebro delta, from its ending spits.

4.2. Low sustainability practices

It is accepted that the urban development at the Catalan coastal
started in the 70s under low regulatory conditions (Malvarez et al.,
2000). The lack of a general management strategy followed by the con-
struction of coastal promenades, second houses (fed by tourism needs)
and existing urban growth pressure jointly with the regulation of river
basins have led to the present sediment starvation needing coastal
protection.
onments under climate change: Pathways to adaptation, Sci Total En-

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2016.01.124


Fig. 4.Wave climate at the coasts of Ireland, Spain (NWMediterranean) and Romania.

6 A. Sánchez-Arcilla et al. / Science of the Total Environment xxx (2016) xxx–xxx
The urban development has resulted in high population density
along the coastal fringe (6.000–7.000 persons/kmof coastwhen perma-
nent residents plus tourists are considered). This squeezing requires a
minimum beach width to support coastal functions and also to defend
the hinterland (infrastructures and territory). During the second half
of the 1980s and early 1990s, beach nourishment was the common so-
lution to fight against erosion,withmore than 10Mm3 in about 10 years
of which only small fraction remains in place. This situation has been
pointed out by some recent research (Eurosion, 2004; Gracia et al.,
2013b, Marchand et al., 2011).

The lack of a general coastal master plan to fight against erosion, the
difficulty to obtain suitable volumes of sediment with enough quality
plus the present economic situation has led to the presentmanagement
strategy, where actions are taken after the impact. This reactive man-
agement also includes the “no active intervention” policy, resulting
often in a degenerative beach state.

The Central part of the Catalan coast (excluding the Ebro system),
that is the Barcelona–Maresme coastal stretch, is an example of such sit-
uation. The area is the longer tract with eroding beaches and also where
most of the locally accretive beaches are found. This behaviour is basi-
cally due to the net littoral drift, from north to south, and the existence
of numerous marinas interrupting the alongshore dynamics. This re-
striction creates a local shoreline retreat at the beaches in the north of
the cells and a lower accretion at the southern part of the cells, linked
to the downstream barrier.

The area is directly exposed to themost energeticwave events (East-
ern component) andhas a backside limit due to an almost fully occupied
territory (settlements and infrastructures). This situation blocks the
natural onshore dynamics typically observed during high energy epi-
sodes. Coastal segmentation has created a sediment redistribution pat-
tern which is incompatible with the socio-economic demand of a
minimum homogeneous emerged beach width along the sector. The
alongshore sediment blockage generated by the construction of struc-
tures and the near total decrease of river sediment supply (large enough
in size to be stable for the emerged beach) has resulted in a sediment
budget imbalance in most littoral cells.

The existence of these artificial obstacles has also created a diver-
gence in alongshore sediment transport, generating local erosional hot
spots south of the barriers which lead to important local losses of
emerged beach (see Fig. 5). The periodic beach nourishment of those
areas or/and the construction of small groins constraining sedimentmo-
bility have been common strategies carried out for maintaining beach
Please cite this article as: Sánchez-Arcilla, A., et al., Managing coastal envir
viron (2016), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2016.01.124
width. However, the high erosion rates and the limited availability of
suitable sediment cast some doubts on the sustainability of such an ap-
proach, normally interruptedwhenever the economic or environmental
situationsmake this solution unacceptable. This has led to the construc-
tion of alongshore riprap revetments to defend certain sectors.

The deployment of groins to increase the residence time of the sed-
iment within the cell has also proved to be fruitless (CEDEX, 2013;
Jimenez et al., 2011). Two main processes can explain such behaviour:
a) the creation of offshore currents that transport sediment out of the
cell towards deeper regions and b) the re-orientation of the shoreline
parallel to the most energetic wave trains. In the first case, although
the sediment does not leave the domain, it is deposited in an area
where only high wave conditions can return it to the coast, leading to a
growing deficit of emerged sand volume. The shoreline re-orientation is
highly sensitive to the incident wave direction. In these beaches waves
act very obliquely to the shoreline due to the small periods and man-
made obstacles can only retain a limited sand volume, with sediment
rapidly reaching the head of the groins and by-passing it towards the
down drift sector (Jimenez et al., 2011; Sanchez-Arcilla et al., 2014,
2015a).

The complexity of these morphodynamic processes has led to two
main management strategies: a patchy (discontinuous) maintenance
and armouring of the coast and the small partitioning into coastal cells
that will next be subject to an almost complete closure with submerged
breakwaters (e.g. Barcelona urban beaches). However, neither option
has allowed the maintenance of a homogeneous beach width. Two
main processes can explain such non desired dynamics: a) the segmen-
tation creates a subset of diffraction points that form logarithmic shaped
bays with less width at the centre and wider areas at the borders
and b) the natural cyclic onshore-offshore coastal dynamics which fa-
vours an offshore transport of finer sediments, reducing the width of
the emerged beach. This has resulted in low sustainability for a narrow
coastal fringe that presents a high level of vulnerability under present
and future climates.

4.3. High sustainability practices

Due to the scarcity of sediment for many sectors in the Catalan coast
the actions undertaken in the last 20 years (also extensive for the rest of
the Spanish territory) have been unsuccessful to maintain a sandy belt
as required by tourism and hinterland protection. New coastal strate-
gies incorporating the whole river catchment basin and targeting
onments under climate change: Pathways to adaptation, Sci Total En-

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2016.01.124


Fig. 5. Erosional hotspots southwards Catalan harbours.

7A. Sánchez-Arcilla et al. / Science of the Total Environment xxx (2016) xxx–xxx
medium to long term scales, moving from protection to a more pro-
active policy will increase the overall coastal sustainability. The Spanish
Ministry of Environment is preparing such a plan under the principles
that coastal management should consider sediment availability and cli-
mate change plus a commitment to “integration” regarding scales and
uses. However, there has not yet been a general implementation of
the plan and in many cases coastal management continues along the
old track. Because of that, municipalities are starting to play a more ac-
tive role demanding not only economic resources but also making
Fig. 6. Shoreline changes in south Barcelona

Please cite this article as: Sánchez-Arcilla, A., et al., Managing coastal envir
viron (2016), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2016.01.124
proposals for maintaining a minimum beach width to ensure beach
functions (Section 7).

An illustration from the coast south of Barcelonawill be presented in
what follows, showing the feasibility of sustainable shoreline retreat
(Fig. 6). The observed erosion is the result of combined human and nat-
ural factors,making it difficult to establish amain culprit. The expansion
of Barcelona harbour with the construction of a long jetty (down to 8m
water depth) in the Llobregat River (Fig. 6) has shortened the supply of
sediment from the North. A small craft harbour (Port Ginesta) closes the
harbour during the period 2004–2010.

onments under climate change: Pathways to adaptation, Sci Total En-

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2016.01.124


8 A. Sánchez-Arcilla et al. / Science of the Total Environment xxx (2016) xxx–xxx
cell at the South. The sequence of southern and northern stormwaves is
no longer able to produce alongshore sediment fluxes in the two shore
parallel directions (senses). The barrier effect enhances cross shore
transport (losses) and prevents river discharges to supply sediment to
the active coastal profile.

The coastal management plan for the area consists of periodic nour-
ishments that back-pass sand from the southern end of the littoral cell
to the northern border. However, after almost one million cubic meters
of sand nourished in the last 6 years, the desired effects have not been
achieved and at present someof the beaches present an alarming reduc-
tion of emerged width. This is due to the difficulty of finding suitable
sediment sizes since the expected alongshore winnowing results in a
grain size classification providing only the finer fractions at the end of
the unit (the more frequent source areas).

Taking all those aspects into consideration, the Gava municipality
has proposed a maintenance plan where themain target is to safeguard
a minimum emerged width. Based on this an initial nourishment has
been designed taking the sediment from the emerged and shallow
neighbouring beaches instead of looking for sources outside the littoral
cell. Sediment placement has also been designed to have a smooth
coastline shape in order to reduce longshore sediment transport gradi-
ents (LIM/UPC, 2014). Besides, at the back beach an ephemeral small
dune of 1.5 m has been proposed to protect infrastructures from
Fig. 7. Transient dune alternatives and storm res

Please cite this article as: Sánchez-Arcilla, A., et al., Managing coastal envir
viron (2016), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2016.01.124
storm events of 15 years return period. The dune acts also as a sediment
bufferwhichwill naturally feed the area, thus enhancing the presence of
an emerged beach. Fig. 7 shows the dune/beach profile response at dif-
ferent locations selected for testing the design using amodifiedXBEACH
model (Roelvink et al., 2009). The parameters of the model have been
calibrated with similar dissipative beaches in the neighbourhood
(Gracia et al., 2013a).

Themainmorphodynamic changes are found between the−0.5 and
2 m isobaths. Several dune layouts were tested showing similar
morphodynamic simulations: erosion at the emerged part and sand ac-
cumulation in the submerged part. This general behaviour can be ex-
plained by the relatively steady offshore wave climate for return
periods from 2 to 15 years (meteo and fetch controlled).

The simulated behaviour shows an increase in sand transport under
storms. This leads to erosion at the emerged part of the profile and accu-
mulation in the submerged part. For extreme wave conditions and
under highmean sea levels, the beach response is a scarp that enhances
erosion. After a set of storms the beachnatural recovery becomes harder
and requires higher energy swells (uncommon in the area) or artificial
means.

The averaged loss of sand with the transient dune during storms
(spanning from 5 to 15 years return periods) is around 15,000 m3.
Water depths from 0 to 2 m present an accretive behaviour (around
ponse at Gavà beach (NW Mediterranean).

onments under climate change: Pathways to adaptation, Sci Total En-

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2016.01.124


9A. Sánchez-Arcilla et al. / Science of the Total Environment xxx (2016) xxx–xxx
7000m3). Longshore currents play an important role (around 0.4m/s in
average), with littoral drift mobilising significant sand volumes
southwards.

The emerged zone flattens when the dune collapses. Note that at
Fig. 7, the dune starts to fail not under a collision regime (erosion at
the offshore side) but because of overtopping volumes from the storm
peak. The dune can withstand increases of 40 cm in mean sea levels
that would correspond to a present storm surge or a future climatic
rise. Beyond that point, the dune entirely collapses and sea level has a
more prominent effect in themorphodynamic signature. This is because
as waves increase, more sediment can be advected onshorewards,
reaching a maximum for elevations between 1.5 and 2 m.

Permanent monitoring of beach evolution and the main driving
factors (waves andmeanwater level) has been proposed to support ob-
jective decisions and an ephemeral set of transient defence measures.
The concept behind these interventions is linked to the difficulty of
guaranteeing permanent protection and accepting a permanent main-
tenance of the beach. The idea of ephemeral defences has been taken
into consideration in other European regions (Harley and Ciavola,
2013) and assessed numerically for some nearby beaches (Garcia-
Leon et al., 2015). Such transientmeasuresmust go togetherwith a fore-
casting (early warning) system that supports dynamic interventions or
maintenance of the beach.

Another case of high sustainability practices can be designed for the
Ebro Delta, 200 km south of Barcelona. Flooding and erosion are consid-
ered as the most important risks by stakeholders (Rovira et al., 2014).
This is due to the scarcity of sediment arriving from the regulated
river catchment basin. Providing additional sediment volumes for off-
setting subsidence and horizontal erosion would be an illustration of
working with natural processes to increase resilience. This could be
achieved by regulated floods from riverine and marine origins (Ibáñez
et al., 2014; Sanchez-Arcilla et al., 2015b).

5. The Irish case

5.1. Coastal description

Ireland's coasts are dominated by high wave energy conditions,
developed under North Atlantic storm patterns, and with 2–4 m range
meso- to macro-tidal regimes. Mean significant wave heights (see
Fig. 4) larger than 3.5 m in winter occur on fully exposed western
coasts, reducing eastwards into the more protected and shorter fetch
conditions of the Celtic and Irish Seas to values smaller than 2 m
(Vijaykumar et al., 2006; Jenkins et al., 2009; O'Shea and Murphy,
2013). The inherited glacial ‘soft’ sediments comprising many of these
coasts commonly show mean erosion rates of 0.5–1.0 m/yr under cur-
rent rates of sea-level rise (SLR). Sediments from these eroding tracts,
coupled with past high onshore sediment supply during the early to
mid-Holocene, have resulted in the formation ofmany beach-dune-bar-
rier structures, of varyingdimensions (e.g., 1–5 km in length, 0.5–1.0 km
width and 5-more than 20 m height above beach level). In turn, these
have allowed the development of extensive low energy back-barrier
lagoon and wetland systems, in many locations linked to estuary
environments.

The appropriate management of these beach-dune-barriers is prob-
lematic, as they are natural attractors for people, uses in agriculture (e.g.
animal grazing and cultivation), sand and mineral resource extraction,
coastal housing, infrastructural developments and in local recreation
to wider tourism activities (see e.g. Delaney et al., 2012). Under future
impacts of accelerated SLR, storminess and increased coastal erosion
rates, these systems are likely to undergo significant changes in struc-
ture and position, as part of a general coastal squeeze (Cooper and
Pilkey, 2012). Contrasting examples of approaches in dealing with the
management of these systems exist in Ireland, emphasising the difficul-
ties in finding management techniques acceptable at local community
levels, but also consistent with good coastal governance and ‘best
Please cite this article as: Sánchez-Arcilla, A., et al., Managing coastal envir
viron (2016), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2016.01.124
practice’ management options (Cooper and Cummins, 2009; Devoy,
2008; Gault et al., 2007; Gray et al., 2014).

5.2. Low sustainability practices

On the high energy Atlantic margin of Europe occur the prominent
beach-dune-barrier systems of Inch and Rossbehy, formed at the head
of Dingle Bay, southwest Ireland (Figs. 1 and 8). These two ‘spit-like’
structures have formed within a long (c.40 km) and narrow (c.10 km)
sedimentary compartmentalised embayment and are controlled by a
mixed wave and tide dominated regime (Devoy, 2009; Kandrot et al.,
2014). The beach has sediment with a D50 of 0.235mm, with a relative
tidal range (RTR) of 2.9 m and a dimensionless fall velocity (Ω) value of
6. These spits developed under Holocene sea-level rise (SLR) on North-
South aligned glacial end-moraines were formed at the end of the last
glacial stage (MIS 2-4) and are orientated normal to the present onshore
wave action (Devoy, 2015a).

Minor drift-aligned shoreline spits are found at the distal ends of
these barriers. Today, the barriers are separated by an ebb-tidal delta,
but probably developed initially as a single structure across the bay in
the early- to mid-Holocene through sediment rollover mechanisms
under SLR (Devoy et al., 1996; Devoy, 2015a). This early barrier was
breached circa 3000 years BP, leading to the formation of the present
spit-like morphologies (Delaney et al., 2012).

Extensive back-barrier freshwaterwetland andfluvial environments
formed behind this feature, before changing to intertidal wetlands post
breaching. Whilst the Inch Spit appears to be relatively stable today,
Rossbehy was breached by a storm surge in 2008. The loss of dune
volume reached a maximum of 530,000 m3/yr in 2008 and culminated
in the 13–14 December 2008 breach which left a small northern island
at around 500 m from the southern dune systems at high water
(Williams et al., 2015). Henceforth, the erosion rates continue at rates
of 30–50m/yr along its core-length and at circa 25m/yr on the seaward
shore face, with the breach doubling in size to 1400 m width from
2012–2014.

Breaching events will likely become more frequent in response to
rising sea levels due wave action at higher elevations across beach and
dune profiles (Williams et al., 2015). Under future SLR associated to cli-
mate warming (about 0.8 m SLR by 2100 for the RCP 8.5, see Section 3)
this structuremay disintegrate, with significant impacts on Inch and the
morpho-hydrodynamics of neighbouring coastal systems, though the
barrier may reform in part or possibly move further east on land
(Church et al., 2013; O'Shea and Murphy, 2013; Devoy, 2015a).

These barriers and adjacent wetlands have attracted persistent at-
tention as a valuable location for coastal geomorphological and wider
science research (e.g., Duffy and Devoy, 1999; Orford et al., 1997). The
dunes on Inch particularly have been recognised as ecologically and
floristically significant and classified as a Special Area for Conservation
and Scientific Interest (SAC/SSIs), (NPWS, 2011). For the wider public,
the visual attractiveness of the area is considered as high, which has
been important in causing not only a persistent growth since the
1980s in tourist and other recreational users to Inch and Rossbehy, but
also as a draw for coastal housing (both first and second homes) and
small business developments.

The growth in buildings in the immediate back-barriers areas (more
than 100 houses situated below 10 mmean sea level) has added signif-
icantly to the area's infrastructures (e.g. roads, harbours, jetties). Earlier
buildings were linked more to the needs of the local primary industries
such as farming, fishing and aquaculture.

This people-attraction factor is of particular importance now, due to
the vulnerability of these environments to coastal flooding, erosion and
cliffing-slope instability and collapse (Devoy, 1992, 2008; KCC, 2001;
O’Connor et al., 2010). The consequences of this vulnerability for invest-
ment have been costly, in terms of demands for increased coastal pro-
tection works and earlier in the 19th and 20th Centuries in extensive
land reclamation schemes (Duffy and Devoy, 1999).
onments under climate change: Pathways to adaptation, Sci Total En-

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2016.01.124


Fig. 8. Inch and Rossbehy spit shoreline evolution from OSI map aerial photographs and field survey data since 1842.
(O'Shean and Murphy, 2013)

10 A. Sánchez-Arcilla et al. / Science of the Total Environment xxx (2016) xxx–xxx
The building of circa 250 m of rip-rap embankment in 2009 (Fig. 1),
to protect the coastal road and the northern junction of Inch with the
mainland (costing more than €4M) shows the need to have integrated
funding plans (the Local Authority had no immediate funding). Subse-
quently, annual wave erosion and storm impacts on the beach, road
and tourism infrastructures at Rossbehy, particularly the impact of the
December 2013–February 2014 storm surges, have cost more than
€1M in remedial measures alone (Fig. 1) see e.g. (KCC, 2009; Gault
et al., 2011, O’Connor et al., 2010). These costs, in the context of very
limited Local Authority coastal management budgets and the 3500 km
of Ireland's ‘soft’ sedimentary coasts experiencing potentially similar
problems make the situation not sustainable.

As coastal systems, these beach-dune-barriers are not subject to ac-
tive control and management, except within the context of overall
coastal planning policies, which recognise the sensitive and vulnerable
nature of these environments (ECOPRO, 1996; Cooper and Pile, 2014).
Please cite this article as: Sánchez-Arcilla, A., et al., Managing coastal envir
viron (2016), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2016.01.124
However, established seasonal uses for animal pasture of these increas-
ingly environmentally stressed dune areas continues.

Local community pressure persists for the development of the cur-
rently more stable northern end of Inch as a golf course and the further
encouragement of beach tourism. Off-road vehicles and horse riding are
using the dunes increasingly, together with walking and the wider im-
pacts of people, establishing new track ways and causing extensive
sand mobilisation and erosion. Vehicles also continue to be permitted
general access at Inch to the beaches fronting the dunes, adding to the
sand losses from the beach and dune systems. Whilst local bye-laws
and coastal legislation exist to prohibit or control the extent of such ac-
tivities, this is not enforced rigorously, in spite of the best efforts of the
Local Authority beach wardens (Gault et al., 2011).

Understanding and developing projections of how these structures
will respond to future changes in coastal boundary conditions will de-
pend upon the continued monitoring of these environments linked to
onments under climate change: Pathways to adaptation, Sci Total En-

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2016.01.124


11A. Sánchez-Arcilla et al. / Science of the Total Environment xxx (2016) xxx–xxx
high resolution morpho-hydrodynamic modelling. The use of interven-
tionist approaches in managing these systems, in view of a likely ten-
dency towards their further degradation and eventual disintegration,
could be classified within a low sustainability category.

5.3. High sustainability practices

The North Dublin Bay area lies north of Howth Head, east coast
Ireland, and includes the seaside communities from Portmarnock to
Rush, which have developed extensively as urban areas since the 1950s
(Fig. 9). Coasts here contain comparable higher energy beach- and
dune-barrier systems to those found at Inch and Rossbehy, together
with estuarine environments (Mulrennan, 1990, 1993; Orford et al.,
1997). The barriers are fronted similarly by wide, commonly 50–150 m
width, fine sand beaches. The wave energy regime is characterised by
southerly degrading swell waves and by waves generated internally
under short fetches within the Irish Sea (Vijaykumar et al., 2006). Coastal
erosion events are common under storm surges and the retreat of the
dune-barriers has been a cause of concern and implementation of
engineered protection measures for decades (Gault et al., 2007).

Schemes for dune stabilisation have been implemented at various
times since the early 20th Century, using the planting of Marram and
Lyme grasses, together with Sea Buckthorn (Hippophae rhamnoides)
(Binggeli et al., 1992). These coastal areas support a number of promi-
nent golf courses and form amajor focus for recreation in the Dublin re-
gion. Activities include daily-based uses by the local population
(e.g., walking, dog walking, horse riding, swimming), together with
manywider recreational uses fromweekend visitors and seasonal sum-
mer tourism. Further, the dunes themselves attract intensive use, apart
from the specific golfing activities (Gault et al., 2007). They have also
been encroached on for building since the 1920s, initially for temporary
beach huts and holiday homes, but increasingly since the 1980s for
more permanent residences. This building pressure has concentrated
people's attention on coastal erosion, with storms post 2005 causing
more than 5–10 m of dune loss in single events, and consequently in-
creased calls by seaside residents for the building of fixed defence
structures.

In response to this range of uses and development pressures the
Local Authority has initiated a proactive policy of coastal management.
This has covered a wide range of initiatives since the mid 2000 s. The
problems of sediment losses and the general nuisance created by
beach vehicle access has been stopped, or reduced significantly. The
open access dune areas, many of which had become overgrown by Sea
Buckthorn have been cleared progressively and Marram grass planting
schemes developed, together with the use of screens, brush-wood fenc-
ing and other bio-defence techniques. People's access to the beaches
through the dune-barriers has increasingly become routed via fenced
Fig. 9. Zonification of activities/interventions and coas

Please cite this article as: Sánchez-Arcilla, A., et al., Managing coastal envir
viron (2016), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2016.01.124
and corduroy-wood pathways (Fig. 9). Additionally, an along-coast
walkway has been developed, where feasible, as part of awider national
and EU funded coastal tourism and heritage development (Gault et al.
(2007).

The problems of coastal erosion continue, but are not being ad-
dressed through the implementation of high cost engineered defence
structures. Beach levels and erosion monitoring schemes, involving
local community participation where possible, are being practised. The
local communities are also being involved in discussion on the issues
of the long term cost and sustainability of traditional fixed coastal
protection structures. Discussions have encouraged thinking in terms
of alternative approaches, including structured coastal retreat, compen-
sation for property loss and the use of low cost remedial protection
techniques, where some defence measures become essential (Gault
et al., 2007;Marchand et al., 2011). These approaches remain controver-
sial locally, but are being initiated. Due to the comparatively lower cost
and impact of these approaches, and particularly their reduced carbon
footprint, this case can be considered an illustration of good adaptation
in the face of future climatic changes.

6. The Romanian case

6.1. Coastal description

The Danube Delta coast has a total length of about 240 km, divided
between the Ukraine and Romania. The Romanian part of the Danube
Delta coast is a stretch of 160 km of low-lying natural beaches generally
consisting of fine sands brought by the Danube River and redistributed
by waves and currents. The Danube delta coast morphology, sedimen-
tology and recent dynamics have been extensively studied and de-
scribed by a series of publications, see e.g. (Panin, 1996, 1998, 1999;
Giosan et al., 1999; Ungureanu and Stanica, 2000; Bhattacharya and
Giosan, 2003; Stanica et al., 2007, 2011; Stanica and Panin, 2009;
Vespremeanu-Stroe et al., 2007; Dan et al., 2009, 2011).

The Danube Delta coast (Stanica et al., 2013) can be divided into
three major coastal sedimentary cells that from North to South can be
presented as (Fig. 10) Chilia (Kilia) sedimentary cell, Sulina — Sf.
Gheorghe sedimentary cell and Zatoane–Midia Harbour sedimentary
cell. The solid discharge that feds these cells has decreased to a half
with a baseline prior to 1970 when the Iron Gate I (943 km upstream)
and II (864 km upstream) were built in 1970 and 1983, respectively
(Giosan et al., 2013).

The Chilia cell represents the coast in front of the Kilia secondary
delta. Most of it is in the Ukraine and it includes also the state boundary
between the Ukraine and Romania in Musura Lagoon (area with active
sedimentation, which has been recently transformed from a bay into a
lagoon). The southern boundary of this cell is impermeable, being
tline evolution at the Northern beaches of Dublin.

onments under climate change: Pathways to adaptation, Sci Total En-

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2016.01.124


Fig. 10. Danube delta littoral cells, shoreline evolution and longshore sediment patterns.

12 A. Sánchez-Arcilla et al. / Science of the Total Environment xxx (2016) xxx–xxx
marked by the Sulina Canal jetties. These were built to protect the wa-
terway and ensure the safe navigation along Sulina, the middle branch
of the Danube. These structures extend 8km offshore; they block sedi-
ment transported alongshore from the north and represent thus an im-
permeable boundary between the Kilia and Sulina — Sf. Gheorghe
sedimentary cells.

The Sulina— Sf. Gheorghe sedimentary cell is about 60 km in length,
where 34 km spans between the Danube mouths of Sulina and Sf.
Gheorghe; whilst Sahalin Spit, at the southern part of the Sf. Gheorghe
Danube mouth, covers the rest. The southern tip of Sahalin Spit is the
southern cell boundary. The general longshore circulation pattern is
from north to south, except for the northern section. Herein, the Sulina
jetties generate an eddy-like current, which has reversed the longshore
drift from south to north. Most sediment from this cell is Danube born
Please cite this article as: Sánchez-Arcilla, A., et al., Managing coastal envir
viron (2016), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2016.01.124
material, with less than 10% of calcareous material derived from shell
fragments. The southern cell boundary is permeable, some sediments
being occasionally transported to the neighbouring sedimentary cell
under specific conditions.

At the central part (spanning about 20 km), the shoreline is rapidly
eroding with rates ranging between 5 and 20 m/yr (Giosan et al.,
2013). The Zatoane–Midia Harbour sedimentary cell is about 100 km
in length, mainly represented by the barrier beaches separating the
Razelm–Sinoe Lagoon system from the Black Sea. There were three
inlets of the lagoon system — Portita, Periboina and Edighiol, all
engineered between 1970 and late 1980s. Subsequently Portita inlet
was closed and developed for tourism, while the inlets Periboina and
Edighiol have now lock systems meant to control the water circulation
between the sea and the lagoon. Most sediments are Danube alluvia,
onments under climate change: Pathways to adaptation, Sci Total En-

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2016.01.124


13A. Sánchez-Arcilla et al. / Science of the Total Environment xxx (2016) xxx–xxx
many of these remobilized by erosion of previous littoral bars. There is a
gradual southwards increase (up to about 50%) in the calcareous frac-
tion (sands from mollusc shell fragments). The last few kilometres of
this coastal cell are shaped by the first cliff outcrops at Cape Midia, the
headlands being separated by long pocket beaches. The northern jetty
of Midia Harbour represents the southern limit of this cell. This jetty,
built around 1980 has a length of 5km and blocks sediment longshore
transfer towards the south, the Bay of Mamaia and Constanta City and
Harbour.

6.2. Low sustainability practices

Since the Danube Delta coast mostly remains in its natural state,
with wild low lying sandy beaches, it is impossible to provide examples
for bad practices at the scale of the entire coast. No implemented prac-
tices that have had a bad effect on the current coastal dynamics were
ever meant to play a role for coastal protection against erosion, while
the disastrous plans for so called coastal protection developed 2 decades
ago have never been put in practice.

Nevertheless, the coastal navigation and harbour protection works
from the northern and southern boundaries of the coast have complete-
ly altered the sediment dynamics. Sulina jetties in the North (extending
8kmoffshore) andMidia Jetties (extending 5kmoffshore) represent im-
permeable coastal cell boundaries and induce a strong disequilibrium
on the longshore sediment transfer. The southern boundary (Midia
jetties) has also played a role in decreasing the coastal area fed by the
Danube-born alluvia. Before their construction, theMamaia Bay beaches
(now outside the study area, which is also Romania`s biggest tourist re-
sort) consisted of Danube born fine sediments.

Sulina jetties have altered the longshore dynamics and a sand bar is
still forming at the river mouth. For navigation purposes it has to be
dredged annually, but the material is deposited offshoreward, outside
the active zone, rather than being deployed at the erosive spots at the
Sulina-St Gheorghe cell. More than 7 Mm3 have been dredged from
1991 to 2007 (Stanica et al., 2011). There is also accretion just at the be-
ginning of the same cell, with observed rates of 5–8 m/yr (Stanica and
Panin, 2009).

The closure of the Portita Inlet in 1974, aimed at transforming
Razelm Lagoon into a freshwater lake was achieved by a set of 4 groins,
which have played amajor role in the local disruption of coastal dynam-
ics (Ungureanu and Stanica, 2000). The coastal stretch south of Portia
haswitnessed an increase of the rate of coastal erosion, being nowadays
around 5 m/yr (Vespremeanu-Stroe et al., 2007).

6.3. High sustainability practices

Based on available information we consider as best practice for the
Danube Delta coast the present Master plan for the Protection against
Erosion for the Romanian Littoral. This exhaustive coastal protection
document has been developed between 2011–2012 by a consortium
led by Halcrow Ltd., in cooperation with GeoEcoMar, NIRD Antipa, Uni-
versity of Bucharest and the Institute of Marine Sciences — CNR, Italy.
The plan acknowledges the legal status of Nature Protected Site of the
Danube Delta coast and the dedicated coastal protection plans take
this status into account. The strategy for most of the coast is to leave
the beaches in natural evolution, abiding to the principle “nature must
deal with nature”. The spatial planning of the Danube Delta Biosphere
Reserve, including also the coastal zone, prevents development of new
constructions in unbuilt areas. As an extra protectionmeasure, a setback
line has been implemented along the entire Romanian coast with a
width of 150 m from the position of the shoreline during calm seas, as
defined at the end of the years 2000, see e.g. (Sanò et al., 2011;
Stanica et al., 2011). New setback line positions are to be re-
established periodically, in order to take into account future coastline
positions.
Please cite this article as: Sánchez-Arcilla, A., et al., Managing coastal envir
viron (2016), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2016.01.124
This policy, which ensures space for natural processes to occur is
supported by the fact that, except for 2 settlements and other 3 devel-
oped sites with restricted areas, along the Danube Delta coast there
are only very few permanent buildings, generally belonging to fisher-
men associations. The natural occurrence of reed beds in the close vicin-
ity of the shoreline play, in some areas, the role of “green protection”.
Other proposals (Stanica et al., 2011) have suggested redistributing
sand from the available sand reservoirs to erosive spots. Part of the ap-
plied budget may also be used to smooth the coastline with punctual
beach nourishments, with the aim of reducing topography induced
longshore gradients (as proposed in the Llobregat Delta, Section 4).

To maintain the natural evolution for most of the coast, the
Master plan has a different proposal for the beaches between the Sulina
and Sf. Gheorghe mouths, which represent a different means of
implementing the “nature with nature” policy. Since the Sulina jetties,
which extend 8 km offshore (see description in previous paragraphs),
have played a significant role in altering the sediment transport on
this part of the coast, the Master plan suggests the need to develop a
sediment by-pass system,whichwouldmaintain the jetties but help re-
store the natural circulation. Plans exist also for the local protection of
the 2 passages built on the inlets connecting Sinoe Lagoon to the sea,
which are essential for the environmental restoration of this lagoon.
Sinoe Lagoon inlets were engineered in the 1980s, having thus had lim-
ited connections with the sea for about 2 decades, and the impact of
these measures on the lagoon habitat has been significant. Therefore
the need to restore and maintain water circulation has been acknowl-
edged since the years 2000, when the inlets were left under free flow
conditions.

Initiatives proposed for the Ebro Delta (Section 4) can also be ap-
plied to the DanubeDelta (Rovira et al., 2014). Two strategic sand reser-
voirs can be found at the Sulina mouth (0.42 Mm3/yr) and the Musura
bay (north of the Sulina jetties). In order to increase sediment trapping,
some authors (Giosan et al., 2013) have proposed increased channeliza-
tion and abandoning erosive deltaic lobes, which would provide a sedi-
ment budget for stabilizing other areas. They also remarked that
drowning of paleo-sand ridge sets and turning them into barrier
systems could provide transient protection to the inland deltaic plain.

7. A shared roadmap. Integrated assessment (present and future
landscape)

The interventions described (Sections 4 to 6) span a representative
vision of present and near future coastal interventions in a range of
European coasts settings. The spatial scales and lifetime differ among
them, but some commonalities can be extracted towards the design of
a shared roadmap. Two complementary paradigms are proposed for
that: the benefits of long-term planning, based on top-down strategies
and the efficiency of short-term interventions, driven by bottom-up
strategies.

Identifying flexibilities and rigidities constitutes the first step for de-
signing a pro-active pathway to sustainability. An adaptive plan needs
to have some solid foundations (rigidities) but with flexibility enough
to ensure that it will be applicable for the changing demands from
climate, society or other factors. Three layers can be envisioned for de-
veloping this plan: i) coastal archetype representing the physical sub-
stratum (Section 2), ii) climate factors incorporating climatic and
event scales and iii) social factors providing policy criteria and access
to funding (Section 3). The archetypes are the layer inwhichmore rigid-
ity exists because it is based on the geology, sediment budget and the
constraints generated by existing or planned infrastructures.

Whilst the Danube Delta (Section 6) presents an almost pristine en-
vironment with littoral cells that span more than 50 km, the Maresme
coast (Section 4) has cells with lengths smaller than 2 km and a rigid
backshore partly occupied by a railway and motorway used daily by
Barcelona commuters. The costs of replacing/substituting these infra-
structures limit the fan of possible adaptation options. As a consequence
onments under climate change: Pathways to adaptation, Sci Total En-

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2016.01.124


14 A. Sánchez-Arcilla et al. / Science of the Total Environment xxx (2016) xxx–xxx
the coastal protection function gains importance because of such valu-
able assets and this raises the vulnerability level. Better infrastructure
attracts population and the coastal fringe vulnerability augments in a
feedback loop that, unless broken, will take risk to an unacceptable
level in the near future under climate change.

A long-term plan requires setting up a reference baseline. In the near
future (until 2040), SLR projections (Section 3) present similar values.
At the second half of this century, however, the SLR gradient becomes
sharper for the high-end scenario (RCP 8.5). A high-end scenario is pre-
ferred as a baseline because it is both plausible and conservative. Bereft
of cheap energy and natural resources, the costs of adaptation and mit-
igation will increase throughout time and the transition towards a low-
carbon society will be difficult (Brown et al., 2013; Hinkel et al., 2014).
Available resources may be allocated to further economic growth
(with the possibility of reaching a dead-end at the short-term) or to a
societal transition combining rigid and flexible elements. Choosing the
first option would only be justified for lower RCPs, lowering adaptation
costs (with respect to higher RCPs) at the secondpart of the century and
resulting in savings that could be used for fostering economic growth.

Monitoring networks should provide the quantitative data required
for a continuous reassessment of impacts and the effect of “responses”.
Dynamic pathways need such information for forecasting and verifica-
tion (Haasnoot et al., 2013). This constitutes the basis for uncertainty re-
duction in the DPSIR chain, thus providing robustness in the decision
making. Long time series such as the XIOM network (Bolanos et al.,
2009) verifies model projections and sharpens the definition of the
pathways, integrating processes and interactions that the models can-
not reproduce.

Probabilistic projections can cope with some of the models’ limita-
tions. They can be introduced through combinations of perturbations
in boundary/initial conditions and throughmulti-ensemble simulations
(Wang et al., 2015). This probabilistic approach can serve for defining
upper limits (Jevrejeva et al., 2014a) or bounding the uncertainty
(Muis et al., 2015). Consistency among climatic co-factors and their de-
pendencies also enhances robustness and it can be introduced with
multivariate statistical methods such as Hierarchical Archimedean
Copulae (Lin-Ye et al., 2015).

Local interventions for coastal sustainability are here clustered into
two groups:workingwith nature (reed beds at the DanubeDelta, resto-
ration of dunes at Inch, overwash enhancement at Ebro Delta) and Tran-
sient Defence Measures (TDM), such as the fuse dune system at
Llobregat Delta. The TDM method consists of coastal protection based
on specific actions that should be deployed prior to extreme events.
The interest in these interventions will grow in a changing climate be-
cause enhanced flooding and erosion due to SLR and increases in popu-
lation will raise social and economic vulnerability (Section 4). TDMwill
become more competitive because they present lower costs and im-
pacts than conventional engineering solutions and offer added flexibil-
ity based on local resources (Sanchez-Arcilla et al., 2015a). Such an
approach, however, requires the support of an early warning system
to predict the storm impact with enough advance time to deploy the
TDM for the more vulnerable coastal sectors.

The cases of Rossbehy, Sahalin Spit and Trabucador bar present a dy-
namic behavior that can be improved through natural processes (work-
ing with Nature). These fragile environments are highly affected by
extreme events (Dan et al., 2011; Gracia et al., 2013a; Williams et al.,
2015). However, overwash episodes can lead to accretion (Ibáñez
et al., 2014; Sanchez-arcilla et al., 2015b) that results beneficial for the
mid to long term sediment budget. Long-term planning cannot include
hard works at the spit boundaries that could block the longshore sedi-
ment fluxes and, thus, prevent the natural sedimentary feeding of
these beaches (see Section 2). Limited artificial nourishment can be
shaped with a natural plan/profile such as for instance forming the
emerged part of a dune. That would provide a sediment buffer but
would also limit overwash, requiring a careful balance to offset any ad-
verse effects.
Please cite this article as: Sánchez-Arcilla, A., et al., Managing coastal envir
viron (2016), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2016.01.124
Local interventions for “urgent” short term problems are often in
conflict with long term sustainability criteria and cannot be easily im-
plemented by lack of a legal framework for “fast track” interventions
(Gault et al., 2011). The deployment of a TDM can be forecasted 72 h
prior to an extreme event and would require about 24 h to be built.
Such short term decisions should always provide the flexibility needed
to deal with coastal uncertainties and be shared with local stakeholders
to facilitate the uptake of new solutions. This is now easier than a few
years back due to the advent of more sophisticated tools for diagnosis
and forecasting coastal impacts and interactions (Garcia-Leon et al.,
2015; Gracia et al., 2014). Early warning systems fed by observational
networks can forecast extreme events and associated coastal hazards
(Sanchez-Arcilla et al., 2014). These tools would provide local commu-
nities with objective information that ensures the timely deployment
of TDM or longer term proactive interventions. This would result in
lower mitigation costs and C footprint (compared to conventional engi-
neering solutions).

The adaptation pathway should also include a follow-up, to assess
the efficiency of the proposed interventions and establish critical or tip-
ping points in the development (Haasnoot et al., 2013). It is an essential
requirement for an adaptation plan since only this information will
allow a critical assessment of the positive and negative impacts of the
intervention which together with its initial and maintenance costs
should permit a continuous assessment of the long term consequences.
The pathway should thus include an adjustment block, consisting of all
interventions that maximise the benefit or mitigate the negative impact
of past interventions. This adjustment should also incorporate a contin-
uous monitoring such as for instance would be required by artificial
nourishment or vegetation in the sense that part of the adjustment is
the maintenance of those activities (Stanica et al., 2011). The pathway
should finally include an educational component, to allow a proper in-
terpretation of costs and benefits at the various time scales and thanks
to that provide a structured input from stakeholders and the users of
that coastal system.

8. Conclusions

The elusive concepts of sustainability and adaptation have been here
considered starting form coastal functions such as tourism and protec-
tion for the hinterland. By interpreting littoral environments as pro-
viders of natural services we have shown the viability of applying the
DPSIR framework for analysis at present and future time scales.

From the comparative analysis of these three cases it has been found
that natural resilience is larger for more energetic coasts (Ireland) and
lower for littorals with milder drivers (Romania). Vulnerability, howev-
er, is larger for more intense competition between uses and longer
coastal tracts (e.g. Spain before the barriers were built). When assessing
low and high sustainability practices there were important commonal-
ities, linking unsustainability with short term (interventionist) ap-
proaches based on rigid barriers and limited duration nourishments.
This was accompanied by the lack of an integrated management (in
some cases such a plan existed bit was not implemented). The high sus-
tainability practices relied on a more holistic assessment of resources
(such as, for instance, sediment availability) including nearby coastal
areas and river catchment basins. It also involved incremental interven-
tions with regular monitoring and local community involvement. The
more sustainable approach favoured “green” protection, strategic sedi-
ment reservoirs and the establishment of set-back lines within a
planned realignment of the coastline.

The comparative analysis has also shown how the three studied pi-
lots present a similar historic evolution, with cases experiencing a
higher pressure of uses leading the way in achievements and mistakes.
That suggests the need to learn from the comparison, since even the
values of dredged materials and nourishments are similar (refer to the
Romanian and the Spanish cases respectively). The more sustainable
adaptation pathways should start from a master plan that addresses
onments under climate change: Pathways to adaptation, Sci Total En-

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2016.01.124


15A. Sánchez-Arcilla et al. / Science of the Total Environment xxx (2016) xxx–xxx
all coastal components and includes all relevant scales, in particular
balancing short term against long term. The proposed interventions
should, thus, go from reactive (present, low sustainability) to proactive
(future, high sustainability), using “green” defences while limiting hard
and soft (stone and sand base respectively) defences to the bounds im-
posed by available energy or funds. The role of strategic sand reservoirs,
considering sand as a limited fossil resource for many countries, should
be another requirement for coastal sustainability in the comingdecades.

The need for downscaling the physical and socio-economic projec-
tions at the spatial scale considered have been illustrated for study
cases in Romania, Ireland and Spain. This has allowed addressing coastal
zonemanagement and adaptation in terms of coastal typologies (arche-
types) that can be representative of other coastal tracts therefore
allowing the exportation of the proposed approach to other coastal sys-
tems. The selection of robust variables for the projection, such as mean
sea level andwaves for the physical component and population density
for the socio-economic component, has led to identifying sustainable
and non-sustainable practices for the studied transects. Low sustainabil-
ity has been associated with rigidization and short term views.
Rigidization means working against natural processes and short term
means a doubtful or unsustainable behaviour at longer time scales.
High sustainability has been associated to building with Nature or
short-long term compatibility. Using natural processes such as vegeta-
tion, or smart nourishment operations, has allowed discuss on of
which are the dominant processes in optimizing coastal investment
planning.

The compatibility between short and long term scales/processes has
been illustratedwith the flexible solution provided by transient defence
measures, another way of illustrating the concept of partial barriers that
only act when the energy level of meteorological and oceanographic
drivers require it. The sequential set of actions that result, adapted for
a given coastal archetype and explicitly considering a time and space
scale, has been termed adaptation pathway. Such a combination aims
to achieve efficiency in cost at short (initial construction) and medi-
um/long term (maintenance and impact mitigation) which will result
in sustainability from the standpoint of policy, economy and societal
perception. Adaptation pathways, combining rigid and flexible ele-
ments and supplemented by an early warning system with suitable
monitoring, should allow a permanent control of the coastal system, in-
dicating the intervals for intervention and permitting a continuous reas-
sessment of the proposed actions. The end result should be a more
sustainable management of the coastal zone under present and future
climates.
Acknowledgements

This paper has been partly supported by the EU research projects
DANCERS (FP7-603805), RISES-AM- (FP7-ENV-693396) and iCoast
(GA ECHO/SUB/2013/661009). The authors also want to acknowledge
the Spanish research project PLAN-WAVE (CTM2013-45141-R,
MINECO — FEDER co-fund). The second author also acknowledges the
PhD scholarship from the Government of Catalonia (DGR FI-AGAUR-
14, Generalitat de Catalunya). Finally we would like to thank two anon-
ymous reviewers for their valuable comments and suggestions that
have allowed improving this paper.
References

Alfieri, L., Burek, P., Feyen, L., Forzieri, G., 2015. Global warming increases the frequency of
river floods in Europe. Hydrol. Earth Syst. Sci. 19, 2247–2260.

Bhattacharya, J.P., Giosan, L., 2003. Wave-influenced deltas: geomorphic implications for
facies reconstructions. Sedimentology.

Binggeli, P., Eakin, M., Macfadyen, A., Power, J., McConell, J., 1992. Impact of the alien sea
buckthorn (Hippophae rhamnoides L.) on sand dune ecosystems in Ireland. In:
Carter, R.W.G., Curtis, T.G.F., Sheehy-Skeffington, M.J. (Eds.), Coastal Dunes. Geomor-
phology, Ecology and Management. Balkema, Rotterdam, pp. 325–337.
Please cite this article as: Sánchez-Arcilla, A., et al., Managing coastal envir
viron (2016), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2016.01.124
Bolanos, R., Jorda, G., Cateura, J., Lopez, J., Puigdefabregas, J., Gomez, J., Espino, M., 2009.
The XIOM: 20 years of a regional coastal observatory in the Spanish Catalan coast.
J. Mar. Syst. 77, 237–260.

Brown, S., Nicholls, R.J., 2015. Subsidence and human influences in mega deltas: the case
of the Ganges–Brahmaputra–Meghna. Sci. Total Environ. 527–528, 362–374.

Brown, S., Nicholls, R., Lowe, J., Hinkel, J., 2013. Spatial variations of sea-level rise and
impacts: an application of DIVA. Clim. Chang. 1-14.

Carter, R.W.G., Woodroffe, C.D., 1994. Coastal Evolution: Late Quaternary Shoreline
Morphodynamics. Cambridge University Press.

Casas-Prat, M., Sierra, J.P., 2013. Projected future wave climate in the NW Mediterranean
Sea. J. Geophys. Res. Oceans 118, 3548–3568.

CEDEX, 2013. Estudio de la dinámica litoral, defensa y propuesta de mejora en las playas
con problemas: Estrategia de actuación en el Maresme. Centro de Estudios y
Experimentación de Obras Públicas.

Church, J.A., Clark, P.U., Cazenave, A., Gregory, J.M., Jevrejeva, S., Levermann, A., Merrifield,
M.A., Milne, G.A., Nerem, R.S., Nunn, P.D., Payne, A.J., Pfeffer, W.T., Stammer, D.,
Unnikrishnan, A.S., 2013. Sea Level Change. In: Stocker, T.F., Qin, D., Plattner, G.K.,
Tignor, M., Allen, S.K., Boschung, J., Nauels, A., Xia, Y., Bex, V., Midgley, P.M. (Eds.),
Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I
to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA,
pp. 1137–1216.

CIIRC, 2010. Estat de la zona costanera a Catalunya. (Departament de Pol{'i}tica Territorial
i Obres Publiques) Generalitat de Catalunya.

Conte, D., Lionello, P., 2013. Characteristics of large positive and negative surges in the
Mediterranean Sea and their attenuation in future climate scenarios. Glob. Planet.
Chang. 111, 159–173.

Cooper, J.A.G., Cummins, V., 2009. Coastal management in Northwest Europe. Elsevier,
Amsterdam.

Cooper, J.A.G., Pile, J., 2014. The adaptation-resistance spectrum: a classification of con-
temporary adaptation approaches to climate-related coastal change. Ocean Coast.
Manag. 94, 90–98.

Cooper, J.A.G., Pilkey, O.H., 2012. Pitfalls of Shoreline Stabilization: Selected Case Studies.
Springer, London.

Dan, S., Stive, M.J.F., Walstra, D.-J.R., Panin, N., 2009. Wave climate, coastal sediment
budget and shoreline changes for the Danube Delta. Mar. Geol. 262, 39–49.

Dan, S., Walstra, D.-J.R., Stive, M.J.F., Panin, N., 2011. Processes controlling the develop-
ment of a river mouth spit. Mar. Geol. 280, 116–129.

Delaney, C.A., Devoy, R.J.N., Jennings, S.C., 2012. Mid to late Holocene relative sea-level
and sedimentary changes in southwest Ireland. In: Duffy, P.J., Nolan, W. (Eds.), At
the Anvil. Geography Publications, Dublin, pp. 697–746.

Devoy, R.J.N., 1987. Sea Surface Studies: A Global View. Croom Held and Chapman Hall,
London.

Devoy, R.J.N., 1992. Questions of coastal protection and the human response to sea-level
rise in Ireland and Britain. Ir. Geogr. 25, 1–22.

Devoy, R.J.N., 2008. Coastal vulnerability and the implications of sea-level rise for Ireland.
J. Coast. Res. 325-341.

Devoy, R.J.N., 2009. Iveragh coasts and mountains. In: Crowley, J., Sheehan, J. (Eds.), The
Iveragh Peninsula: A Cultural Atlas of the Ring of Kerry. Cork University Press, pp. 33–44.

Devoy, R.J.N., 2015a. The development andmanagement of the Dingle bay spit-barriers of
soutwest Ireland. In: Randazzo, G., Jackson, D.W.T., Cooper, J.A.G. (Eds.), Sand and
Gravel Spits. Springer, pp. 139–180.

Devoy, R.J.N., 2015b. Sea-level rise: causes, impacts and scenarios for change. In:
Sherman, D., Ellis, J. (Eds.), Coastal and Marine Hazards, Risks and Disasters. Elsevier,
Amsterdam, pp. 197–242.

Devoy, R.J.N., Delaney, C., Carter, R.W.G., Jennings, S.C., 1996. Coastal stratigraphies as
indicators of environmental changes upon European Atlantic Coasts in the Late
Holocene. J. Coast. Res. 12, 564–588.

Duffy, M.J., Devoy, R.J.N., 1999. Contemporary process controls on the evolution of sedi-
mentary coasts under low to high energy regimes: western Ireland. Geol. Mijnb. 77,
33–49.

ECOPRO, 1996. Environmentally Friendly Coastal Protection (ECOPRO): code of practice.
Department of Marine and Natural Resources (Dublin), Forbait, and the Department
of the Environment (Northern Ireland). Government Publications, Dublin.

EEA, 1995. Europe's Environment: The Dobris Assessment. European Environmental
Agency, Copenhagen.

EEA, 2014. European Environmental Agency Report, Global and European Sea-level Rise
(CLIM 012) — Assessment Published Sept. 2014. http://www.eea.europa.eu/data-
and-maps/indicators/sea-level-rise-2/assessment.

Eurosion, 2004. Living with Coastal Erosion in Europe: sediment and space for sustainabil-
ity. Part I: Major Findings and Policy Recommendations of the EUROSION Project. Of-
fice for Official Publications of the European Communities, Luxembourg.

Fang, J., Sun, S., Shi, P., Wang, J.a., 2014. Assessment and mapping of potential storm surge
impacts on global population and economy. Int. J. Disaster Risk Sci. 5, 323–331.

Garcia-Leon, M., Gracia, V., Robichaux, L., Kroger, A., Gault, J., Sanchez-Arcilla, A., 2015.
Evaluation of Transient Defence Measures Against Storms, Coastal Sediments 2015.
World Scientific.

Gault, J., Morrissey, C., Devoy, R.J.N., 2007. Dune Protection Plan for the Fingal Coast, Co.
Dublin. The Coastal and Marine Research Centre, UCC and Fingal County Council,
Dublin.

Gault, J., O’Hagan, A.M., Cummins, V., Murphy, J., Vial, T., 2011. Erosion management in
Inch beach, South West Ireland. Ocean Coast. Manag. 54, 930–942.

Giosan, L., Bokuniewicz, H., Panin, N., Postolache, I., 1999. Longshore sediment transport
pattern along the Romanian Danube Delta coast. J. Coast. Res. 4, 859–871.

Giosan, L., Stefan, C., Filip, F., Deng, B., 2013. Maintenance of large deltas through channel-
ization: nature vs. humans in the Danube delta. Anthropocene 1, 35–45.
onments under climate change: Pathways to adaptation, Sci Total En-

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0005
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0005
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0010
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0010
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0015
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0015
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0015
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0015
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0020
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0020
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0025
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0025
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0030
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0030
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0035
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0035
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0040
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0040
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0045
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0045
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0045
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0050
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0050
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0050
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0050
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0050
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0050
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0055
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0055
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0060
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0060
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0060
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0065
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0065
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0070
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0070
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0070
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0075
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0075
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0080
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0080
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0085
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0085
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0090
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0090
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0090
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0095
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0095
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0100
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0100
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0105
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0105
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0110
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0110
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0115
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0115
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0115
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0120
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0120
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0120
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0125
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0125
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0125
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0130
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0130
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0130
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0135
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0135
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0135
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0140
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0140
http://www.eea.europa.eu/datandaps/indicators/seaevel-ise-assessment
http://www.eea.europa.eu/datandaps/indicators/seaevel-ise-assessment
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0150
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0150
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0150
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0155
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0155
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0160
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0160
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0165
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0165
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0165
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0170
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0170
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0175
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0175
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0180
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0180
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2016.01.124


16 A. Sánchez-Arcilla et al. / Science of the Total Environment xxx (2016) xxx–xxx
Gracia, V., Garcia, M., Grifoll, M., Sanchez-Arcilla, A., 2013a. Breaching of a barrier under
extreme events. The role of morphodynamic simulations. J. Coast. Res. 65, 951–956.

Gracia, V., Garcia-Leon, M., Sanchez-arcilla, A., Gault, J., Oller, P., Fernández, J., Sairouni, A.,
Cristofori, E., Toldrà, R., 2014. A new generation of early warning systems for coastal
risk: the iCoast project. International Conference on Coastal Engineering, pp. 1–8.

Gracia, V., Sanchez-Arcilla, A., Anfuso, G., 2013b. Spain. In: Pranzini, E., Williams, A. (Eds.),
Coastal Erosion and Protection in Europe. Routledge, Oxon, pp. 254–274.

Gray, S.R.J., Gagnon, A.S., Gray, S.A., O'Dwyer, B., O'Mahony, C., Muir, D., Devoy, R.J.N.,
Falaleeva, M., Gault, J., 2014. Are coastal managers detecting the problem? Assessing
stakeholder perception of climate vulnerability using Fuzzy Cognitive Mapping.
Ocean Coast. Manag. 94, 74–89.

Haasnoot, M., Kwakkel, J.H., Walker, W.E., ter Maat, J., 2013. Dynamic adaptive policy
pathways: a method for crafting robust decisions for a deeply uncertain world.
Glob. Environ. Chang. 23, 485–498.

Hamm, L., Capobianco, M., Dette, H.H., Lechuga, A., Spanhoff, R., Stive, M.J.F., 2002. A sum-
mary of European experience with shore nourishment. Coast. Eng. 47, 237–264.

Hanson, H., Brampton, A., Capobianco, M., Dette, H., Hamm, L., Laustrup, A., Lechuga, A.,
Spanhoff, R., 2002. Beach nourishment project, practices and objectives: AN
European overview. Coast. Eng. 47.

Harley, M.D., Ciavola, P., 2013. Managing local coastal inundation risk using real-time
forecasts and artificial dune placements. Coast. Eng. 77, 77–90.

Hinkel, J., Lincke, D., Vafeidis, A.T., Perrette, M., Nicholls, R.J., Tol, R.S.J., Marzeion, B.,
Fettweis, X., Cezar, I., Levermann, A., 2014. Coastal flood damage and adaptation
costs under 21st century sea-level rise. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 111, 3292–3297.

Hinkel, J., Nicholls, R.J., Tol, R.,Wang, Z.B., Hamilton, J.M., Boot, G., Vafeidis, A.T., McFadden,
L., Ganopolski, A., Klein, R.J.T., 2013. A global analysis of erosion of sandy beaches and
sea-level rise: an application of DIVA. Glob. Planet. Chang. 111, 150–158.

Ibàñez, C., Canicio, A., Day, J., Curcó, A., 1997. Morphologic development, relative sea level
rise and sustainable management of water and sediment in the Ebre Delta, Spain.
J. Coast. Conserv. 3, 191–202.

Ibáñez, C., Day, J.W., Reyes, E., 2014. The response of deltas to sea-level rise: naturalmech-
anisms and management options to adapt to high-end scenarios. Ecol. Eng. 65,
122–130.

Ibáñez, C., Sharpe, P.J., Day, J.W., Day, J.N., Prat, N., 2010. Vertical accretion and relative sea
level rise in the Ebro Delta Wetlands (Catalonia, Spain). Wetlands 979–988.

IIASA, 2012. IIASA (International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis) 2012 SSP Data-
base (version 0.93). https://secure.iiasa.ac.at/web-apps/ene/SspDb/dsd?Action=
htmlpage&page=about.

IPCC, 2013. Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working
Group I to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York,
NY, USA.

IPCC, 2014. In: Field, C.B., Barros, V.R., Dokken, D.J., Mach, K.J., Mastrandrea, M.D., Bilir, T.E.,
Chatterjee, M., Ebi, K.L., Estrada, Y.O., Genova, R.C., Girma, B., Kissel, E.S., Levy, A.N.,
MacCracken, S., Mastrandrea, P.R., White, L.L. (Eds.), Climate Change 2014: Impacts,
Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part A: Global and Sectoral Aspects. Contribution of
Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and
New York, NY, USA.

Jenkins, G.J., Murphy, J.M., Sexton, D.M.H., Lowe, J.A., Kilsby, C.G., 2009. UK Climate Projec-
tions: Briefing Report (and 2010 Update). Met Office Hadley Centre, Exeter, United
Kingdom.

Jevrejeva, S., Grinsted, A., Moore, J.C., 2014a. Upper limit for sea level projections by 2100.
Environ. Res. Lett. 9, 104008.

Jevrejeva, S., Moore, J.C., Grinsted, A., Matthews, A., Spada, G., 2014b. Trends and acceler-
ation in global and regional sea levels since 1807. Glob. Planet. Chang. 113, 11–22.

Jimenez, J.A., Gracia, V., Valdemoro, H.I., Mendoza, E.T., Sanchez-Arcilla, A., 2011. Manag-
ing erosion-induced problems in NW Mediterranean urban beaches. Ocean Coast.
Manag. 54, 907–918.

Kandrot, S., Devoy, R.J.N., Cawkwell, F., Gault, J., 2014.Monitoring andModellingMicro- to
Meso-scale Dune-barrier Behaviour Using Terrestrial Laser Scanning, Irish Geomor-
phology Group First Annual Papers and Workshop Meeting. Department of Geogra-
phy, Trinity College, Dublin.

KCC, 2001. Development plan review. KCC Review Issues Document 10/12/01-5/02/02
Tralee. Kerry County Council.

KCC, 2009. December Ordinary Meeting Minutes. Kerry County Council, Tralee, p. 58.
Kristensen, P., 2004. The DPSIR Framework, Workshop on a Comprehensive/Detailed

Assessmentof the Vulnerability of Water Resources to Environmental Change in
Africa using River Basin Approach. National Research Institute (Denmark),
Nairobi,Kenya.

LIM/UPC, 2014. Proposal for the Predesign of Solutions for Coastal Stabilisation at the
Gava Beaches. LIM/UPC (Maritime Engineering Laboratory - Polytechnic University
of Catalonia), p. 173.

Lin-Ye, J., Garcia, M., Gracia, V., Sanchez-arcilla, A., 2015. A multivariate model of NW
Mediterranean extreme events at present and future climate: hydrodynamics, energy
and duration. Conference of the International Association for Mathematical
Geosciences, pp. 1–9.

Lionello, P., Boldrin, U., Giorgi, F., 2008. Future changes in cyclone climatology over Europe
as inferred from a regional climate simulation. Clim. Dyn. 30, 657–671.

Lowe, J.A., Woodworth, P.L., Knutson, T., McDonald, R.E., McInnes, K.L., Woth, K., von
Storch, H., Wolf, J., Swail, V., Bernier, N.B., Gulev, S., Horsburgh, K.J., Unnikrishnan,
A.S., Hunter, J.R., Weisse, R., 2010. Past and Future Changes in Extreme Sea Levels
and Waves, Understanding Sea-Level Rise and Variability. Wiley-Blackwell,
pp. 326–375.

Malvarez, G., Pollard, J., Dominguez, R., 2000. Origins, management and measurement of
stress on the coast of Southern Spain. Coast. Manag. 215-234.
Please cite this article as: Sánchez-Arcilla, A., et al., Managing coastal envir
viron (2016), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2016.01.124
Marchand, M., Sanchez-Arcilla, A., Ferreira, M., Gault, J., Jimenez, J.A., Markovic, M.,
Mulder, J., 2011. Concepts and science for coastal erosion management — an intro-
duction to the CONSCIENCE framework. Ocean Coast. Manag. 12, 859–866.

Masselink, G., Hughes, M.G., Knight, J., 2011. Coastal Processes and Geomorphology.
Hodder Education, London.

Menéndez, M., Woodworth, P.L., 2010. Changes in extreme high water levels based on a
quasi-global tide-gauge data set. J. Geophys. Res. Oceans 115 (n/a-n/a).

Muis, S., Güneralp, B., Jongman, B., Aerts, J.C.J.H., Ward, P.J., 2015. Flood risk and adapta-
tion strategies under climate change and urban expansion: a probabilistic analysis
using global data. Sci. Total Environ. 538, 445–457.

Mulrennan, M.E., 1990. The Geomorphic Development of the Barrier-Beach complexes of
North County Dublin Coastline. University College Dublin.

Mulrennan, M.E., 1993. Changes since the nineteenth Century to the Estuary Barrier Com-
plexes of North County Dublin. Ir. Geogr. 1, 1–13.

Neumann, B., Vafeidis, A.T., Zimmermann, J., Nicholls, R.J., 2015. Future coastal population
growth and exposure to sea-level rise and coastal flooding — a global assessment.
PLoS ONE 10, e0118571.

Nissen, K., Leckebusch, G., Pinto, J., Ulbrich, U., 2014. Mediterranean cyclones and wind-
storms in a changing climate. Reg. Environ. Chang. 14, 1873–1890.

NPWS, 2011. Castlemaine Harbour SAC (Site Code 343): Conservation Objectives
Supporting Document, Coastal Habitats. National Parks and Wildlife Service, Dublin.

O’Connor, M.C., McKenna, J., Cooper, J.A.G., 2010. Coastal issues and conflicts in North
West Europe: a comparative analysis. Ocean Coast. Manag. 53, 727–737.

O’Neill, B., Kriegler, E., Riahi, K., Ebi, K., Hallegatte, S., Carter, T., Mathur, R., van Vuuren, D.,
2014. A new scenario framework for climate change research: the concept of shared
socioeconomic pathways. Clim. Chang. 122, 387–400.

OECD, 1993. OECD Core Set of Indicators for Environmental Performance Reviews.
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. OECD, Paris, France.

Orford, J.D., Carter, R.W.G., Jennings, S.C., 1996. Control domains and morphological
phases in gravel-dominated coastal barriers of Nova Scotia. J. Coast. Res. 12,
589–604.

Orford, J.D., Cooper, J.A.G., Smith, B., 1997. LOICZ: the human factor as an influence on the
Irish coast. In: Sweeney, J. (Ed.), Global Change and the Environment. Royal Irish
Academy, pp. 88–107.

O'Shea, M., Murphy, J., 2013. Predicting and monitoring the evolution of a coastal barrier
dune system postbreaching. J. Coast. Res. 38-50.

Pacheco, A., Carrasco, A.R., Vila-Concejo, A., Ferreira, O., Dias, J.A., 2006. A coastal manage-
ment program for channels located in back barrier systems. Ocean Coast. Manag.
119–143.

Panin, N., 1996. Impact of global changes on geoenvironmental and coastal zone state of
the Black Sea. Geo-Eco-Marina, pp. 7–23.

Panin, N., 1998. Danube Delta: Geology, Sedimentology, Evolution. Association des
Sedimentologistes Francais, Paris (65 pp.).

Panin, N., 1999. Global changes, sea level rise and the Danube delta: risks and responses.
Geo-Eco-Marina.

Planton, S., Lionello, P., Artale, V., Aznar, R., Carrillo, A., Colin, J., Congedi, L., Dubois,
C., Elizalde, A., Gualdi, S., Hertig, E., Jacobeit, J., Jordà, G., Li, L., Mariotti, A.,
Piani, C., Ruti, P., Sanchez-Gomez, E., Sannino, G., Sevault, F., Somot, S.,
Tsimplis, M., 2012. 8 — the climate of the Mediterranean Region in future climate
projections. In: Lionello, P. (Ed.), The Climate of the Mediterranean Region.
Elsevier, Oxford, pp. 449–502.

Roelvink, J.A., Reniers, A.J.H.M., Dongeren, A.R.V., van Thiel de Vries, J.S.M., McCall, R.,
Lescinski, J., 2009. Modeling storm impacts on beaches, dunes and barrier islands.
Coast. Eng. 56.

Rovira, A., Ballinger, R., Ibáñez, C., Parker, P., Dominguez, M.D., Simon, X., Lewandowski,
A., Hochfeld, B., Tudor, M., Vernaeve, L., 2014. Sediment imbalances and flooding
risk in European deltas and estuaries. J. Soils Sediments 14, 1493–1512.

Sanchez-Arcilla, A., Garcia, M., Gracia, V., 2015a. Sustainability of artificial coasts: the
Barcelona coast case. Coastal Zones: Solutions for the 21st Century. Elsevier,
pp. 163–182.

Sanchez-Arcilla, A., Garcia-Leon,M., Gracia, V., 2014. Hydro-morphodynamicmodelling in
Mediterranean storms — errors and uncertainties under sharp gradients. Nat.
Hazards Earth Syst. Sci. 14, 2993–3004.

Sanchez-arcilla, A., Gracia, V., Garcia-Leon, M., Jimenez, J.A., Caceres, I., Valdemoro, H.,
2015b. Natural accretionmechanisms: the role in future coastal sustainability. Coastal
Sediments. World Scientific Publishing, pp. 1–14.

Sanò, M., Jiménez, J.A., Medina, R., Stanica, A., Sanchez-Arcilla, A., Trumbic, I., 2011. The
role of coastal setbacks in the context of coastal erosion and climate change. Ocean
Coast. Manag. 54, 943–950.

Stanica, A., Panin, N., 2009. Present evolution and future predictions for the deltaic coastal
zone between the Sulina and Sf. Gheorghe Danube river mouths (Romania). Geomor-
phology 107, 41–46.

Stanica, A., Dan, S., Gheorghe, U.V., 2007. Coastal changes at the Sulina mouth of the
Danube River as a result of human activities. Mar. Pollut. Bull. 55, 555–563.

Stanica, A., Dan, S., Jiménez, J.A., Ungureanu, G.V., 2011. Dealing with erosion along the
Danube Delta coast. The CONSCIENCE experience towards a sustainable coastline
management. Ocean Coast. Manag. 54, 898–906.

Stanica, A., Panin, N., Caraivan, G., 2013. Romania. In: Pranzini, E., Williams, A. (Eds.),
Coastal Erosion and Protection in Europe. Routledge, Oxon, pp. 397–412.

Syvitski, J.P.M., Kettner, A.J., Overeem, I., Hutton, E.W.H., Hannon, M.T., Brakenridge, G.R.,
Day, J., Vorosmarty, C., Saito, Y., Giosan, L., Nicholls, R.J., 2009. Sinking deltas due to
human activities. Nat. Geosci. 681–686.

Tsimplis, M.N., Josey, S.A., Rixen, M., Stanev, E.V., 2004. On the forcing of sea level in the
Black Sea. J. Geophys. Res. Oceans 109 (n/a-n/a).

Ungureanu, G.V., Stanica, A., 2000. Impact of human activities on the evolution of the
Romanian Black Sea Beaches. Lakes Reserv. Res. Manag. 111–115.
onments under climate change: Pathways to adaptation, Sci Total En-

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0185
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0185
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0190
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0190
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0195
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0195
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0200
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0200
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0200
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0205
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0205
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0205
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0210
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0210
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0215
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0215
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0220
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0220
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0225
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0225
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0230
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0230
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0235
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0235
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0235
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0240
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0240
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0240
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0245
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0245
https://secure.iiasa.ac.at/webpps/ene/SspDb/dsd?Actiontmlpage&pagebout
https://secure.iiasa.ac.at/webpps/ene/SspDb/dsd?Actiontmlpage&pagebout
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0255
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0255
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0255
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0255
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0260
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0260
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0260
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0260
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0260
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0260
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0260
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0265
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0265
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0265
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0270
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0270
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0275
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0275
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0280
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0280
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0280
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0285
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0285
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0285
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0285
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0290
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0290
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0295
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0300
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0300
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0300
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0300
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0305
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0305
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0305
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0310
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0310
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0310
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0310
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0315
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0315
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0320
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0320
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0320
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0325
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0325
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0330
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0330
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0335
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0335
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0340
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0340
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0345
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0345
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0345
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0350
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0350
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0355
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0355
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0360
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0360
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0360
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0365
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0365
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0370
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0370
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0375
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0375
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0380
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0380
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0385
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0385
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0390
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0390
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0390
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0395
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0395
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0395
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0400
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0400
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0405
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0405
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0405
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0410
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0410
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0415
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0415
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0420
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0420
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0425
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0425
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0425
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0430
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0430
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0435
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0435
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0440
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0440
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0440
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0445
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0445
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0445
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0450
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0450
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0455
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0455
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0455
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0460
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0460
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0460
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0465
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0465
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0470
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0470
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0470
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0475
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0475
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0480
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0480
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0485
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0485
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0490
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0490
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2016.01.124


17A. Sánchez-Arcilla et al. / Science of the Total Environment xxx (2016) xxx–xxx
Valchev, N.N., Trifonova, E.V., Andreeva, N.K., 2012. Past and recent trends in the western
Black Sea storminess. Nat. Hazards Earth Syst. Sci. 12, 961–977.

Vespremeanu-Stroe, A.F.C., Tatui, F., Giosan, L., 2007. Multi-decadal evolution of the North
Atlantic oscillation: influences on the dynamics of the Danube Delta shoreline.
J. Coast. Res. 157–162.

Vijaykumar, N.L., Devoy, R.J.N., Gault, J., Cronin, K., Arcilan, A., 2006. The modelling of
wind and waves for the Irish shelf seas: a forty year hindcast wind and wave atlas
for Ireland. International Meeting of Coastal Science, Littoral, 2006, 18-20 September.
Gdansk University of Technology, Poland.

Viles, H., Spencer, T., 1995. Coastal Problems: Geomorphology, Ecology and Society at the
Coast. Edward Arnold, London (350 pp.).
Please cite this article as: Sánchez-Arcilla, A., et al., Managing coastal envir
viron (2016), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2016.01.124
Wang, X.L., Feng, Y., Swail, V.R., 2014. Changes in global ocean wave heights as projected
using multimodel CMIP5 simulations. Geophys. Res. Lett.

Wang, X.L., Feng, Y., Swail, V.R., 2015. Climate change signal and uncertainty in CMIP5-
based projections of global ocean surface wave heights. J. Geophys. Res. Oceans
120, 3859–3871.

Williams, J.J., Esteves, L.S., Rochford, L.A., 2015. Modelling storm responses on a high-
energy coastline with XBeach. Model. Earth Syst. Environ. 1.

Woodroffe, C.A., 2002. Coasts: Form, Processes and Evolution. Cambridge University Press.
onments under climate change: Pathways to adaptation, Sci Total En-

http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0495
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0495
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0500
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0500
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0500
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0505
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0505
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0505
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0505
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0510
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0510
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0515
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0515
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0520
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0520
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0520
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0525
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0525
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S0048-9697(16)30124-3/rf0530
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2016.01.124

	Managing coastal environments under climate change: Pathways to adaptation
	1. Introduction
	2. Coastal archetypes
	3. Climate and human change factors
	4. The Spanish case
	4.1. Coastal description
	4.2. Low sustainability practices
	4.3. High sustainability practices

	5. The Irish case
	5.1. Coastal description
	5.2. Low sustainability practices
	5.3. High sustainability practices

	6. The Romanian case
	6.1. Coastal description
	6.2. Low sustainability practices
	6.3. High sustainability practices

	7. A shared roadmap. Integrated assessment (present and future landscape)
	8. Conclusions
	Acknowledgements
	References


