

























































Ocean Sci., 12, 137–151, 2016

www.ocean-sci.net/12/137/2016/

doi:10.5194/os-12-137-2016

© Author(s) 2016. CC Attribution 3.0 License.

Temporal evolution of the momentum balance terms and frictional

adjustment observed over the inner shelf during a storm

M. Grifoll1,2, A. L. Aretxabaleta3, J. L. Pelegrí4, and M. Espino1,2

1Technical University of Catalonia, Barcelona, Spain
2International Centre of Coastal Resources Research, Barcelona, Spain
3US Geological Survey, Woods Hole, MA, USA
4Departament d’Oceanografia Física i Tecnològica, Institut de Ciències del Mar, CSIC, Barcelona, Spain

Correspondence to: M. Grifoll (manel.grifoll@upc.edu)

Received: 27 April 2015 – Published in Ocean Sci. Discuss.: 27 May 2015

Revised: 16 December 2015 – Accepted: 21 December 2015 – Published: 18 January 2016

Abstract. We investigate the rapidly changing equilibrium

between the momentum sources and sinks during the pas-

sage of a single two-peak storm over the Catalan inner shelf

(NW Mediterranean Sea). Velocity measurements at 24 m

water depth are taken as representative of the inner shelf, and

the cross-shelf variability is explored with measurements at

50 m water depth. During both wind pulses, the flow accel-

erated at 24 m until shortly after the wind maxima, when the

bottom stress was able to compensate for the wind stress.

Concurrently, the sea level also responded, with the pressure-

gradient force opposing the wind stress. Before, during and

after the second wind pulse, there were velocity fluctuations

with both super- and sub-inertial periods likely associated

with transient coastal waves. Throughout the storm, the Cori-

olis force and wave radiation stresses were relatively unim-

portant in the along-shelf momentum balance. The frictional

adjustment timescale was around 10 h, consistent with the e-

folding time obtained from bottom drag parameterizations.

The momentum evolution at 50 m showed a larger influence

of the Coriolis force at the expense of a decreased frictional

relevance, typical in the transition from the inner to the mid-

shelf.

1 Introduction

The inner shelf, encompassing depths ranging from a few

to tens of meters, is dynamically defined as the region that

lies between the surf zone (where waves break and the mo-

mentum balance is dominated by wave-induced terms) and

the mid-shelf (where the along-shelf circulation is usually in

geostrophic balance) (Lentz and Fewings, 2012). The circu-

lation over the inner shelf is often investigated through the

analysis of the momentum balance in different regions, al-

though most studies have usually focused on those condi-

tions averaged over periods longer than 1 week (Lee et al.,

1984; Lentz and Winant, 1986; Lentz et al., 1999, Maza et al.,

2006; Fewings and Lentz, 2010; Grifoll et al., 2012, 2013).

In contrast, the analysis of the momentum terms at daily and

shorter timescales under rapidly changing forcing conditions

remains less explored.

Energetic wind events, such as storms, modify the typical

pattern of water circulation over the continental shelf. The

proximity of the coastline and the relevance of bottom fric-

tion prevent the generation of inertial fluctuations, which of-

ten prevail in the mid- and outer-shelf following wind pulses

(Salat et al., 1992; Shearman, 2005). Additionally, during the

passage of storms, the intense wind, and in some cases the

associated cooling, affects a large fraction of the water col-

umn. The frictional adjustment time, proportional to water

depth and inversely proportional to wind stress, is largely

reduced nearshore during such energetic events. As a con-

sequence, the magnitude, phase and relative importance of

the dominant terms in the momentum balance is modified.

For instance, during the passage of the tropical storm Floyd

along the US east coast, Kohut et al. (2006) found an increase

in both wind stress and the horizontal pressure gradient, with

a change in the sign of the terms between the storm and the

subsequent relaxation period. During winter wind events on

the US east coast, Lee et al. (1984) found evidence of the

Published by Copernicus Publications on behalf of the European Geosciences Union.



138 M. Grifoll et al.: Temporal evolution of the momentum balance terms and frictional adjustment

sea-level slope opposing the wind stress in order to estab-

lish a frictional equilibrium that differed from the average

conditions. A seasonal study of the Catalan shelf (Grifoll et

al., 2013) suggested that the occurrence of one single intense

event can dominate the monthly averaged momentum bal-

ance, with water piling against the coast as a response to the

enhanced wind stress; to balance the surface forcing, the bot-

tom stress term was also increased.

In this paper, we investigate the temporal evolution of the

momentum balance terms over relatively short timescales

(of order 1 day) during the passage of a storm. The anal-

ysis is based on a set of observations from the Catalan in-

ner shelf (offshore the city of Barcelona, NW Mediterranean

Sea; Fig. 1). The prevalent momentum terms at two different

depths (24 and 50 m) are examined. We take advantage of our

setting in a micro-tidal environment to investigate a temporal

scale (from hours to a few days) usually not considered in the

literature, where the time series are often low-pass filtered to

remove the short-term fluctuations (e.g., tidal flow). The goal

is to quantify the different momentum terms during the storm

and to examine the response timescales of the inner-shelf en-

vironment to the principal forcing mechanisms.

2 Site location, data and methods

The Catalan shelf is micro-tidal, with tidal amplitudes of

the order of 0.1 m. The wind and heat flux regimes exhibit

a seasonal cycle associated with the Mediterranean climate

and the periodicity of meteorological events in the region.

Wind intensity usually has a minimum during summer and is

more energetic during fall, winter and spring. During these

last seasons, regional storms are predominantly associated

with north and northeast winds alternating with northwest-

erly wind pulses (land winds). Grifoll et al. (2013) analyzed

the resulting seasonal circulation pattern over the inner shelf

through a combination of numerical and observational tech-

niques. The flow is prevalent in the along-shelf direction

year-round, which is consistent with the coastal constraint

and the shallowness of the area. The monthly averaged along-

shelf momentum balance was between wind stress and pres-

sure gradient, with bottom stress being a second-order term.

In the present study, we focus on a subset of the data ana-

lyzed by Grifoll et al. (2012) that includes an energetic event

lasting a few days during March 2011. The bulk of the mea-

surements correspond to a field experiment conducted over

the Catalan inner shelf in the framework of the FIELD_AC

project (Grifoll et al., 2012). The data set consisted of ve-

locity time series from three Acoustic Doppler Current Pro-

filer (ADCP) deployments, each with a pressure sensor (A1

[AWAC], A2 [AWAC] and A3 [RDI]; Fig. 1). The ADCP bin

size was 1 m for A1 and A2, and 2 m for A3 station; the ve-

locity accuracy was ±0.5 cm s−1. The along-shelf distance

between A1 and A2 was 4 km. A1 and A2 were deployed

less than 1 km from the coast (24 m bottom depth) while A3

was 3 km away from the coast (50 m bottom depth). Wind

data were collected using a mast located at a Coastal Station

Observatory (CSO; www.pontdelpetroli.org; see Fig. 1). In

addition, 43 conductivity-temperature-depth (CTD) profiles

were collected between 17 March and 10 April 2011 in the

area surrounding the ADCPs (Grifoll et al., 2012, described

the temperature and salinity conditions). Additionally, syn-

optic information for the storm (winds and sea-level pres-

sure) was obtained from the ERA-Interim global reanalysis

product by the European Centre for Medium Range Weather

Forecasting (ECMWF).

Wave data were recorded through a directional wave buoy

[Datawell DWR-G7] moored at A3. A numerical wave model

SWAN (Booij et al., 1999) was implemented and calibrated

for a region that covers our study area, providing the wave

variables with 50 m resolution to estimate the wave-induced

momentum terms. The numerical domain is shown in Fig. 1

and the implementation details were presented in Grifoll et

al. (2014).

The time series used for estimating the momentum terms

have been low-pass filtered with a 1/12 h−1 cutoff frequency

to avoid short time fluctuations. This choice of filter win-

dow is a compromise that allows for capturing momentum

changes in timescales as short as 6 h and still removing short

fluctuations, from minutes to a few hours. It is also consistent

with observations of low energy at frequencies much higher

than inertial (Grifoll et al., 2012).

3 Results

3.1 Event description

The currents during the entire March–April 2011 field cam-

paign were analyzed in a previous study (Grifoll et al., 2012),

highlighting the prevalence of the along-shelf direction and

the high correlation between the velocities measured at A1,

A2 and A3. For this reason, we focus on the A2 observations,

considered to be representative of the dynamics in the inner

shelf, and use A1 and A3 to support the momentum-term es-

timates. The investigation of the cross-shelf variability in the

along-shelf momentum equation also uses A3.

We focus on the 12–15 March 2011 period, which in-

cludes the passing of a NE storm with maximum wind ve-

locity of 13 m s−1. The storm arose from the detachment of

a low-pressure center from the jet stream between 11 and

12 March 2011, which reached the Iberian Peninsula (Fig. 2).

The low pressure remained centered over the Iberian Penin-

sula on 13 and 14 March, and by 15 March it weakened con-

siderably. In our region, it was characterized by two energetic

northeasterly wind peaks of similar magnitude (12 March

05:00 UTC and 14 March 15:00 UTC). A relatively calm pe-

riod in between the peaks lasted 22 h, with a slight reverse in

wind direction (Fig. 3a), caused by the location of the low-

Ocean Sci., 12, 137–151, 2016 www.ocean-sci.net/12/137/2016/

www.pontdelpetroli.org


M. Grifoll et al.: Temporal evolution of the momentum balance terms and frictional adjustment 139

Figure 1. Map of the western Mediterranean Sea with the study area (a). (b) Shows the bathymetry of a portion of the Catalan shelf (isobaths

every 25 m) with the locations of the ADCP sensors (A1, A2 and A3). A directional wave buoy was placed at A3. The square marker shows

the Coastal Station Observatory (CSO) where the wind data were recorded. (b) Includes the numerical model domain used to propagate the

wave conditions into A2 (black rectangle); the reference system adopted for the momentum balance is also shown.

pressure center over the study area. The storm finished on

15 March when the wind intensity decreased to zero.

The along-shelf velocity (Fig. 3b) was characterized by

a prevalent southwestward flow in the entire water column,

with near-surface velocities typically 4 times larger than the

near-bottom flow. The cross-shelf flow (Fig. 3c) was less in-

tense than the along-shelf flow and exhibited a complex ver-

tical structure. As a result, the depth-averaged along-shelf

velocities were much larger than the depth-averaged cross-

shelf velocities during the two wind peaks (Fig. 3d), reflect-

ing a strong flow polarization associated with the coastal con-

straint.

During the first day of the storm (12 March), the depth-

averaged along-shelf current (Fig. 3d) was toward the south-

west with a maximum at 07:00 UTC (2 hours after the

wind stress peak). During the calm day (13 March 00:00–

22:00 UTC), the wind changed direction slightly toward the

northeast (peaking at 15:00 UTC), but the along-shelf cur-

rents maintained a similar magnitude and structure than the

day before. During the second wind peak the situation re-

peated itself, but with the along-shelf flow displaying some

oscillations. The wind measurements are in good agreement

with the values expected from the synoptic charts in Fig. 2.

The cross-shelf currents also displayed a similar time evo-

lution during both wind peaks: the cross-shelf flow inten-

sified with the wind, onshore at the surface and offshore

near the bottom; as the wind stress decreased, the flow re-

versed, turning offshore at the surface and onshore near

the bottom (Fig. 3d). During the calm day, the cross-shelf

flow was weakly onshore. Following the second wind peak

(14 March 16:00 UTC), the surface wind stress decreased

gradually from 0.2 Pa to zero (15 March 23:00 UTC). The

along-shelf flow remained to the southwest throughout the

water column, and the cross-shelf flow was offshore in the

sub-surface layers balanced by onshore currents near bottom.

The detided sea level (Fig. 3e) increased during both wind

peaks and slowly decreased after the last wind peak. After

the storm, the sea level increased as a result of water being

piled up against the coast due to the northeasterly wind. The

wave conditions measured at A3 were characterized by two

significant wave height peaks (Fig. 3f) from the E–SE di-

rection with 8 s period. The peaks of significant wave height

followed the peaks of (along-shelf) wind stress, with a delay

longer than for the along-shelf currents because of the influ-

ence of swell.

3.2 Momentum balance in the inner shelf

Assuming hydrostatic balance, ignoring the sea-level varia-

tions as compared with the total water depth, and neglect-

ing the baroclinic terms (estimated as small in Grifoll et al.,

2012, 2013), the depth-averaged along-shelf momentum bal-

ance equation can be written as

∂v̄

∂t︸︷︷︸
ACCE.

+
∂v̄v̄

∂y
+
∂ūv̄

∂x︸ ︷︷ ︸
ADVEC.

+
v̄v̄

H

∂H

∂y
+
ūv̄

H

∂H

∂x︸ ︷︷ ︸
CROS.SLP.

+ f ū︸︷︷︸
COR.

= −g
∂n

∂y︸ ︷︷ ︸
PRS.GRD.

+
τys

ρH︸︷︷︸
W.STR.

−
τyb

ρH︸︷︷︸
B.STR.

−
1

ρH

(
∂Syy

∂y
+
∂Sxy

∂x

)
︸ ︷︷ ︸

RAD.STR.

, (1)

where (ū,v̄) are the cross- (x) and along-shelf (y) depth-

averaged components of velocity, H is the water depth, f is

www.ocean-sci.net/12/137/2016/ Ocean Sci., 12, 137–151, 2016



140 M. Grifoll et al.: Temporal evolution of the momentum balance terms and frictional adjustment

Figure 2. Regional charts of the mean sea-level pressure (HPa) and winds for the sequence 11–14 March 2011. Data source: ERA-Interim

global reanalysis from ECMWF.

the Coriolis parameter (f = 9.6× 10−5 s−1), ρ is the water

density (1025 kg m−3), η is the sea-level perturbation asso-

ciated with the barotropic component of the flow, τys is the

along-shelf wind stress, τyb is the along-shelf bottom stress

and Syy , Sxy represent the wave-induced mass fluxes esti-

mated via radiation stresses (Longuet-Higgins and Stewart,

1964).

The along-shelf acceleration term at A2 (ACCE. in Eq. 1)

is estimated from the observations using finite-centered dif-

ferences with the velocity recorded at A2 (Fig. 4a). A neg-

ative peak is observed in the acceleration time series dur-

ing the first wind peak. During 13 March, about 1 day after

the first wind peak and shortly after the wind weakened (and

even reversed), the acceleration term displayed an oscillatory

pattern with a repeat interval of about 1 day or less.

The non-linear or advective terms are estimated by finite

differentiation between the adjacent ADCP measurements

(Kirincich and Barth, 2009; Fig. 4b). The velocity advection

terms (ADVEC. in Eq. 1) were small during the first peak

of the storm but later oscillated in a manner similar to the

acceleration term. There are two additional momentum ad-

vection terms related to changes in the depth of the water

column:
(
ūv̄
H

)
∂H
∂x
+
(
v̄v̄
H

)
∂H
∂y

. The first term, the cross-shelf

slope term (CROS.SLP.), has to be retained in our analysis,

while the second term is zero, as the water depth is constant

in the along-shelf direction.

The Coriolis term (COR in Eq. 1), computed from the

depth-averaged cross-shelf velocities at A2, is small in com-

parison with the acceleration term during the storm (Fig. 4c).

Although the surface and sub-surface cross-shelf flows were

relatively important through the water column (Fig. 3c), the

depth-averaged cross-shelf flow was much smaller than the

along-shelf velocities (Fig. 3d). The size of this term was 4

times smaller than the acceleration term.

The along-shelf wind stress term (W.STR. in Eq. 1;

Fig. 4d) was calculated using a neutral drag law (Large and

Pond, 1981) from winds measured at the nearby meteorolog-

ical station (Fig. 1). There was a good correspondence be-

tween wind stress and along-shelf velocity (Fig. 3a and d).

The maximum (negative) acceleration, however, occurred a

Ocean Sci., 12, 137–151, 2016 www.ocean-sci.net/12/137/2016/



M. Grifoll et al.: Temporal evolution of the momentum balance terms and frictional adjustment 141

Figure 3. (a) Time series of wind stress measured at the CSO (the continuous line for the along-shelf wind component and the dashed line

for the cross-shelf wind component). (b) Along-shelf velocity. (c) Cross-shelf velocity. (d) Depth-averaged along- and cross-shelf velocities.

(e) Detided sea-level variations. (f) Significant wave-height. The velocities and sea-level fluctuations were measured at station A2, and the

wave conditions at station A3. The date indicates 00:00 UTC.

www.ocean-sci.net/12/137/2016/ Ocean Sci., 12, 137–151, 2016



142 M. Grifoll et al.: Temporal evolution of the momentum balance terms and frictional adjustment

Figure 4. Estimates for the along-shelf momentum terms at 25 m. Left-hand-side terms of Eq. (1): (a) acceleration terms (ACCE. δv/δt),

(b) advective (solid line, ADVEC., δv2/δy+ δ(vu)/δx) and cross-slope (dashed line, CROS.SLP., (uv/H) δH/δx) terms estimated from

the currents at the neighboring ADCP locations and (c) Coriolis term (COR., f u). Right-hand-side terms of Eq. (1): (d) wind stress term

(W.STR., τys/ρH), (e) pressure-gradient force from observations (PGFO term, gδη/δy), (f) bottom stress term (B.STR., τyb/ρH), (g)

pressure-gradient force from residual (PGFR) and (h) radiation stress term (RAD.ST., (1/ρH)δSxy/δx solid line, and (1/ρH ) δSyy/δy

dashed line). Notice the change in the vertical scale in panel (h). The data used for estimating the momentum terms have been low-pass

filtered, with a cutoff period of 12 h. The date indicates 00:00 UTC.

few hours before the maximum winds (12 March 05:00 and

12 March 7:00 UTC). After the first wind peak, the accelera-

tion decreased rapidly and changed sign, becoming small but

positive during the remaining of the wind pulse. Something

similar happened during the second wind peak, but this time

characterized by several fluctuations, with acceleration peaks

occurring about every 24 h or less (Fig. 4a).

The bottom stress (B.STR. in Eq. 1) is estimated using a

linear drag law (Lentz and Winant, 1986):

τys = ρ r vb, (2)

where r is the linear drag coefficient, ρ is density and vb
is the near-bottom velocity (measured at about 1 m from

the sea bottom). The estimation of the drag coefficient de-

pends on the water depth and the along-shelf velocity; large

fluctuations in the value of r have been found to occur as

the prevalent momentum terms change (Lentz et al., 1999).

Typical values for water depths of a few tens of meters are

between 10−3 and 10−4 m s−1 (e.g., Winant and Beards-

ley, 1979). In our analysis, the drag coefficient was close to

10−3 m s−1, estimated from the momentum balance evolu-

tion as explained below. Linear drag formulations are well

established for steady-state conditions but might cause mis-

representations during transient conditions (such as during

the passage of a storm). We not only use the linear formula-

Ocean Sci., 12, 137–151, 2016 www.ocean-sci.net/12/137/2016/



M. Grifoll et al.: Temporal evolution of the momentum balance terms and frictional adjustment 143

tion as a first estimate of the size of the frictional terms but

also consider the potential effect of non-linear friction (Ap-

pendix A). The time series for the bottom stress term had

peak values at times of maximum along-shelf flow, almost

immediately after the peak wind stress (Fig. 4e).

The wave-induced mass fluxes (RAD.STR. in Eq. 1) are

estimated as follows:

Sxy = E
cg

c
sinφ cosφ, (3)

Syy = E

[
cg

c

(
1+ sin

2
φ
)
−

1

2

]
, (4)

where the wave energy is computed as E = ρ0gH
2
sig
/16,

with Hsig as the significant wave height, φ the wave direc-

tion of propagation, and cg and c, respectively the (linear

theory) group and phase velocity at the peak wave frequency.

Model radiation stress gradients are then estimated from two

adjacent numerical cells in the proximity of A2 that consid-

ered the propagation of wave conditions measured at A3.

The peak values in significant wave height (about 2.5 m),

and hence in the radiation stresses, occurred slightly after the

maximum winds because of swell effects (Fig. 4h). The ra-

diation stress terms were 1 order of magnitude smaller than

the dominant frictional and acceleration terms.

No direct estimate of the along-shelf pressure-gradient

force (PRS.GRD. in Eq. 1) can be obtained from the data.

The ADCP recorded the pressure in the water column but

the distances between ADCPs are not appropriate to capture

the along-shelf sea-level variability, as the signal-to-noise ra-

tio is not adequate. Hickey (1984) pointed out that, for spa-

tial scales of the same order of magnitude as the external

Rossby radius (about 100 km in the Catalan Sea), the ex-

pected sea-level gradient would be only a few centimeters.

In our case, the sea-level variations recorded by the pair of

pressure sensors in A1 and A2 (separated by only a few kilo-

meters) were of the same order as the accuracy of the de-

vices (order millimeters). As an alternative approximation,

an observed pressure-gradient force (PGFO) may be com-

puted using data from a sea-level gauge located in the harbor

of Blanes (approximately 64 km to the north; Fig. 1) and the

ADCP pressure sensor at A2. This along-shelf pressure gra-

dient remained positive during the entire storm, meaning a

downwind accumulation of water, and was reinforced during

the two wind peaks (Fig. 4e).

Additionally, we may calculate this along-shelf pressure-

gradient force as the residual from the momentum balance

equation (PGFR) as follows:

PGFR=
∂v̄

∂t
+
∂v̄v̄

∂y
+
∂ūv̄

∂x
+
ūv̄

H

∂H

∂x
+ f ū−

τys

ρH

+
τyb

ρH
+

1

ρH

(
∂Syy

∂y
+
∂Sxy

∂x

)
. (5)

Maza et al. (2006) used a similar approach to compute the

pressure-gradient force when the sea-level gradient was not

available from observations. In our case, the value of r is

estimated iteratively until the maximum PGFR matched the

maximum PGFO during the first peak of the storm (Fig. 4g).

This strategy resulted in an observationally based r value that

is consistent with the evolution of the momentum balance.

The resulting coefficient is 8.5× 10−4 m s−1, comparable to

values computed from observations at similar depths (Winant

and Beardsley, 1979).

Both the observed and residual pressure-gradient time se-

ries (PGFO and PGFR) reproduce the force direction of the

sea-level slope during the wind stress peaks (Fig. 4d). The

PGFR includes a contribution by a direct response to the lo-

cal wind forcing (for instance during 13 March), which is not

immediately obvious in PGFO. During the wind peaks, the

positive pressure-gradient force partially counterbalanced the

wind stress in a manner consistent with other observational

studies (Lee et al., 1984; Lentz, 1994; Fewings and Lentz,

2010). Despite its potentially large uncertainty, we use PGFR

in the analysis of the momentum balance evolution because

it is consistent with the estimates for the other momentum

terms.

3.3 Momentum balance near the mid-shelf

The cross-shelf variability of the along-shelf momentum is

estimated by comparing the inner-shelf results with the mo-

mentum terms at 50 m water depth. The acceleration and bot-

tom stress follow a pattern similar to the one observed at

24 m (Fig. 5). During the first wind peak, the acceleration

responded to the wind stress, with its maximum occurring

before the maximum winds. The maximum bottom stress, as

at 24 m, occurred a few hours after the maximum winds. Dur-

ing the second peak, the situation was less clear than at 24 m,

with substantial oscillations in the acceleration and bottom

stress. The bottom stress reached a minimum toward the end

of the negative wind stress pulse.

From the velocities observed at A3, we estimate the sur-

face and bottom frictional forces, the acceleration and the

Coriolis force (Fig. 5). The surface stress term is estimated

with the local wind measured at the CSO, scaled with the cor-

responding water depth. The non-linear terms cannot be es-

timated due to the lack of additional measurements at 50 m,

necessary to assess the along-shelf gradient. Thus, as the ad-

vective and wave-radiation terms are not available, we es-

timate the pressure gradient as a residual that results from

combining acceleration, Coriolis and wind and bottom fric-

tion (PGFRACCE+COR+FRIC):

PGFRACCE+COR+FRIC =
∂v̄

∂t
+ f ū−

τys

ρH
+
τyb

ρH
. (6)

In next section, we examine the relation of this residual with

the other terms at 50 m depth, to explore the changing role of

the Coriolis force with water depth.

www.ocean-sci.net/12/137/2016/ Ocean Sci., 12, 137–151, 2016



144 M. Grifoll et al.: Temporal evolution of the momentum balance terms and frictional adjustment

Figure 5. Estimates for the along-shelf momentum terms at 50 m.

Left-hand-side terms of Equation 1: acceleration terms (ACCE.

δv/δt) and Coriolis (COR. fu). Right-hand-side terms of Equa-

tion 1: wind stress term (W.STR. τys/ρH ) and bottom stress term

(B.STR. – τyb/ρH ). The data used for estimating the momentum

terms have been low-pass filtered with a cutoff period of 12 h. The

date indicates 00:00 UTC.

4 Discussion

4.1 Momentum evolution in the inner shelf

From the estimated along-shelf momentum terms, we con-

clude that the primary balance at 24 m (Fig. 4) took place be-

tween acceleration, wind stress, bottom friction, momentum

advection and pressure force gradient. The Coriolis force and

the radiation stress played secondary roles in the momentum

balance. In particular, the radiation stresses were 1 order of

magnitude smaller than the dominant acceleration, pressure

gradient and frictional terms, consistent with other studies

that ignored wave forcing outside the surf zone (Lentz et al.,

1999; Fewings and Lentz, 2010). In a region 150 km north

of our study area, in water depths of 28 m off the Tet River,

Michaud et al. (2012) confirmed numerically that the wave

effects on the inner-shelf circulation are relatively small even

during a storm event.

While our estimates present some uncertainty as a result

of instrumental inaccuracies and the intrinsic assumptions in

the estimation of the terms, we expect them to be reasonable

approximations to the relative size of the dominant terms in

the time-varying along-shelf momentum balance. In this sec-

tion, we combine the wind and velocity observations with

the along-shelf momentum estimates to further analyze the

inner-shelf response to the changing winds.

During the first peak (12 March), as the wind stress in-

creased, the acceleration term initially became more nega-

tive and the bottom stress more positive, as expected from

the direction of the flow (Fig. 4a). The peak in the acceler-

ation term occurred 4 h before the wind maximum, as a re-

sult of the enhanced frictional dissipation and a rapid change

in the residual pressure-gradient force (PGFR), from nega-

tive to positive values (Fig. 4a, f and g). The change in the

sign of PGFR, indicative of downwind water accumulation,

was abrupt, being responsible for switching the acceleration

from negative to positive at about 10:00 UTC, hence set-

ting the size and timing of the maximum along-shelf current

(Fig. 3d).

During the calm period (13 March), the PGFR once again

reversed, likely caused by a relaxation after the first wind

peak. The acceleration remained close to zero until 13 March

10:00 UTC and then turned negative, despite the appearance

of weak northeast winds. The negative acceleration started at

the time when onshore winds were observed (Fig. 3a). The

intensification of the southwestward PGFR was locally re-

flected by a leveling of the sea surface throughout 13 March

(Fig. 3e). The sequence of events is consistent with the in-

tensification of a southwestward flow probably in cross-shelf

geostrophic balance. During 14 March, when both along-

and cross-shelf winds were weak, some nearshore water was

progressively released, first through a two-layer baroclinic

cross-shelf flow and then by offshore flow in the entire water

column (Fig. 3c).

The along-shelf momentum balance during the second

wind peak shared some characteristics with the balance dur-

ing the first wind peak but also displayed important differ-

ences. The acceleration term and the PGFR were enhanced

following the increase in wind stress, with the along-shelf

velocity reaching a maximum at the time of the second wind

peak. However, the second wind event also had substantial

fluctuations in the acceleration, advective, bottom friction,

Coriolis and PGFR terms (Fig. 4). The fluctuations appear

as a moderate increase in energy at the 12–16 h band in the

wavelet analysis for the depth-averaged currents at station A2

(Fig. 6). These oscillations are consistent with fluctuations in

the lowest part of the water column in the cross-shelf veloc-

ities (Fig. 3c), and could be explained as a transient coastal

current response to the sudden enhanced wind stress in the

form of inertio-gravity waves (Kundu et al., 1983; Tintoré

et al., 1995). These waves are associated with near-inertial

motions resulting from the flow adjustment at the coast. An-

other plausible explanation of these oscillations is the gen-

eration of internal waves dispersed from the surface (wind-

mixed layer) to larger depths in the lee of the storm (Gill,

1982; Kundu and Thompson, 1985) or fast coastal Kelvin

waves (Csanady, 1982; Gill, 1982). Their proper characteri-

zation would require additional observations in the cross- and

along-shelf directions jointly with more detailed information

of the stratification in the water column before and after the

storm.

The along-shelf velocity spectral and wavelet analyses

also show the existence of fluctuations with a dominant peri-

odicity of about 2 days, although only significant for 14 and

15 March (Fig. 6). Sub-inertial fluctuations in that band of

the spectrum may reflect the propagation into the study area

of free coastal waves generated elsewhere during the first part

of the storm. The propagation of topographic waves is briefly

considered in Appendix B, using the Csanady (1982) coastal-

strip model to assess the magnitude of the oscillations for a

Ocean Sci., 12, 137–151, 2016 www.ocean-sci.net/12/137/2016/



M. Grifoll et al.: Temporal evolution of the momentum balance terms and frictional adjustment 145

Figure 6. (Left) wavelet analysis and (right) spectral analysis for the depth-averaged currents at station A2. The solid thin line in the wavelet

power spectrum shows the energy values that exceed the significance level; similarly, the dashed line in the global power spectrum shows the

significance level. The date indicates 00:00 UTC.

linear and frictionless coastal band. The theoretical lowest-

mode topographic waves have a period of about 32 h, which

is similar to the dominant period as deduced from the spectral

and wavelet analyses (Fig. 6). Observed sea-level oscillations

(Fig. 3e), as large as 0.05 m on timescales of about 1–2 days,

gave rise to velocities of about 0.3 m s−1 (Fig. 3c). Jordi et

al. (2005) described the existence of topographic waves in the

NW Mediterranean Sea, which propagated southwest. Due to

our limited observations, additional measurements and nu-

merical modeling efforts (e.g., Brink and Chapman, 1985)

are necessary to properly characterize the relevance of topo-

graphic waves during storms.

The differences between the observed and residual

pressure-gradient forces, PGFO and PGFR, are striking

(Fig. 3). The PGFR is necessary to balance the flow yet

it differs substantially from the pressure gradient as calcu-

lated from the A2 and Blanes sea-level gauges (64 km apart).

Hence, we may interpret the PGFR as composed of two con-

tributions: (1) a rapid coastal response to the along- and

cross-shelf wind forcing, and (2) a relatively slow sea-level

adjustment to the propagating storm. Our interpretation is

that the PGFO corresponds to the second, relatively smooth,

contribution, which would drive the flow in the absence of

waves (as it occurs during the first wind event).

Our analysis highlights the importance of the initial con-

ditions (whether the system starts from rest or not) and the

complexity of the momentum fluctuations during the devel-

opment of the storm. A comparison of the temporal evolu-

tion of the momentum terms during both wind peaks shows

that the role of the acceleration and advective terms is quite

different. During the first peak, the advective terms are rel-

atively small as a result of the linear response of the pres-

sure gradient and bottom stress to the wind forcing. After the

first peak, however, the acceleration and advective terms dis-

play fluctuations that may reflect transient waves. Hence, the

along-shelf velocity during the second peak is the cumulative

effect of a local response to wind stress combined with the

arrival of waves that barely feel the effect of bottom friction.

4.2 Frictional adjustment and Ekman depth in the

inner shelf

During the first wind peak, the increase in along-shelf veloc-

ity enhanced the bottom stress, which eventually balanced

the joint effect of wind stress and along-shelf pressure gradi-

ent, therefore achieving a complete frictional adjustment. A

measure of the frictional adjustment time can be extracted

from the observations, considering the cross-zero momen-

tum and inflexion points in the time series. During the first

peak (12 March), the flow started from near rest and the

non-linearities were small. After the first peak, the momen-

tum balance was affected by fluctuations in the acceleration

and advection terms responding to the cross-shelf slope mo-

mentum term. Hence, a maximum value for the frictional

adjustment time is estimated as the time between zero and

maximum bottom stress during the first wind pulse, or about

14 h (from 11 March 20:00 UTC to 12 March 10:00 UTC).

This frictional adjustment time doubles the frictional time as

computed from the linear drag law of the bottom stress term

(t =H/r = 7.8 h) and is consistent with typical values from

similar depths. For instance, Winant and Beardsley (1979)

provided estimates ranging between 7 and 26 h at depths be-

tween 28 and 31 m.

To provide a framework for the frictional time, we con-

sider the linearized analytical model from Csanady (1982),

applied to the first wind peak period. The along-shelf veloc-

ity response to a steady wind stress, considering only bottom

friction, is controlled by the following expression:

∂v̄

∂t
=
τys

ρH
−
τyb

ρH
. (7)

Solving this equation for a quadratic drag law (Appendix A),

we obtain an exponential relation with a characteristic fric-

www.ocean-sci.net/12/137/2016/ Ocean Sci., 12, 137–151, 2016



146 M. Grifoll et al.: Temporal evolution of the momentum balance terms and frictional adjustment

tional adjustment timescale (tf ).

tf =
H

2
√
τys
ρ
Cda

, (8)

where Cda is a bottom drag coefficient associated with the

depth-averaged velocity. For a value of wind stress of 0.12 Pa

(averaged value during the first peak), tf is 13 h. This magni-

tude agrees well with the frictional adjustment time estimated

from observations (about 14 h) and confirms the short re-

sponse time of locally generated along-shelf currents. There-

fore, the frictional timescale is shorter than the adjustment

timescale for geostrophic balance to take place, of the order

of an inertial oscillation period, f−1 = 18.15 h. This result

supports the view that, during the passage of the storm, the

locally generated flow at 24 m is regulated by bottom dissipa-

tion; a result that is consistent with the reduced contribution

of the Coriolis term to the local along-shelf momentum bal-

ance.

It is important to point out that the sea surface adjust-

ment time is similar to the time period between the two

wind peaks. The along-shelf momentum generated by the

first wind pulse did not have sufficient time to dissipate be-

fore the second wind peak arrived. In our case, this is fur-

ther complicated by the potential arrival of upstream waves.

This progressive adjustment may be appreciated in the time

evolution of the sea surface, where the sea level approached

some near-equilibrium value towards the end of each wind

pulse (Fig. 3e). The sea-level time series also illustrates that

the adjustment is characterized by at least two separate com-

ponents: one responding to local wind forcing and the lo-

cal response to remotely generated waves and another, much

slower, associated with the sea-level adjustment at scales of

the order of the external Rossby radius (Hickey, 1984), about

100 km in the Catalan shelf.

The short frictional adjustment time is consistent with the

study site being part of the inner shelf during the storm. The

inner shelf is defined as the region where the combined sur-

face and bottom boundary layers occupy the entire water col-

umn (Lentz, 1994). Obviously, the boundaries of the inner-

shelf region vary in time depending on the intensity of the

forcing mechanism. The bottom and surface Ekman depth

can be obtained from empirical formulations such as (Weath-

erly and Martin, 1978)

δ =
1.3u∗
√
N f

, (9)

where u∗ = (τs /ρ)
1/2 is the friction velocity, τs is the

surface/bottom stress magnitude and N2 = gdρ/ dz is the

squared buoyancy frequency. The time evolution of the sur-

face and bottom Ekman layers (Fig. 7) is computed itera-

tively (asN depends on the vertical position within the water

column). The buoyancy frequency for Eq. (9) is estimated

using the CTD measurements during 17 March (2 days after

Figure 7. Estimates of the surface (continuous line) and bottom

(dashed line) Ekman depths (m). The gray patches show the periods

where the sum of the surface and bottom Ekman depths exceeded

24 m (the water depth at station A2). The date indicates 00:00 UTC.

the storm; Grifoll et al., 2012). TheN values are estimated to

be 0.03 s−1 for the surface layer and 0.005 s−1 for the bottom

layer. The transient nature of the storm will cause some dif-

ferences in the level of stratification, especially in the surface

layer, but the relative size of the terms will remain mostly un-

changed. Periods with less energetic wind conditions exhibit

smaller wind stress; therefore, the relative importance of the

Coriolis term increases at 24 m (Grifoll et al., 2012). Our re-

sults show that the boundary layers overlapped most of the

time during the storm event (Fig. 7). Even though the appli-

cability of Eq. (9) has been questioned for areas influenced

by freshwater discharge (Garvine, 2004; Dzwonkowski et al.,

2014), the calculated Ekman layer depths are consistent with

the importance of the frictional terms in the along-shelf dy-

namics.

4.3 Cross-shelf variability of the along-shelf

momentum terms

The cross-shelf variability of the along-shelf momentum is

investigated with the help of the momentum terms calcu-

lated at 50 m water depth. The frictional adjustment time,

as observed through the evolution of the momentum terms

at 50 m, exhibited a 4 h lag when compared with the fric-

tional adjustment time at 24 m (Sect. 4.1), likely caused

by the time delay in the vertical transfer of momentum.

The linear drag coefficient is calculated following the same

approach as for the analysis at 24 m, now adjusting the

PGFRACCE+COR+FRIC term (without advection terms) to the

observed value (PGFO) for the first peak of the storm. The

resulting value, r = 7.3× 10−4 m s−1, is close to the value

of r for the inner shelf (8.5× 10−4 m s−1). This supports our

conclusion that, during the first storm peak, the along-shelf

momentum balance was controlled by the combination of lo-

cal acceleration, Coriolis and friction, while the advective,

Coriolis and radiation stress terms played a secondary role.

The relative ratio of the fluctuations (standard deviations)

in the acceleration and wind stress terms,
(
ρ0 H ∂v̄/∂t

τys

)
, in-

creases offshore (from 1.10 at 24 m to 1.36 at 50 m). These

values are larger than estimates from other shelves (Lentz

Ocean Sci., 12, 137–151, 2016 www.ocean-sci.net/12/137/2016/



M. Grifoll et al.: Temporal evolution of the momentum balance terms and frictional adjustment 147

Figure 8. (Top panel) cross-shelf transect of the frictional adjustment times for several along-shelf wind stresses (τ ) together with the inertial

time off the city of Barcelona (18.15 h, grey solid line). The cross-shelf variation of the frictional adjustment time (computed following Eq. 8)

is shown for storm peak conditions (red line) and averaged storm conditions (blue line). The two dotted lines correspond to wind stresses

such that the frictional and inertial times become equal at 24 m (t24) and 50 m (t50) water depth. (Bottom panel) the location of the inertial,

frictional and transition zones for the peak and mean storm conditions. The ADCP locations at 24 m and 50 m are indicated with black and

blue triangles, respectively.

and Fewings, 2012): in the Middle Atlantic Bight, around 0.3

and 0.5 at 25 and 50 m, respectively; and in the West Florida

Shelf, 0.5 and 1 for 25 and 50 m, respectively. The larger val-

ues found in the Catalan shelf are ascribed to the enhanced

acceleration during the storm.

The size of the Coriolis term at 50 m increases in compar-

ison to the size of this term estimated at 24 m water depth.

The standard deviation of the Coriolis term also increases

offshore, from 9.6× 10−7 m s−2 at 24 m to 1.5× 10−6 m s−2

at 50 m. The ratio of the fluctuations between the Coriolis

and wind stress terms,
(
ρ0 Hf ū
τys

)
, increased from 0.3 at 24 m

to 1.3 at 50 m water depth. Lentz and Fewings (2012) pre-

sented ratios around 0.4 for the Middle Atlantic Bight and

West Florida Shelf at 25 m, and between 2 and 3 at 50 m

depth.

The increasing/decreasing importance of the

Coriolis/bottom-frictional terms responds to a switch

towards the geostrophic balance, typical in the transition

from the inner to the mid-shelf. With increasing depth, the

frictional effects decrease in the along-shelf momentum

balance. Lee et al. (1984) observed that the Coriolis term

doubled from 28 to 75 m water depth in the South Atlantic

Bight (USA), with progressively smaller frictional terms. At

the start of our study period (11 March 2011, Fig. 5), the

50 m water depth Coriolis term was larger than the other

terms, suggesting a geostrophic balance during the calm

period.

During the storm period, the PGFRACCE+COR+FRIC term

at 50 m is moderately correlated with the Coriolis term

(R = 0.55 with 95 % confidence level). This correlation sug-

gests that the dynamic response at 50 m includes a large

geostrophic component, of greater relevance than at 24 m,

where the PGFR is less correlated with Coriolis (R = 0.33

with 95 % confidence level). However, the acceleration and

frictional terms, and likely the non-linear terms, also play

an important role at 50 m water depth during the storm; for

example, the acceleration terms at 24 and 50 m are also mod-

erately correlated (R = 0.64 with 95 % confidence level).

Michaud et al. (2013), from observations in the Gulf of Lion

(275 km north of our study area, Fig. 1) at 65 m depth, also

emphasized the importance of the wind-induced geostrophic

currents during a storm.

We may finally compare the cross-shelf changes of the

frictional and geostrophic terms in the along-shelf momen-

tum balance (Fig. 8). Their relative importance can be ex-

plored by comparing the bottom frictional time (Eq. 8) with

the inertial time (f−1 = 18.15 h). During the peak of the

www.ocean-sci.net/12/137/2016/ Ocean Sci., 12, 137–151, 2016



148 M. Grifoll et al.: Temporal evolution of the momentum balance terms and frictional adjustment

storm (surface stress τ = 0.25 Pa), the frictional and iner-

tial times are equal for water depths of 94 m; for the aver-

age stress of the storm (surface stress τ = 0.12 Pa) this hap-

pens for water depths of 64 m. Thus, the frictional effects

dominated for depths up to around 60 m, causing our cur-

rent meters to be located in regions controlled by inner-shelf

dynamics during the entire storm. For the frictional and in-

ertial times to be the same, the wind stress would have to be

0.075 Pa at 50 m and 0.02 Pa at 24 m. Therefore, the Coriolis

term is relatively not important at 24 m except for very low

surface stresses, such as during the calm period between the

two storm pulses (0.02 Pa); during those times other terms,

like the pressure-gradient force, will dominate the along-

shelf momentum balance (Grifoll et al., 2013).

5 Conclusions and final remarks

We have assessed the effects of the passage of a storm

over the inner Catalan shelf (NW Mediterranean Sea) on

the along-shelf momentum balance. At 24 m water depth, a

primary momentum balance between acceleration, pressure-

gradient and frictional forces (surface and bottom) is estab-

lished. The Coriolis and the wave-induced momentum terms

play a second-order role in the momentum balance. Our es-

timates for the frictional adjustment time and Ekman depth

confirm the prevalence of the frictional response of the flow

at 24 m. The increasing importance of Coriolis at 50 m cor-

responds to a shift towards the geostrophic behavior, charac-

terizing the transition from the inner to the mid-shelf.

The storm (12–15 March 2011) had two separate wind

peaks that caused currents with some similarities but also

important differences. The main similarity was the local re-

sponse to wind forcing, with the along-shelf flow (towards

the southwest) accelerating to a maximum shortly after the

wind peak, at a time when the joint effect of bottom stress and

a northeastward pressure-gradient force (arising from down-

wind water set up) compensated for the decreasing wind

stress. Such a response was more obvious during the first

peak (13 March), as the system started from a condition of

weak along-shelf flow. During the relatively calm period be-

tween both wind peaks (14 March), the pressure-gradient

force turned toward the southwest and the flow remained in

that direction. During this period, the winds were weakly on-

shore, likely setting a cross-shelf geostrophic balance. By

the end of the calm period, and lasting through the second

wind peak (15 March), the momentum balance was charac-

terized by the appearance of fluctuations with both super-

inertial (12–16 h) and sub-inertial (1–2 days) periods. During

the second wind peak, the temporal sequence of increased ac-

celeration followed by opposing bottom stress and pressure

gradient reoccurred, but with the along-shelf flow largely in-

fluenced by the sub-inertial (likely topographic) waves, with

velocity amplitudes as large as 0.3 m s−1. These waves re-

mained active even when the second wind peak had ended.

In our analysis, we have focused on the shelf response to

a single twin storm, where extensive observational data were

available. However, northeasterly energetic wind events are

common during spring and fall in the Catalan shelf; there-

fore, similar events are expected on a yearly basis. The ex-

trapolation of our results to other shelves depends on phys-

ical variables such as stratification, river discharge and re-

mote sea-level forcing. In relatively low-energy shelves, such

as the Catalan shelf, it is plausible that two-peak storms be

commonly characterized by a sequence of a linear response

followed by a subsequent non-linear behavior.

Early investigations (e.g., Scott and Csanady, 1976)

pointed out that tidally driven fluctuations hinder the anal-

ysis of the wind-induced fluctuations over relatively shallow

depths, where the frictional adjustment time may be simi-

lar or shorter than the tidal period. In these environments,

for typical wind events, the wind-forcing, tidal and fric-

tional periods are all comparable; in particular, the semidi-

urnal and frictional times become similar at depths of about

60 m (Csanady, 1982). In contrast, the micro-tidal nature of

Catalan shelf has allowed us to investigate in detail the shelf

response at temporal scales shorter than previously investi-

gated for the inner shelf.

Ocean Sci., 12, 137–151, 2016 www.ocean-sci.net/12/137/2016/



M. Grifoll et al.: Temporal evolution of the momentum balance terms and frictional adjustment 149

Appendix A: Frictional adjustment time for linear and

quadratic formulations

A simple model to determine the frictional time adjustment

was presented by Csanady (1981), based on the transport mo-

mentum equation in the along-shelf direction:

∂V

∂t
+ fU =−gH

∂η

∂y
+ u
∗2
−
τyb

ρ
, (A1)

where the transport is

U =

0∫
−H

udz, (A2a)

V =

0∫
−H

v dz, (A2b)

and the frictional velocity is given by

u
∗
=

√
τys

ρ
. (A3)

Under the assumption that the depth distribution is only a

function of the cross-shelf coordinate, we neglect the along-

shelf pressure gradients. Also, the coastal constraint near

the coast implies U = 0. These conditions lead a frictional

balance between the acceleration and the wind and bottom

stresses:

∂V

∂t
= u
∗2
−
τyb

ρ
. (A4)

The bottom stress was parameterized by Csanady (1981)

using a quadratic drag law equation as a function of the

depth-averaged current (V/H ):

τyb

ρ
= Cda

(
V

H

)2
. (A5)

Integrating, the solution for the along-shelf transport fol-

lows an exponential equation

V =
u∗H
√
Cda

(
1− exp

(
−2u∗t

√
Cda/H

)
1+ exp

(
−2u∗t

√
Cda/H

)) , (A6)
with an e-folding timescale of

tf =
H

2

√
τys Cda
ρ

. (A7)

Alternatively, we may consider the bottom frictional term

to depend linearly on the depth-averaged current:

τyb

ρ
= r

(
V

H

)
. (A8)

In this case, the solution follows again an exponential so-

lution:

V =
u∗2H

r

(
1− exp

(
−
r

H
t
))
, (A9)

where the e-folding timescale is H/r , as expected accord-

ing to the lineal parameterization of the bottom stress in

Eq. (2). Linear and quadratic derived frictional time expres-

sions have the same physical meaning, with e-folding times

proportional to the water depth and inversely proportional

to bottom stress parameter (r or Cda). For the linear and

quadratic formulations, at long times the depth-averaged ve-

locities tend asymptotically to
u∗
√
Cda

and
u∗2

r
, respectively,

which are the velocities required for bottom stress to balance

the wind stress.

Appendix B: Topographic waves over the continental

shelf

Here, we follow Csanady (1982, Sect. 4.5) to estimate the

size of the coastal propagating anomalies. We look at the

non-forced propagation of a sea surface perturbation, with

elevation η, generated at some earlier time in some upstream

location along the coast. We keep the same coordinate con-

vention as in the main text, with (x,y), respectively directed

cross shelf and along shelf (positive offshore and to the north-

east). Following Grifoll et al. (2013), we let the dominant

terms in the cross-shelf direction to be in geostrophic bal-

ance. Hence, the linearized depth-averaged momentum- and

mass-conservation equations for non-stratified and friction-

less conditions are (dropping overbars):

− f v =−g
∂η

∂x
, (B1)

∂ (vH)

∂t
+ f uH =−gH

∂η

∂y
, (B2)

∂ (uH)

∂x
+
∂ (vH)

∂y
=−

∂η

∂t
. (B3)

Let us idealize our coastal ocean as having the water depth

independent of the along-shelf distance, H =H (x). Taking

the curl of the momentum equations and using the mass-

conservation equation leads to the following vorticity equa-

tion (constant f condition)

∂2 (vH)

∂t∂x
− f

∂η

∂t
=−g

dH

dx

∂η

∂y
. (B4)

In the cross-shelf direction the change in water depth is

much greater than the change in surface elevation (the equiv-

alent of assuming the rigid lid approximation for the mass-

conservation equation), i.e.,
∂(vH)
∂x
� ∂η/∂t . Hence, we may

safely neglect the second term in the left-hand side of

Eq. (B4) so that, using Eq. (B1), we get

∂2

∂t∂x

(
H
∂η

∂x

)
+ f

dH

dx

∂η

∂y
= 0. (B5)

www.ocean-sci.net/12/137/2016/ Ocean Sci., 12, 137–151, 2016



150 M. Grifoll et al.: Temporal evolution of the momentum balance terms and frictional adjustment

We need two boundary conditions to solve this equation. The

first one comes from the condition of no-normal flow at the

coast; from Eq. (B2), and with the help of Eq. (B1), we obtain

∂2η

∂t∂x
+ f

∂η

∂y
= 0, at x = 0. (B6)

The second condition may be simply specified from the

requirement of a finite-size perturbation; from Eq. (B1) this

is equivalent to setting that far enough from the coast the

elevation of the perturbation tends to zero:

∂η

∂x
= 0 at x = Lx . (B7)

Here, we chooseLx to be the width of the continental shelf

(i.e., the offshore extent of the perturbation is limited by the

width of the coastal band). For our study, we take this to

be the characteristic width of the continental shelf north of

Barcelona, or about 40 km.

The solution of Eq. (B5) subject to the boundary condi-

tions (B6) and (B7) is obtained through separation of vari-

ables, η(x,y, t)= φ (y, t)χ (x). The equation for φ (y, t) be-

comes

∂φ

∂t
− ci

∂φ

∂y
= 0, (B8)

where ci is the separating constant. The general solution cor-

responds to a wave propagating in the negative y direction (in

our case, towards the southwest), φ (y+ ci t), showing that ci
corresponds to the phase speed of the traveling perturbation.

Following Csanady (1982), let the water depth be a linear

function of the cross-shelf distance, H (x)= xH0/Lx ≡ sx,

where s is the slope. The equation for χ (x) becomes

ξ
d2χ

dξ2
+

dχ

dξ
+χ = 0, (B9)

where ξ ≡ f x/ci . The boundary condition at the coast be-

comes
(
ci
f

)
dχ
dx
+χ = 0, and the condition at x = Lx turns

into
dχ
dx
= 0. Equation (B9) together with these boundary

conditions is an eigenvalue problem, with different solu-

tions for a discrete number of positive ci values. The so-

lution that satisfies the boundary condition at the coast is

χ = AJ0
(
2ξ1/2

)
, where J0 is a Bessel function of order 0,

and A is a constant. The boundary condition at x = Lx sets

the possible ci values, those that satisfy J1
[
2(f l/ci)

1/2
]
= 0,

where J1 is a Bessel function of order 1. The faster wave cor-

responds to c1 = fLx/3.67, having the simplest structure:

maximum velocity at the coast that decreases to zero at Lx .

From Eq. (B1), the along-shelf velocity is

v =−(gAφ)/(cif x)
1/2J1

(
2

√
f x
ci

)
. The maxi-

mum velocity takes place at the coast, given by

v =−
(gAφ)
c1
=−(3.67gAφ)/(fLx), its magnitude de-

pending on the elevation Aφ at the coast. In Fig. 3e, we

see changes in elevation as large as 0.05 m taking place on

timescales of 1–1.5 days, which would represent velocities

of about 0.3 m s−1, which is in fair agreement with the

observed oscillations (Fig. 3b).

The periodicity of these perturbations depends on the size

of the region where they are generated, which sets the along-

shelf wavenumber k = 2π/Ly . The shortest period corre-

sponds to the fastest propagating perturbations, which are

also the ones that result in the largest along-shelf velocities;

it turns out to be T ≡
2π
ω
≡

2π
(c1k)
=

3.67Ly
fLx

. If we choose Ly
to be 120 km, or about the size of the domain with maximum

gradients in sea-level pressure (and hence maximum winds)

(Fig. 2), we get Ly/Lx
∼= 3 and the period is about 32 h. This

number is to be taken only as a very rough estimate but yet

it suggests that some of the energy in the spectra analyses

(Fig. 6), in the 1–2 day band, comes from propagating topo-

graphic waves.

Acknowledgements. This work was supported by DARDO

(ENE2012-38772-C02-02), Rises-AM (GA603396),

Plan-Wave (CTM2013-45141-R) and ICoast project

(Echo/SUB/2013/661009). We would like to thank Joan Puigde-

fàbregas, Jordi Cateura and Joaquim Sospedra (LIM-UPC,

Barcelona, Spain) for the data acquisition campaign. The authors

thank Alexis Beudin (USGS, Woods Hole, USA) and Ken Brink

(WHOI, Woods Hole, USA) for a number of useful suggestions.

We are also very grateful to our reviewers, Vlado Malačič and

one anonymous oceanographer, for their ideas; Vlado Malačič

raised the issue of the potential relevance of coastal waves, which

meant a substantial reanalysis of our velocity data and a reinter-

pretation of our results. Finally, we are pleased to acknowledge

Gabriel Csanady and Steve Lentz, as their seminal studies on the

circulation of the coastal ocean have been a source of inspiration to

our work.

Edited by: S. Carniel

References

Booij, N., Ris, R. C. and Holthuijsen, L. H.: A third-generation

wave model for coastal regions: 1. Model description and valida-

tion, J. Geophys. Res., 104, 7649, doi:10.1029/98JC02622, 1999.

Brink, K. H. and Chapman, D. C.: Programs for Computing Prop-

erties of Coastal Trapped waves and Wind-driven Motions over

the Continental Shelf and Slope, Woods Hole Oceanographic In-

stitute Tech. Rep. WHOI 85-17, 99 pp., 1985.

Csanady, G. T.: Circulation in the coastal ocean, Adv. Geophys., 23,

101–183, 1981.

Csanady, G. T.: Circulation in the coastal ocean, D. Reidel Publish-

ing Company, 279 pp., Dordretch, Holland, 1982.

Dzwonkowski, B., Park, K., Lee, J., Webb, B. M., and Valle-

Levinson, A.: Spatial variability of flow over a river-influenced

inner shelf in coastal Alabama during spring, Cont. Shelf Res.,

74, 25–34, 2014.

Ocean Sci., 12, 137–151, 2016 www.ocean-sci.net/12/137/2016/

http://dx.doi.org/10.1029/98JC02622


M. Grifoll et al.: Temporal evolution of the momentum balance terms and frictional adjustment 151

Fewings, M. R. and Lentz, S. J.: Momentum balances on the inner

continental shelf at Martha’s Vineyard Coastal Observatory, J.

Geophys. Res., 115, C12023, doi:10.1029/2009JC005578, 2010.

Garvine, R. W.: The vertical structure and subtidal dynamics of the

inner shelf off New Jersey, J. Mar. Res., 62, 337–371, 2004.

Gill, A. E.: Atmosphere-ocean dynamics, Academic Press, London,

England, 662 pp., 1982.

Grifoll, M., Aretxabaleta, A. L., Espino, M., and Warner, J. C.:

Along-shelf current variability on the Catalan inner-shelf (NW

Mediterranean), J. Geophys. Res., 117, 1–14, 2012.

Grifoll, M., Aretxabaleta, A. L., Pelegrí, J. L., Espino, M., Warner,

J. C., and Sánchez-Arcilla, A.: Seasonal circulation over the

Catalan inner-shelf (northwest Mediterranean Sea), J. Geophys.

Res. Ocean., 118, 5844–5857, 2013.

Grifoll, M., Gracia, V., Aretxabaleta, A. L., Guillén, J., Espino, M.,

and Warner, J. C.: Formation of fine sediment deposit from a flash

flood river in the Mediterranean Sea, J. Geophys. Res. Ocean.,

119, 5837–5853, 2014.

Hickey, B. M.: The Fluctuating Longshore Pressure Gradient on

the Pacific Northwest Shelf: A Dynamical Analysis, J. Phys.

Oceanogr., 14, 276–293, 1984.

Jordi, A., Orfila, A., Basterretxea, G., and Tintoré, J.: Coastal

trapped waves in the northwestern Mediterranean, Cont. Shelf.

Res., 25, 185–196, 2005.

Kirincich, A. R., Barth, J. A.: Alongshelf Variability of Inner-Shelf

Circulation along the Central Oregon Coast during Summer, J.

Phys. Oceanogr., 39, 1380–1398, 2009.

Kohut, J. T., Glenn, S. M., and Paduan, J. D.: Inner shelf re-

sponse to Tropical Storm Floyd, J. Geophys. Res., 111, C09S91,

doi:10.1029/2003JC002173, 2006.

Kundu, P. K. and Thomson, J. P.: Inertial oscillations due to a mov-

ing front, J. Phys. Oceanogr., 15, 1076–1084, 1985.

Kundu, P. K., Chao, S., and McCreary, J. P.: Transitient coastal cur-

rents and inertia-gravity waves, Deep-Sea Res., 30, 10A, 1059–

1082, 1983.

Large, W. G. and Pond, S.: Open Ocean Momentum Flux Measure-

ments in Moderate to Strong Winds, J. Phys. Oceanogr., 11, 324–

336, 1981.

Lee, T. N., Ho, W. J., Kourafalou, V., and Wang, J. D.: Circulation

On the Continental Shelf of the Southeastern United States, Part

I: Subtidal Response to Wind and Gulf Stream Forcing During

Winter, J. Phys. Oceanogr., 14, 1001–1012, 1984.

Lentz, S.: Current dynamics over the northern California inner shelf,

J. Phys. Oceanogr., 24, 2461–2478, 1994.

Lentz, S., Guza, R. T., Elgar, S., Feddersen, F., and Herbers, T. H.

C.: Momentum balances on the North Carolina inner shelf, J.

Geophys. Res., 104, 18205–18226, 1999.

Lentz, S. J. and Fewings, M. R.: The Wind- and Wave-Driven Inner-

Shelf Circulation, Ann. Rev. Mar. Sci., 4, 317–343, 2012.

Lentz, S. J. and Winant, C. D.: Subinertial Currents on the Southern

Califoinia Shelf, J. Phys. Oceanogr., 16, 1737–1750, 1986.

Longuet-Higgins, M. and Stewart, R.: Radiation stresses in water

waves; a physical discussion, with applications, Deep-Sea Res.,

11, 529–562, 1964.

Maza, M., Voulgaris, G., and Subrahmanyam, B.: Subtidal in-

ner shelf currents off Cartagena de Indias, Caribbean coast of

Colombia, Geophys. Res. Lett., 33, 1–5, 2006.

Michaud, H., Marsaleix, P., Leredde, Y., Estournel, C., Bourrin, F.,

Lyard, F., Mayet, C., and Ardhuin, F.: Three-dimensional mod-

elling of wave-induced current from the surf zone to the inner

shelf, Ocean Sci., 8, 657–681, 2012.

Michaud, H., Leredde, Y., Estournel, C., Berthebaud, É., and

Marsaleix, P.: Modelling and in-situ measurements of intense

currents during a winter storm in the Gulf of Aigues-Mortes

(NW Mediterranean Sea), Comptes Rendus Geosci., 345, 361–

372, 2013.

Salat, J., Tintore, J., Font, J., Wang, D.-P., and Vieira, M.: Near-

Inertial Motion on the Shelf-Slope Front off Northeast Spain, J.

Geophys. Res., 97, 7277–7281, 1992.

Scott, J. T. and Csanady, G. T.: Nearshore Currents off Long Island,

J. Geophys. Res., 81, 5401–5409, 1976.

Shearman, R. K.: Observations of near-inertial current variabil-

ity on the New England shelf, J. Geophys. Res., 110, C02012,

doi:10.1029/2004JC002341, 2005.

Tintoré, J., Wang, D.-P., García, E., and Viúdez, A.: Near-Inertial

Motion in the coastal ocean, J. Mar. Syst., 6, 301–312, 1995.

Weatherly, G. and Martin, P.: On the structure and dynamics of the

oceanic bottom boundary layer, J. Phys. Oceanogr., 8, 557–570,

1978.

Winant, C. D. and Beardsley, R. C.: A Comparison of Some Shallow

Wind-Driven Currents, J. Phys. Oceanogr., 9, 218–220, 1979.

www.ocean-sci.net/12/137/2016/ Ocean Sci., 12, 137–151, 2016

http://dx.doi.org/10.1029/2009JC005578
http://dx.doi.org/10.1029/2003JC002173
http://dx.doi.org/10.1029/2004JC002341

	Abstract
	Introduction
	Site location, data and methods
	Results
	Event description
	Momentum balance in the inner shelf
	Momentum balance near the mid-shelf

	Discussion
	Momentum evolution in the inner shelf
	Frictional adjustment and Ekman depth in the inner shelf
	Cross-shelf variability of the along-shelf momentum terms

	Conclusions and final remarks
	Appendix A: Frictional adjustment time for linear and quadratic formulations
	Appendix B: Topographic waves over the continental shelf
	Acknowledgements
	References

