














































 
 

Acoustic evaluation of modular greenery noise barriers  

A.M. Lacasta
a
, A. Penaranda

a
, I.R. Cantalapiedra

a
, C. Auguet

a
, S. Bures

b
, M. Urrestarazu

c
 

   
a
 Departament de Física, EPSEB, Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya, 08028 Barcelona, 

Spain 

     
b
 Buresinnova S. A., Barcelona, Spain 

    
c
 Departamento de Agronomía, Universidad de Almería, Almería 04120, Spain 

 

Abstract 

Green noise barriers have become an alternative means of reducing urban traffic noise. In this 

paper, the acoustic performance of a modular greenery noise barrier is evaluated. In situ 

measurements of noise reflection were performed using an experimental prototype to estimate 

the sound absorption coefficients. These coefficients were found to have values of 

approximately 0.7, higher than those previously found in laboratory measurements for a similar 

system with a lower vegetation density. The obtained values were input into software for 

predicting environmental noise to analyse the expected performance of such barriers, 

particularly in the case of a pair of parallel barriers. A comparison with the results for reflective 

barriers indicates a significant improvement in sound attenuation of up to 4 dBA. The values are 

similar and even superior to results reported by other authors regarding the effectiveness of 

absorptive treatments applied to parallel barriers, and furthermore, the proposed barriers offer an 

aesthetic element for environmental integration.  

 

Keywords: vertical greenery systems, sound absorption, noise barriers, predicted noise 

attenuation 

  



 
 

1. Introduction 

Urban planning considers various aspects related to demographics, safety, mobility, and 

economic viability, among other factors; however, noise control is not always included, at least 

in the early stages. In such cases, solutions to noise problems must be developed when they 

appear, typically by reducing the level of noise or obstructing its propagation. Road traffic is 

one of the most common sources of noise pollution affecting residents’ quality of life, especially 

in an urban context (Kang, 2006; Den Boer and Schroten, 2007). Areas near roads with heavy 

traffic can be protected by erecting noise barriers. Extensive research on noise barriers with 

different characteristics has been performed over the past four decades, including geometrical 

analyses, theoretical modelling and full-scale testing (Ekici and Bougdah, 2003; Kotzen and 

English, 2009). Urban development and growth can necessitate the protection of areas to both 

sides of a heavily trafficked roadway by means of the construction of a pair of acoustic barriers, 

but in such a case, the multiple reflections occurring between the barriers may result in a 

significant degradation in screening performance compared with that of a single barrier (Watts, 

1996a; Cianfrini et al., 2007; Daltrop and Hodgson, 2012). Watts (1996) performed full-scale 

tests of several different parallel-barrier configurations and found, for example, that the 

screening performance of a single 2 m high barrier on one side of the road was reduced by 4 

dB(A) when a reflective barrier of a similar height was erected on the other side of the road. To 

improve the performance of noise barriers, various approaches or combinations of approaches 

can be adopted. Some strategies for mitigating the problems of parallel barriers involve 

inclining them vertically or designing shapes with which to modify their diffracting edges 

(Watts, 1996b; Menounou and Busch-Vishniac, 2000; Ishizuka and Fujiwara, 2004). Another 

method involves the application of sound-absorbing materials to the traffic-facing side of each 

barrier (Watts, 1996a; Watts and Godfrey, 1999; Palma and Samagaio 2006; Cianfrini, et al., 

2007; Daltrop and Hodgson, 2012). As an example, measurements comparing the performance 

of sound-absorptive, reflective, and T-profile noise barriers (May and Osman, 1980) have 

shown that a T-profile barrier produces a reduction in the level of noise that is approximately 1–



 
 

1.5 dB(A) greater than that of the same barrier without the cap, whereas no significant 

difference was observed between the noise reductions achieved in the absorptive and reflective 

configurations. Nevertheless, absorptive materials can eliminate, or at least reduce, reflection 

effects and therefore counteract the degradation in the performance of a single barrier caused by 

the presence of a second parallel barrier (Watts, 1996a). In a scale model (Daltrop and Hodgson, 

2012), the effects of barrier absorption on the source sides of barriers of various heights were 

tested, including the cases of reflective and absorptive parallel barriers. It was shown that the 

effect of adding absorptive material to the source sides of parallel barriers was equivalent to that 

of increasing the barrier height by 0.33 m.  

 A reduction in road traffic noise can be achieved through the optimal use of vegetation 

(Defrance et al., 2015). The absorptive and scattering properties of greenery make it a 

potentially suitable alternative to classical barriers, in addition to presenting an aesthetic effect 

(Ekici and Bougdah, 2003). Moreover, interaction with green spaces has a beneficial impact on 

noise perception (Dzhambov and Dimitrova, 2015). Although vegetation barriers are able to 

reduce noise, they must be at least 1.5 metres thick to achieve attenuations higher than 5 dB(A) 

(Kalansuriya et al., 2009). However, a combination of vegetation and a solid barrier may be an 

interesting and effective solution (Dunnett and Kingsbury, 2004; Wong et al., 2010; 

Horoshenkov et al., 2013; Daltrop et al., 2012, Hodgson et al., 2013). A recent review paper by 

Van Renterghem at al. (2015) shows that there are many methods of reducing traffic noise by 

means of natural barriers between the road and the noise-affected region. Increasing the 

absorption at the surfaces of parallel road-noise-shielding walls by means of planted substrates 

is a useful technique. The reflective, deflective and absorptive properties of the plants and the 

attenuation effects produced by the air between the vegetation and the wall can increase the 

acoustic isolation provided by such a barrier. Furthermore, the plants and the wall represent 

opposite spectral solutions for noise transmission, blocking the sound in the lower and higher 

frequency ranges, respectively (Dunnett and Kingsbury, 2004). Wong et al. (2010) analysed 8 

vertical greenery systems. Their results showed stronger attenuation at low to moderate 



 
 

frequencies due to the absorbing effect of the substrate, whereas weaker attenuation was 

observed in the high-frequency spectrum. They also observed an increase in the sound 

absorption coefficients with greater greenery coverage. Horoshenkov et al. (2013) measured the 

acoustic absorption coefficients of five types of low-growing plants in the presence and absence 

of soil. They found that the absorption coefficients of plants are predominantly determined by 

the area density and the angular orientation of the leaves. The presence of porous soil in which a 

plant is growing can also affect the ability of the plant to absorb sound because of the 

interaction between the sound waves propagated through the plant to the top layer of the soil 

and the sound waves reflected from the porous soil. Yang et al. (2013) considered various 

factors such as soil depth, soil moisture and level of vegetation. Measurements without 

vegetation revealed high absorption coefficients, with a significant decrease as the soil moisture 

increased. The absorption coefficients measured in the presence of plants showed a tendency to 

increase with increasing vegetation coverage and density.  

In previous work, a greenery wall prototype for use in building façades was designed and 

constructed (Urretarazu and Bures, 2012). The system is composed of independent modular 

units and a support mechanism. Each modular unit is a closed box filled with a substrate, in 

which plant species are cultivated. To analyse the possible application of this modular greenery 

wall for noise reduction, two different standardized laboratory tests were conducted (Azkorra et 

al., 2015). The main results were a weighted sound reduction index (Rw) of 15 dB and a 

weighted sound absorption coefficient () of 0.40. The goal of the present paper is to analyse 

the performance of this modular-based greenery system when applied in the design of noise 

barriers to increase their noise absorption capabilities and their integration with their 

surroundings. First, in situ measurements of noise reflection at a moderate scale were performed 

to estimate the sound absorption coefficients. Then, the obtained values were input into software 

for noise prediction to evaluate the potential improvement in sound attenuation that can be 

achieved by such greenery barriers. 



 
 

   In Europe, in situ measurements of the sound reflection properties of noise barriers are 

currently performed in accordance with CEN standards (2003). The specified method involves 

the averaging of measurements taken at specific angles of incidence. Rotation can be performed 

in the vertical or horizontal plane. The results are computed in one-third-octave frequency bands 

and describe the extent to which the device under test reflects a sound wave back towards its 

source. Recently, in the framework of the European QUIESST project, this method was 

thoroughly revised (Guidorzi and Garai, 2013; Garai et al., 2014). The method requires a 

minimum barrier width and height of 4 m to avoid the effect of ground reflections (if vertical 

rotation is chosen) or post reflections (if horizontal rotation is chosen). Because of these 

geometrical constraints, in most cases, the CEN/TS 1793-5 standard (CEN, 2003) cannot be 

applied. Moreover, to obtain the reflection index for each band, specular reflection properties 

are assumed. Some authors (Tronchin, 2013) have noted that for this reason, the results obtained 

using this method may not be adequate for rough surfaces, as this assumption is incorrect for the 

scattering surfaces. Furthermore, for the in situ measurement of sound absorption coefficients, 

the ISO 13472-1 standard is recommended for road surfaces. Several authors have applied this 

technique to various surfaces (Londhe, 2009; Guidorzi, 2008). In the study reported in this 

paper, a procedure based on this method, although with some differences, was used to compare 

the reflection characteristics of barriers with and without the proposed modular greenery 

system.  

   The noise reduction provided by barriers is often evaluated through numerical simulations. 

Numerous software packages are available for assisting in the prediction of traffic noise levels 

and the evaluation of noise barrier performance, such as CadnaA, SoundPlan, LimaA, Immi or 

MicroBruit (Boczkowski, 2013; Guarnaccia et al., 2014a, 2014b; Carr et al., 2012). In this 

study, CadnaA (Computer Aided Noise Abatement) was used. The general approach of CadnaA 

is based on the inverse ray-tracing technique (Guarnaccia et al., 2014a). This software enables 

the analysis of the noise generated by various sources, such as roads and railways, based on 

international standard technical parameters. Either localized receivers or extended areas can be 



 
 

considered; in the latter case, the analysis is performed for individuals divisions of a grid of the 

desired size.  

 

2. Materials and methods 

2.1 Description of the prototype greenery wall 

The barrier was constructed from concrete blocks and coated with mortar. The dimensions of 

the prototype barrier are 2.62 m in width, 2.42 m in height and 0.20 m in thickness. The wall is 

shown with and without greenery in Fig. 1. 

 

Figure 1. Experimental prototype with and without the modular greenery system 

  

The green wall system is based on recycled polyethylene modules; each is an independent 

hydroponic crop unit (MCU) (Urrestarazu, 2012; Perez, 2016). The MCUs are resistant to UV 

radiation and are 600 mm wide by 200 mm high by 400 mm thick. Each MCU is a closed box 

filled with a recyclable and environmentally friendly substrate: a 50/50 vol/vol mix of compost 

and coconut fibres of 15 cm in thickness. A lower layer of recycled plastic (3 mm in thickness), 

which is environmentally beneficial by virtue of the recycling of the plastic, also provides 

resistance and collects rainwater from the upper layer. Each MCU is independent and is held in 

place by a stainless steel structure. An irrigation system and vegetal canopy, as described by 

Urrestarazu and Burés (2012) and Azkorra et al. (2015), is used. This green wall is designed to 

host any small shrub, although native plants that are well adapted to the climate are 



 
 

recommended. In this study, the Helichrysum thianschanicum species was used. This species is 

widely used in gardening in the Mediterranean climate and particularly in plant façades because 

of its high resistance to drought and high temperatures. Each module contained 24 pre-

cultivated plants with an average height of 0.4 m. Acoustic measurements were performed after 

the irrigation, resulting in a composition of 16.2% solid materials, 51.8% water and 23% air (by 

volume). 

2.2 In situ measurement procedure 

In situ measurements of sound reflection were performed on the experimental noise barrier both 

with and without the modular greenery system. Although the small dimensions of the prototype 

prevented the precise determination of the noise absorption characteristics, a comparative 

analysis could be performed to quantify the improvement achieved by mounting greenery on the 

plain concrete wall. A method based on the ISO 13472-1 standard and the European CENT/TS 

1793 standard, though with certain simplifications and adaptations to the experimental set-up, 

was used. The procedure consisted of generating and analysing the evolution of a train of very 

short acoustic signals (pulses) incident on and reflected by the barrier. A microphone was 

placed between the omnidirectional source and the barrier (Fig. 2). With the selection of a 

sufficient short time for analysis, it is possible to assume that this microphone received both the 

directly incident sound and that reflected by the barrier. In addition, the directly incident sound 

was also registered by placing a second microphone at the same distance from the noise source 

but in a location free of reflections coming from nearby walls. The effect of ground reflections 

is expected to be similar in both recordings. Thus, the subtraction of the two simultaneously 

recorded signals should yield the signal corresponding to the reflected sound. The 

characteristics of the devices used are as follows: two M1-17 1/4" microphones and a DO12 

omnidirectional source. The barrier and the devices were placed on an earthen floor, which can 

be regarded as a highly absorptive material. 

 



 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 2. Sketch of the experimental set-up. H=2.42 m, h=0.8, 0.9 and 1 m, x1=1.4 and x2=1 m. 

 

 As the objective of this study was to quantify the decrease in the reflection component achieved 

with the use of the developed greenery system, measurements with and without vegetation were 

performed under otherwise identical conditions. The distance from the noise source to the 

microphone was 1 m, and that from the microphone to the wall was 1.4 m. It should be noted 

that this latter distance is greater than the recommended value, but this choice is justified by the 

large thickness of the greenery elements. For each barrier, the spectral analysis of both the direct 

and reflected signals, evaluated within a small time window and corrected for the difference in 

path length, yields the surface reflection factor RP(f) for each octave frequency band: 

   

 

where Kr is a geometrical factor that depends on the difference between the paths followed by 

the direct and reflected waves, Pr(f) is the spectrum of the sound pressure wave reflected by the 

barrier (after the application of the subtraction technique), and Pd(f) is the spectrum of the direct 

sound pressure wave. It is worth noting several potential difficulties encountered in both 

performing the measurements and handling the data. An incorrect determination of geometrical 

factors and other corrections can lead to strong discrepancies in the reflection factors. A 

(1)            
1

(f)P

(f)P

K
=(f)R

d

r

r

P



 
 

significant improvement in the accuracy of the method can be achieved by performing a 

reference measurement using a totally reflecting surface for the same positions of the 

loudspeaker and the microphones (Garai et al., 1998). In our case, the wall without greenery is 

not a totally reflecting surface, but it exhibits a known reflection behaviour and thus can be 

treated as the reference surface. The relative reflection factor Rp,rel(f) is then evaluated as 

follows: 

 

 

where Pr,green(f) and Pr,wall(f) are the spectra of the sound pressure waves reflected by the barrier 

with and without greenery, respectively. 

   Once the relative reflection factors have been obtained, the relative absorption coefficients can 

be calculated as follows: 

 

 

   The real absorption coefficients for the greenery wall can then be estimated from the relative 

coefficients rel and the known absorption coefficients of the reference barrier, wall: 

 

 

In accordance with this procedure, a train of identical pulses was generated, each with a 

duration of 3 ms and separated by 1 s. The microphone was always placed at a distance of 1.4 m 

from the wall, but three different heights were tested: h=100, 90 and 80 cm. As observed from 

Fig. 1, the greenery system was quite heterogeneous. The heights were selected such that points 

at h=100 cm were in front of zones with dense vegetation, whereas points at h=80 were in front 

of zones with sparse vegetation. Differences in the results for the different heights could 

)2(    
,

,
(f)P

(f)P
=(f)R

wallr,

greenr

relp

(3)        1
2

,
(f)R=(f)α

relPrel


(4)
  1)(

)1)( (11
2

,

2

(f)) -α((f)f

 f(f)R(f)R=α(f)

relwallrel

relwallPP











 
 

therefore provide information about the dependence of the sound reflection behaviour on the 

vegetation density. 

2.3. Procedure for the numerical prediction of attenuation levels 

The environmental noise prediction software CadnaA was employed to evaluate the 

improvement that can be achieved by using greenery barriers instead of barriers with low 

absorption. Calculations were performed for a 6-lane motorway of 30 m in width with an 

average daily traffic (ADT) of 12000 vehicles. The barrier height was set to H=3 m, and each 

was placed at a distance of W/2 from the centre of the track. Barriers regarded as “reflective 

barriers” were characterized by a low absorption coefficient (a value of 0.2 was set for all 

frequencies), whereas “greenery barriers” were assigned the absorption values measured from 

the modular greenery prototype. 

Receivers were placed at distances d from the barrier and at heights h from the ground. At each 

receiver position, the improvement achieved for the green barrier, LA, was calculated as 

follows:  

 

where LA,ref and LA,green are the sound levels, in dB(A), for pairs of reflective and greenery 

barriers, respectively. 

 

3. Results 

3.1 In situ measurement results  

   As described in Section 2.2, two microphones received a train of identical pulses representing 

both direct and reflected signals at various heights. As an example, Fig. 3 (top panel) shows the 

temporal evolution of the signals recorded by the microphone located at a height of h=100 cm 

for the barrier with and without greenery. In the case of the greenery-free barrier, reflection of 

the sound is clearly seen (dashed line), with a delay of approximately 8 ms from the directly 

(5)    
,, greenArefAA

LLL 



 
 

incident wave. In the presence of the greenery system, reflection is also observed but, as 

expected, at a much lower level (solid line). The reflected waves can be obtained by subtracting 

from these signals (pt) the directed signals (pd) recorded by a microphone at the same distance 

from the noise source but in a location free of reflections from nearby walls. The reflected 

signals (pr=pt-pd) are presented in Fig. 3 (bottom panel). In this representation, the effect of the 

vegetation in reducing the reflection of the wave can be more clearly observed. The first 

reflection from the barrier arrives at the second microphone 14 ms later than the direct signal. 

Therefore, in light of the observed signals, a time window of 10 ms (also shown in Fig. 3) 

appears adequate for further analysis. 

 

 Figure 3. Top panel: Signals recorded by a microphone placed between the sound source and the barrier 

at a height of h=100 cm from the ground. Bottom panel: The reflected signals obtained by subtracting the 

direct signals. Solid lines correspond to the greenery-covered barrier, and dashed lines correspond to the 

reference barrier without greenery. The selected time window is indicated in the bottom panel.  



 
 

  

   Fig. 4 presents the sound pressure levels averaged over all analysed pulses that correspond to 

the reflected waves, in octave bands. The three left panels compare the levels for the barrier 

with and without greenery for the three microphone heights. In each case, the mean value 

obtained from 6 recorded pulses is shown. As expected, the levels corresponding to the 

greenery-free wall are always higher than those measured for the wall with greenery. The 

difference between the two values depends on the height of the microphone and is highest for 

the case of h=100 cm. This is because, as previously mentioned, the vegetation was distributed 

quite heterogeneously, and this reception point was immediately in front of a zone of dense 

vegetation. The right panels of Fig. 4 show, for each height, the relative absorption  

 

Figure 4. Left panels: The reflected sound levels for the reference barrier without greenery (black) and the 

greenery-covered barrier (white) at three different microphone positions: h=100 cm (top), 90 cm (middle) 

and 80 cm (bottom). Right panels: The corresponding relative absorption coefficients.  

 



 
 

coefficients calculated using Eqs. (2) and (3). We observe that these relative coefficients are 

higher than 0.5 for all frequencies and measurement points. The standard deviation is 0.05. 

Table 1 shows the relative absorption coefficients, averaged over the three microphone 

positions, and the real absorption coefficients of the greenery barrier calculated using Eq. (4). 

 

Table 1. Relative absorption coefficients averaged over the three positions of the microphone. The 

absorption coefficients were estimated via Eq. (4) using the reference absorption characteristics for a 

low-absorption surface (also shown in the table). 

 
250 Hz 500 Hz 1000 Hz 2000 Hz 4000 Hz 

rel 0.65 0.68 0.63 0.56 0.64 

wall 0.20 0.20 0.20 0.20 0.20 

 0.70 0.73 0.67 0.63 0.66 

 

 

   The results obtained for the absorption coefficients in the range of moderate and high 

frequencies indicate values of approximately 0.65. At lower frequencies, the absorption is 

higher, but it should be noted that because of the small value of the temporal window used in 

this analysis, the absorption coefficients at such low frequencies may be subject to error.  

3.2. Predicted attenuation improvement provided by greenery-covered noise barriers 

   As explained in the introduction, when a pair of noise barriers is erected to protect areas 

located near roadways, the multiple reflections occurring between the barriers may result in 

significant degradation of the attenuation performance compared with that of a single barrier. It 

is expected that this problem should be minimized by the use of greenery barriers, and the 

objective of this section is to quantify this improvement. The environmental noise prediction 

software CadnaA was employed for this purpose, following the method explained in Section 

2.3. First, the separation between the barriers was set to W=46 m. Several sets of receivers, 



 
 

located at different distances d from the barrier and at different heights h from the ground, were 

considered. Fig. 5 shows the predicted sound maps, at three different heights, corresponding to 

configurations with a single barrier, a pair of parallel reflective barriers and a pair of parallel 

greenery barriers.  

Figure 5. Predicted sound maps at three heights with respect to ground level, h=2, 4 and 8 m, and three 

barrier configurations (shown in white). Left panels: One reflective barrier placed 23 m from the centre of 

the track. Central panels: Two reflective barriers, each 23 m from the centre of the track (W=46 m). Right 

panels: Same as the central panels but with greenery barriers. Colours from red to green indicate a 

decrease in noise level.  

The single-barrier case presented in the figure (left panel) corresponds to a reflective barrier, but 

in fact, the attenuation experienced behind a single barrier does not depend significantly on the 



 
 

absorption coefficient. The colours in the figure illustrate how sound is attenuated behind the 

barrier; sound levels lower than those in front of the barrier are indicated, especially at a height 

of h=2 m. When a second reflective barrier is added on the other side of the road (central 

panels), the occurrence of multiple reflections increases the noise level from the road, causing a 

clear reduction in the attenuation behind the first barrier (the green colours shift to orange 

tones). However, when a pair of greenery barriers instead of reflective barriers is erected (right 

panels), the attenuation obtained behind the single barrier appears to be recovered. 

  

 

To better understand the behaviour shown in Fig. 5, the sound levels at a height of h=4 m are 

plotted as a function of the distance from the barrier in Fig. 6. A comparison of the results for 

the three analysed configurations shows that the use of greenery barriers considerably mitigates 

the reflection effect, although it does not eliminate it completely. The improvement, calculated 

using Eq. (5), is shown in the inset of Fig. 6. It increases with increasing distance and is equal to 

approximately 2.3 dBA at a distance of d=40 m. For this case (h=4 m and d=40 m), Fig. 7 

compares the sound levels in the various frequency bands.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

55

60

65

70

75

0 20 40 60 80

L
A

 (
d

B
A

)

distance (m)



 
 

 

Figure 6. Predicted sound levels as functions of the distance from the barrier for a single reflective barrier 

(dotted line), a pair of reflective barriers (dashed line) and a pair of greenery barriers (solid line). The 

receiver height is h=4 m. Inset: The improvement LA (Eq. (5)) achieved by using greenery barriers 

instead of a pair of reflective barriers. 

In Fig. 8, the improvements achieved by using greenery barriers are presented, as functions of 

the receiver height h, for distances of d=20, 40, 60 and 80 m (these positions are marked in the 

sound maps presented in Fig. 5). As expected, the difference between using reflective or 

absorbing barriers is less important at greater heights. Above 8 m, the improvement is only 

approximately 1 dB(A) or less. At short distances (d=20 m), the improvement reaches a 

maximum at a height approximately equal to the barrier height (3 m). At longer distances, this 

maximum occurs at a lower height. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Fig. 7. Predicted sound-level distributions, in octave frequency bands, for a receiver at a height of h=4 m 

and a distance from the barrier of d=40 m. The three different barrier configurations are compared. 

30

40

50

60

70

125 250 500 1000 2000 4000

L
A

(d
B

A
)

frequency (Hz)

one single barrier

two ref lective barriers

two greenery barriers



 
 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 8. Predicted improvements achieved using a pair of greenery barriers, as functions of height, for 

distances of d=20, 40, 60 and 80 m. 

 

Finally, we study the dependence on the separation between the barriers, W. Three separations 

are considered: W= 38, 46 and 54 m. Because the barrier height is fixed at 3 m, these 

separations correspond to barrier height ratios, W/H, of approximately 12, 15 and 18, 

respectively. The results are shown in Figs. 9 and 10. In Fig. 9, the sound levels for reflective 

and greenery barriers obtained at a height of h=4 m for each of the three separations are plotted 

as functions of the distance from the barrier. As expected, when the separation is smaller, the 

effect of reflections is more important and, therefore, the improvement offered by the greenery 

barriers is higher. Fig. 10 compares the improvements, as functions of height, for a receiver 

located 40 m from the barrier. Is clearly seen that a lower separation yields greater 

improvement.  

0

1

2

3

4

0 2 4 6 8 10 12


L

A
 (
d

B
A

)

height (m)

d=20m

d=40m

d=60m

d=80m



 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 9. Predicted sound levels for pairs of reflective and greenery barriers with separations of W=38, 46 

and 54 m as functions of the distance from the barrier. The receiver height is h=4 m. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure 10. Predicted improvements for pairs of greenery barriers with separations of W=38, 46 and 54 m 

as functions of height. The receiver is placed at a distance of d=40 m. 

 

 

60

62

64

66

68

70

72

0 20 40 60 80

L
A

 (
d

B
A

)

distance (m)60

62

64

66

68

70

72

0 20 40 60 80

L
A

 (
d

B
A

)

distance (m)

W=38 m

W=46 m

W=54 m

Ref lective barriers

Greenery barriers

0

1

2

3

4

0 2 4 6 8 10 12


L

A
 (
d

B
A

)

heigh (m)

W=38 m

W=46 m

W=54 m



 
 

4. Discussion and conclusions  

   A modular greenery wall was acoustically characterized to evaluate its potential performance 

as a roadway noise barrier. First, in situ measurements of the sound reflection and absorption 

coefficients were performed using an experimental prototype. The results for the greenery-

covered wall and a reference wall without greenery were compared, revealing a clear 

improvement in the presence of greenery. The in situ measured absorption coefficients have an 

average value of approximately 0.7. In general, the values for all frequency bands are higher 

than those previously obtained in laboratory measurements (Azcorra et al., 2015), which can be 

attributed to the fact that in these previous measurements, the vegetation in the greenery system 

was not as highly developed as that in the prototype barrier used in this study. In fact, these 

findings reinforce our belief that in situ measurements of this kind are a valuable tool for the 

realistic evaluation of greenery walls, which exhibit significant changes throughout the year that 

cannot be conveniently evaluated in the laboratory.  

The obtained noise absorption results are reasonable considering the kinds of substrate and 

vegetation used. The values are higher than those obtained by other authors with high-density 

substratum soil but lower than those obtained for low-density substratum soil (Horosenkov et 

al., 2013). The results are also in qualitative agreement with the values obtained by Wong et al. 

(2010) for greenery with a high coverage density. In addition, the values are similar to or even 

higher than those obtained by other authors for porous concretes developed for highway noise 

barriers that incorporate recycled waste materials, such as coal bottom ash (Arenas et al., 2013) 

and waste concrete (Park et al., 2005), as coarsening aggregates. 



 
 

Numerical predictions obtained using the CadnaA software regarding the effectiveness of the 

proposed greenery system indicate that this system enables an improvement in noise-blocking 

performance when used in a pair of parallel barriers. The multiple reflections between the 

barriers are effectively minimized by the absorption provided by the greenery. The achieved 

improvement depends on the receiver position and the distance between the barriers, but a value 

of 4 dB(A) was obtained as a maximum for realistic situations. A comparison with the results 

obtained by other authors for absorptive parallel barriers is difficult because of the dependence 

on the specific characteristics of the barriers (dimensions, barrier separation), the traffic noise 

considered in each study and the receiver positions. However, the obtained improvement 

appears similar to that reported by some authors (Watts, 1996b) and higher than that reported by 

others (Daltrop and Hodgson, 2012). 

The results obtained in this work are somewhat limited because they correspond to a particular 

level of vegetation growth in a system that varies throughout the year. However, when the 

experimental evaluation was performed, the vegetation was in an intermediate stage, and thus, 

the noise absorption values reported here can be regarded as average values. In any case, it is 

worth noting that unlike laboratory experiments, the proposed in situ protocol can be applied to 

collect measurements in different seasons and thus to evaluate the temporal evolution of the 

noise absorbance caused by the growth of the vegetation in green barriers. Additionally, the 

effects of different substrates could be analysed in future works. Another potential extension of 

this work, relevant for urban planning, would be to consider numerical predictions for a more 

realistic urban scenario. As shown in this paper, numerical simulations allow a greater 

understanding of the soundscapes in environments with various noise sources and could be a 

useful tool for facilitating the consideration of noise problems in urban planning projects to 

predict the future effects of sources of disturbance.  



 
 

In conclusion, the proposed greenery barrier can be an alternative to other types of conventional 

barriers because, in addition to its aesthetic value, its high sound absorption provides an 

effective reduction in noise levels. The visualization of the results obtained through simulation 

clarified the distributions of the noise sound levels in all areas surrounding a road or highway 

for barriers with different configurations and characteristics. Furthermore, the applied in situ 

method is suitable for investigating the effects of changes in vegetation and enables the study of 

barriers with reduced dimensions. 

5. Acknowledgements 

   The authors would like to thank the FEDER of the European Union for financial support 

through the project ‘‘G-GI3000/IDIX SILENTVEG: Barreras vegetales autónomas y sostenibles 

para la mitigación acústica y compensación del CO2 en vías de transporte, con seguimiento 

telemático’’ of the ‘‘Programa Operativo FEDER de Andalucía 2007-2013’’. 

 

  



 
 

References 

Arenas, C., Vilchez, L. F., Leiva, C., , H, Rodríguez-Galán, M. Use of co-combustion bottom 

ash to design an acoustic absorbing material for highway noise barriers. Waste 

Management 33 (2013), pp. 2316-2321.  

Azkorra, Z., Pérez, G., Coma, J., Cabeza, L. F., Bures, S., Álvaro, J. E., Urrestarazu, M.,. 

Evaluation of green walls as a passive acoustic insulation system for buildings. Applied 

Acoustics 89 (2015), pp. 46-56. 

Boczkowski, A. Some observations on the design of noise barriers. Management Systems in 

Productions Engineering. Scientific and technical quarterly, 2(10) (2013) pp. 32-36. 

Carr, K., Penton, S., Li, M. Evaluation of road transportation noise modelling algorithms and 

software packages. Canadian Acoustics, 39(3) (2011), pp. 84-85. 

CEN/TS 1793-5:2003. 2003. Road traffic noise reducing devices – Test method for determining 

the acoustic performance –Part 5: Intrinsic characteristics - In situ values of airborne 

sound reflection and airborne sound insulation. 

Cianfrini, C., Corcione, M., Fontana, L. Experimental verification of the acoustic performance 

of diffusive road side noise barriers. Applied acoustics, 68(11) (2007), pp. 1357-1372. 

Daltrop, S. and Hodgson, M. Scale-model investigation of the effects of surface absorption and 

nearby foliage on noise-barier performance. Canadian Acoustics, 40(4) (2012), pp. 41-48. 

Daltrop, S.,  Hodgson, M. Wakefield, C., Field investigation of the effects of vegetation on the 

performance of roadside noise barriers. Noise  Cont. Eng. J. 60(2) (2012), pp. 202-208.  

Defrance, Jérôme, et al. Innovative barriers in Environmental methods for transport noise 

reduction, Nilsson, M., Bengtsson, J. and Klæboe, R. (Eds.), CRC Press (2014), pp. 19-

47.  

Den Boer, L. C., and Schroten, A. Traffic noise reduction in Europe. CE Delft 14 (2007), pp. 

2057-2068. 

Dunnett, N., Kingsbury, N. Planting green roofs and living walls (Vol. 254). Portland, OR: 

Timber Press (2004). 



 
 

Dzhambov, Angel. M., and Dimitrova, Donka D. Green spaces and environmental noise 

perception. Urban Forestry and Urban Greening, 14(4) (2015) pp. 1000-1008. 

 

Ekici, I., Bougdah, H., 2003. A review of research on environmental noise barriers. Building 

Acoustics, 10(4) (2003), pp. 289-323. 

Garai, M., Berengier, M., Guidorzi, P., L’Hermite, P., 1998. Procedure for measuring the sound 

absorption of road surfaces in-situ. In Proceedings of Euronoise , 98 (1998), pp. 819-824. 

Garai, M., Schoen, E., Behler, G., Bragado, B., Chudalla, M., Conter, M., Guidorzi, P. 

Repeatability and Reproducibility of In Situ Measurements of Sound Reflection and 

Airborne Sound Insulation Index of Noise Barriers. In Acta Acustica united with 

Acustica, 100(6) (2014), pp. 1186-1201. 

Guarnaccia, C., Quartieri, J., Mastorakis, N. E. Comparison of Acoustic Barriers Noise 

Reductions Evaluated by Different Calculation Methods. In Latest Trends on Systems”, 

Proc. of the 18th Int. Conf. on Circuits, Systems, Communications and Computers 

(2014a), pp. 443-449. 

Guarnaccia, C., Quartieri, J., Mastorakis, N. E. Analysis of Methods to Evaluate the Noise 

Reduction due to Acoustic Barriers Installation, International Journal of Mechanics 8 

(2014b), pp. 258-267. 

Guidorzi P., Garai M. Signal analysis in the sound absorption measurement procedure: The 

importance of time subtraction and reference surface corrections. Proceedings of 

Acoustics‘08, Paris, France, ISBN 978-2-9521105-4-9 (2008), pp.1755-1760. 

Guidorzi P, Garai M. Advancements in Sound Reflection and Airborne Sound Insulation 

Measurement on Noise Barriers. Open Journal of Acoustics, 3 (2013), pp. 25-38 

Horoshenkov, K. V., Khan, A., & Benkreira, H. Acoustic properties of low growing plants. The 

Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 133(5) (2013), pp.2554-2565. 

Hodgson, M., Daltrop, S., Peterson, R., Benedict, P. Compliance and vegetated-barrier 

acoustical testing in a purpose-built sound-transmission suite, Noise Cont. Eng. J. 61(5) 

(2013) pp. 481-486. 



 
 

Ishizuka, T., Fujiwara, K. Performance of noise barriers with various edge shapes and acoustical 

conditions. Applied Acoustics, 65(2) (2004), pp. 125-141. 

ISO 13472-1. 2002. Measurement of sound absorption properties of road in situ. Extended 

surface method. 

Kalansuriya, C. M., Pannila, A. S., Sonnadara, D.U.J. Effect of roadside vegetation on the 

reduction of traffic noise levels. Proceedings of the Technical Sessions. Institute of 

Physics–Sri Lanka, 25 (2009), pp. 1-6. 

Kang, J. Urban sound environment. CRC Press, 2006. 

Kotzen, Benz, and  English, Colin. Environmental noise barriers: a guide to their acoustic and 

visual design. CRC Press, (2009). 

Londhe, N., Rao, M. D., Blough, J. R., 2009. Application of the ISO 13472-1 in situ technique 

for measuring the acoustic absorption coefficient of grass and artificial turf surfaces, 

Applied Acoustics 70 (2009), pp. 129-141 

May, D. N., and Osman M.M. 1980. The performance of sound absorptive, reflective, and T-

profile noise barriers in Toronto. Journal of Sound and Vibration 71.1 (1980), pp. 65-71. 

Menounou, P., Busch-Vishniac, I. J., 2000. Jagged edge noise barriers. Building Acoustics 7(3) 

(2000), pp. 179-200. 

Palma, M. J. C., Samagaio, A., 2006. Acoustic performance of a noise barrier coated with an 

absorptive material. Noise control engineering journal 54(4) (2006), pp. 245-250. 

Park, S.B., Seo, D.S., Lee, J. Studies on the sound absorption characteristics of porous concrete 

based on the content of recycled aggregate and target void ratio. Cem. Concr. Res., 35 

(2005), pp 1846–1854 

Pérez G. Coma J., Barreneche C., de Gracia A., Urrestarazu M., Burés S., Cabeza L.F. Acoustic 

insulation capacity of Vertical Greenery Systems for buildings. Applied Acoustics 110 

(2016), pp. 218-226. 

Tronchin L. On the acoustic efficiency of road barriers: The Reflection Index, International 

Journal of Mechanics, Issue 3, Vol. 7(2013), pp 318-326. 



 
 

Urrestarazu M., Burés S. Sustainable green walls in architecture. J Food Agric Environ 10 

(2012), pp. 792-4. 

Van Renterghem, T., Forssén, J., Attenborough, K., Jean, P., Defrance, J., Hornikx, M., and 

Kang, J., 2015. Using natural means to reduce surface transport noise during propagation 

outdoors. Applied Acoustics, 92 (2015), pp. 86-101. 

Watts, G. R., Acoustic performance of a multiple edge noise barrier profile at motorway sites. 

Applied Acoustics 47(1) (1996b), pp. 47-66. 

Watts, G. R., Godfrey, N. S. Effects on roadside noise levels of sound absorptive materials in 

noise barriers. Applied Acoustics 58(4) (1999), pp. 385-402. 

Watts, G.R.,. Acoustic performance of parallel traffic noise barriers. Applied Acoustics 47(2) 

(1996a), pp. 95-119. 

Wong, N. H., Kwang Tan, A. Y., Tan, P. Y., Chiang, K., Wong, N. C. Acoustics evaluation of 

vertical greenery systems for building walls. Building and Environment 45(2) (2010), pp. 

411-420. 

Yang, H. S., Kang, J., Cheal, C. Random-Incidence Absorption and Scattering Coefficients of 

Vegetation. Acta Acustica united with Acustica 99(3) (2013), pp. 379-388. 


