





















































The Small Breathing Amplitude at the Upper Lobes Favors the Attraction of Polymorphonuclear Neutrophils to Mycobacterium tuberculosis Lesions and Helps to Understand the Evolution toward Active Disease in An Individual-Based Model


ORIGINAL RESEARCH
published: 29 March 2016

doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2016.00354

Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org 1 March 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 354

Edited by:

Jörg Linde,

Leibniz-Institute for Natural Product

Research and Infection Biology

-Hans-Knoell-Institute, Germany

Reviewed by:

Denise Kirschner,

University of Michigan Medical

School, USA

Fabrizio Clarelli,

CNR Istituto per le Applicazioni del

Calcolo, Italy

*Correspondence:

Pere-Joan Cardona

pj.cardona@gmail.com

Specialty section:

This article was submitted to

Infectious Diseases,

a section of the journal

Frontiers in Microbiology

Received: 10 December 2015

Accepted: 07 March 2016

Published: 29 March 2016

Citation:

Cardona P-J and Prats C (2016) The

Small Breathing Amplitude at the

Upper Lobes Favors the Attraction of

Polymorphonuclear Neutrophils to

Mycobacterium tuberculosis Lesions

and Helps to Understand the

Evolution toward Active Disease in An

Individual-Based Model.

Front. Microbiol. 7:354.

doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2016.00354

The Small Breathing Amplitude at the
Upper Lobes Favors the Attraction of
Polymorphonuclear Neutrophils to
Mycobacterium tuberculosis Lesions
and Helps to Understand the
Evolution toward Active Disease in
An Individual-Based Model
Pere-Joan Cardona

1* and Clara Prats
2

1Unitat de Tuberculosi Experimental, Fundació Institut d’Investigació en Ciències de la Salut Germans Trias i Pujol, Universitat

Autònoma de Barcelona, CIBERES, Badalona, Spain, 2 Escola Superior d’Agricultura de Barcelona, Departament de Física,

Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya – BarcelonaTech, Castelldefels, Spain

Infection withMycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb) can induce two kinds of lesions, namely

proliferative and exudative. The former are based on the presence of macrophages

with controlled induction of intragranulomatous necrosis, and are even able to stop its

physical progression, thus avoiding the induction of active tuberculosis (TB). In contrast,

the most significant characteristic of exudative lesions is their massive infiltration with

polymorphonuclear neutrophils (PMNs), which favor enlargement of the lesions and

extracellular growth of the bacilli. We have built an individual-based model (IBM) (known

as “TBPATCH”) using the NetLogo interface to better understand the progression from

Mtb infection to TB. We have tested four main factors previously identified as being

able to favor the infiltration of Mtb-infected lesions with PMNs, namely the tolerability

of infected macrophages to the bacillary load; the capacity to modulate the Th17

response; the breathing amplitude (BAM) (large or small in the lower and upper lobes

respectively), which influences bacillary drainage at the alveoli; and the encapsulation of

Mtb-infected lesions by the interlobular septae that structure the pulmonary parenchyma

into secondary lobes. Overall, although all the factors analyzed play some role, the small

BAM is the major factor determining whether Mtb-infected lesions become exudative,

and thus induce TB, thereby helping to understand why this usually takes place in the

upper lobes. This information will be very useful for the design of future prophylactic and

therapeutic approaches against TB.

Keywords: NetLogo, Individual-Based Model, tuberculosis, polymorphonuclear neutrophils, Th17, bacillary

drainage, breathing amplitude, alveolar macrophages tolerability

http://www.frontiersin.org/Microbiology
http://www.frontiersin.org/Microbiology/editorialboard
http://www.frontiersin.org/Microbiology/editorialboard
http://www.frontiersin.org/Microbiology/editorialboard
http://www.frontiersin.org/Microbiology/editorialboard
http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2016.00354
http://crossmark.crossref.org/dialog/?doi=10.3389/fmicb.2016.00354&domain=pdf&date_stamp=2016-03-29
http://www.frontiersin.org/Microbiology
http://www.frontiersin.org
http://www.frontiersin.org/Microbiology/archive
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
mailto:pj.cardona@gmail.com
http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2016.00354
http://journal.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fmicb.2016.00354/abstract
http://loop.frontiersin.org/people/127912/overview
http://loop.frontiersin.org/people/229925/overview


Cardona and Prats NetLogo TBPATCH

INTRODUCTION

Tuberculosis is still a major threat to humankind, causing up
to 1.5 million deaths so far (World Health Organization, 2015).
Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb) is able to reach the alveolar
spaces via micrometric aerosols. Once it has reached this site,
it is phagocytosed by alveolar macrophages (AMs) and can
grow intracellularly until it causes apoptosis or necrosis, thereby
becoming extracellular (Lee et al., 2006). These bacilli are drained
toward other alveolar spaces, where they cause its infection, or
again infect the AMs that come from the interstitial space to
replace those that have disappeared (Hashimoto et al., 2013;
Hussell and Bell, 2014). This takes place until a certain number
of AMs have been infected and destroyed, which induces the
local inflammatory response that allows sufficient bacilli to reach
the lymphatic nodes and trigger the immune response. This
response is mainly based on the proliferation of specific T CD4
lymphocytes that are able to activate infected AMs by secretion
of IFN-γ (North and Jung, 2004; Vilaplana et al., 2014). The
majority of subjects subsequently control the infection, thus
resulting in minimal and well-controlled lesions. However, in
a few cases, the infection is able to develop large progressive
lesions, thereby causing a relevant destruction of the lung
parenchyma that impairs their functionality and generates active
disease. Data from necropsies of early TB cases performed in
the pre-antibiotic era (Cardona, 2015) show how progressive
lesions are mainly built by infiltration of the parenchyma by
polymorphonuclear neutrophils (PMNs), intragranulomatous
necrosis and liquefaction in the presence of a high bacillary load.
In contrast, lesions built with AMs and epithelioid cells appear to
have a controlled size and a lower bacillary load.

Data from in vivo experimental modeling in either mice
(Marzo et al., 2014), rabbits (Converse et al., 1996), goats (de
Val Pérez et al., 2011), or monkeys (Flynn et al., 2015) also show
the same pattern. Thus, in vitro experimental data demonstrate
that the ability to attract PMNs is related to the tolerability of
the infected AMs to a certain bacillary load, thus causing either
apoptosis or necrosis (Lee et al., 2006). In this context, apoptosis
would cause a limited intracellular growth in the alveolar AMs
and a limited inflammatory response due to a lack of PMNs,
whereas higher tolerability or an inability to cause apoptosis
allows higher intracellular bacilli concentrations, which is related
to a marked neutrophilic infiltration (Gan et al., 2008).

Equally, the quality of the immune response is also responsible
for further infiltration. It is known that the induction of a Th17
response favors the attraction of PMNs to the lesions once specific
lymphocytes reach them and begin to secrete IL-17. This Th17
response is triggered against extracellular pathogens as a result
of the cytokine profile generated by their presence (Korn et al.,
2009).

Two major factors are also related to the progression toward
active TB. First of all, it appears that the upper lobes accumulate
by far the largest number of TB lesions (Dock, 1954). This
has been related to the mechanics of the respiration process,
which is influenced by the force of gravity, thereby impairing the
breathing amplitude (BAM) in the upper lobes while enhancing
it in the lower regions thanks to the force generated by the

diaphragm. This small amplitude in the upper lobes (Guo et al.,
2011) could allow the local accumulation of bacilli, thereby
attracting PMNs.

Another factor that helps control lesion progression is the
encapsulation process that takes place in large mammals (Peake
and Pinkerton, 2015). In these animals there is a need to structure
the parenchyma into a net of septae that connect to the visceral
pleura, thus facilitating the ventilation process without disrupting
the fragile lung parenchyma (Peake and Pinkerton, 2015). This
net structures the parenchyma into cubes with a volume of
around 1 cm3, known as secondary lobes, containing four acini,
each of which has four alveolar sacs containing four alveoli
(Webb, 2006). The fibroblasts thatmaintain these septae can react
quickly to the presence of any minimal lesion in the parenchyma
by encapsulating it and stopping its progression by fibrosis and
calcification (Gil et al., 2010).

We have built an individual-based-model (IBM) to
understand how these four factors can influence the progression
toward active TB and have uncovered the key role played by
drainage activity, which can be compensated by the macrophage
tolerability and by changing the quality of the immune response
to an anti-Th17 one. The encapsulation process also plays a
crucial role, although it also depends on the speed of lesion
growth, which can overcome encapsulation when intense
enough.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

The model is described following the IBM standardized protocol
ODD (Overview, Design concepts, and Details) (Grimm et al.,
2006, 2010). This protocol consists in formalizing the IBM
with three blocks, which are subdivided into seven optional
subcategories, namely Purpose, Entities, State variables and
scales, Process overview and scheduling, Design concepts,
Initialization, Input data, and Submodels.

Overview
Purpose
The objective of this IBM is to analyse and understand the
influence of four factors, namely the tolerability of the infected
AM (BLTOL), the anti-Th17 response, bacillary drainage (BAM)
and the encapsulation process, on the progression toward active
TB.

Entities, State Variables, and Scales
The fundamental entities in this model are alveoli and bacilli.
The IBM has been built using the NetLogo structure (Tissue
and Wilensky, 2004) based on patches (spatial cells) and turtles
(individuals). Thus, patches represent individual alveoli and
turtles represent individual bacilli. The time step is 1 h, which
is small enough to allow the modeling of the bacilli growth
cycle (around 24 h) and wide enough to allow computationally
feasible simulations. The simulated period is 42 days from initial
infection (7 weeks), as the acute phase we are aiming to reproduce
is observed at 3–4 weeks post-infection and the lesions are
stabilized at around 6 weeks post-infection (Cardona et al., 2003).

Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org 2 March 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 354

http://www.frontiersin.org/Microbiology
http://www.frontiersin.org
http://www.frontiersin.org/Microbiology/archive


Cardona and Prats NetLogo TBPATCH

FIGURE 1 | Flow chart of the computer code.

Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org 3 March 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 354

http://www.frontiersin.org/Microbiology
http://www.frontiersin.org
http://www.frontiersin.org/Microbiology/archive


Cardona and Prats NetLogo TBPATCH

FIGURE 2 | NetLogo’s user interface, with model TBPATCH. Green sliders are the parameters that can be changed by the user. Brown boxes show the evolution

of different variables during a simulation. The left window is the world representation, where spatial evolution of the infection can be seen. Colors: Alveoli: White:

when a single AM is present; Black: when the AM is destroyed; Blue: when the AM is destroyed and replaced by another AM from the interstitium; Violet: when an

activated AM (aAM) is present; Pink: when PMNs occupy the alveoli; Brown: capsule. Bacilli: Blue challenge bacilli; Red: Intracellular bacilli (Ibac); Green:

Extracellular (Ebac); Brown: growing Ebac; Orange: dormant (Dbac); Yellow: killed bacilli (Kbac).

Patches or spatial cells
A 2D grid of 46 × 46 alveoli is defined, each alveolus being
represented by a spatial cell or patch (in humans, 0.3 mm
diameter) (Suarez et al., 2012). The whole grid is equivalent to a
secondary lobule as the average diameter of the secondary lobule
is from 10 to 25 mm of diameter (Webb, 2006). This 2D grid is
enough to represent an ensemble of connected alveoli, since the
model does not include the lung 3D structure at this stage.

Each patch initially contains a single alveolar macrophage
(AM) (Suarez et al., 2012; Peake and Pinkerton, 2015) whose state
is determined by the evolution of the infection. Patch variables
are mostly related with the characteristics of the AM and other
cells that they contain, each state being represented by a specific
color as follows:

- White patch: alveolus with the single initial AM;
- Black patch: alveolus whose AM has been destroyed by the
bacilli;

- Blue patch: alveolus whose initial AM has been replaced by
another one from the interstitium after its destruction, i.e.,
without the need for extravasation caused by an inflammatory
response to enter the cell;

- Violet patch: alveolus with one activated AM (aAM);
- Pink patch: alveolus that has been occupied by PMNs
(neutrophilic infiltration); and

- Dark pink patch: necrotized alveolus (alveolus with caseum).

In addition, a brown patch defines the presence of interlobar
fibroblasts. Initially they are found in interlobar septae, but they

are able to encapsulate lesions under specific conditions (Gil et al.,
2010).

All these cells (AMs, PMNs, fibroblasts) do not necessarily
occupy the entire available space in the alveolus, but their
presence and characteristics are shown through the patch
color. In fact, while the mean diameter of human alveoli is
0.3 mm, AMs size around 20 microns diameter and PMNs
size around 8 microns diameter (Krombach et al., 1997). The
interstitial space that provides new interstitial AM and the
capillary net responsible for the entrance of AM and PMNs
once the inflammatory response is triggered are not explicitly
modeled because their size is negligible in front of alveolar
space.

Turtles or individuals
Bacilli are the agents (individuals) and their properties are related
to their state within the alveolar growth cycle, which is also
identified with colors: initial bacillary load (Ibac, blue), bacilli
growing intracellularly (Ibac, red), non-growing extracellular
bacilli (Ebac, in green), growing Ebac (brown), dormant bacilli
(Dbac, in orange) or killed bacilli (Kbac, in yellow). When
growing, the time within the growth cycle (reproduction time)
is also controlled.

Global variables
The global variables are mostly related to the bacillary load of
the system, as well as the PMN and aAM concentration and
spatial distribution. A further important global variable is related

Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org 4 March 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 354

http://www.frontiersin.org/Microbiology
http://www.frontiersin.org
http://www.frontiersin.org/Microbiology/archive


Cardona and Prats NetLogo TBPATCH

TABLE 1 | One-way ANOVA.

Input parameters

AntiTh17 Encapsulation factor Max-Ibac (BLTOL) Drain-alveoli (BAM)

Outcome variables Time to 104 bacilli 0.544 0.008** <0.001** <0.001**

Ibac d42 <0.001** 0.005** 0.001** 0.024*

Ebac d42 <0.001** 0.003** <0.001** <0.001**

Dbac d42 <0.001** 0.003** <0.001** <0.001**

Kbac d42 0.078 <0.001** <0.001** <0.001**

% Infiltration d42 <0.001** 0.004** <0.001** 0.002**

Ratio aAM/PMNs d42 <0.001** 0.571 <0.001** <0.001**

Time-crossing aAM/PMNs n/a 0.048* <0.001** <0.001**

Slope aAM d42 0.058 0.434 <0.001** 0.006**

P-values of simulation results when combining different input parameters and outcome variables (Welch’s test was performed when the equality of variances requirement was not

satisfied).

*Statistically significant difference with p < 0.05.

**Statistically significant difference with p < 0.01.

to activation of the immune response, which can acquire values
of 0 (no immune response yet) or 1 (immune response already
activated).

Process Overview and Scheduling
As mentioned above, the model was constructed in NetLogo
(Tissue and Wilensky, 2004), which is well suited for modeling
individual-based systems in a user-friendly interface. The user
is allowed to select different conditionings and properties of
the system to be simulated, using a set of sliders (see Details
sub-section).

The simulation starts with definition of the initial
configuration, in which a certain number of intracellular
bacilli are randomly distributed in the space. The initial bacillary
load can be chosen by the user. All alveoli are set to the initial
single AM state (white). If encapsulation is considered, the limits
of the space are changed to the encapsulated state (brown). The
model assumes discrete time steps of 1 h, as mentioned. Each
hour, all individuals execute a series of actions, and their variables
are updated immediately. The characteristics of the patches are
also immediately updated as a consequence of evolution of the
infection. Patches (i.e., alveoli) are submitted to actions that may
affect the bacilli they contain.

The actions for individuals are, when possible: reproduce
(either intracellularly or extracellularly), become extracellular
when the macrophage is destroyed, be drained, be killed by the
immune response, and re-infect. The actions for patches can
be distinguished between those that affect the space and those
that affect the AM contained in patches. The former include
get encapsulated and get necrotized, whereas the latter (actions
concerning the AM) are, when appropriate, be destroyed by
intracellular bacilli growth, be replaced after destruction, and
be activated by inflammatory response. Finally, when the global
bacillary load exceeds a certain threshold, the immune response
is activated everywhere. Global variables are updated at the end
of each time step. Figure 1 shows the flow diagram for the
computational model.

Design Concepts
Basic Principles
Themodel is based on the observations and theories referred to in
the introduction to this paper, which are summarized in a recent
review (Cardona, 2015).

Emergence
Emerging phenomena are mainly related to the global dynamics
of the infection. In particular, the spatial patterns that emerge
from simulations are especially interesting as they are a reflection
of the different kinds of lesions that may be found in a TB-
infected lung (proliferative and exudative), and are the result of
non-trivial interactions between the processes considered.

Interaction
Local interactions are mainly driven by space. Thus, intracellular
growth, for example, is limited by the bacillary load tolerability
(BLTOL) of the AM, whereas the properties of neighboring
patches (encapsulation, necrosis) condition the evolution of a
single patch. Interactions at a global level are related to activation
of the immune response, which affects the whole system. In
addition, global interactions are also given by the possibility of
the bacilli being drained and reinfecting a different alveolus.

Stochasticity
Randomness is introduced at all levels of the simulation. Some
actions are associated with a certain probability and are thus
executed according to a stochastic number. All parameters are
affected by Gaussian noise.

Observation
Output data show the global evolution of each class of bacilli
(intracellular, extracellular, dormant and killed) as well as the
amount of AM in each state. In addition, the evolution of PMNs,
AM and necrosis are also reported. Data are exported to an
external data file. Moreover, the graphical interface continuously
shows the spatial evolution, thus allowing the observer to see the
different patterns of lesions.

Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org 5 March 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 354

http://www.frontiersin.org/Microbiology
http://www.frontiersin.org
http://www.frontiersin.org/Microbiology/archive


Cardona and Prats NetLogo TBPATCH

TABLE 2 | Multiple comparisons analysis.

Input parameters

Max-Ibac (BLTOL) Drain-alveoli (BAM)

O
u
tc
o
m
e
v
a
ri
a
b
le
s

Time to 104 bacilli A-B-C A-B-C

16–32 <0.001** 0.1–0.2 <0.001**

32–64 <0.001** 0.2–0.3 <0.001**

16–64 <0.001** 0.1–0.3 <0.001**

Ibac d42 A-B-C A-A-B

16–32 <0.001** 0.1–0.2 1.000

32–64 0.009** 0.2–0.3 0.046*

16–64 <0.001** 0.1–0.3 0.045*

Ebac d42 A-A-B A-B-B

16–32 0.993 0.1–0.2 <0.001**

32–64 0.001** 0.2–0.3 0.673

16–64 0.001** 0.1–0.3 <0.001**

Dbac d42 A-A-B A-A-B

16–32 0.426 0.1–0.2 0.990

32–64 <0.001** 0.2–0.3 <0.001**

16–64 <0.001** 0.1–0.3 <0.001**

Kbac d42 A-B-C A-B-C

16–32 <0.001** 0.1–0.2 <0.001**

32–64 <0.001** 0.2–0.3 <0.001**

16–64 <0.001** 0.1–0.3 <0.001**

% Infiltration d42 A-B-B A-B-B

16–32 <0.001** 0.1–0.2 0.005**

32–64 0.065 0.2–0.3 0.998

16–64 0.004** 0.1–0.3 0.006**

Ratio aAM/PMNs d42 A-A-B A-A-B

16–32 0.965 0.1–0.2 0.176

32–64 <0.001** 0.2–0.3 <0.001**

16–64 <0.001** 0.1–0.3 0.044*

Time-crossing

aAM/PMNs

A-B-C A-B-A

16–32 <0.001** 0.1–0.2 <0.001**

32–64 <0.001** 0.2–0.3 <0.001**

16–64 <0.001** 0.1–0.3 0.145

Slope aAM d42 A-B-C AB-B-A

16–32 <0.001** 0.1–0.2 0.655

32–64 <0.001** 0.2–0.3 0.011*

16–64 <0.001** 0.1–0.3 0.070

ANOVA for multiple comparisons with three-level parameters (Tukey method or Games-

Howell method). Three different letters mean that there are no overlaps between intervals.

The p-value for each pair is shown.

*Statistically significant difference with p < 0.05.

**Statistically significant difference with P < 0.01.

Details
Initialization
The following sliders can be used to select the characteristics
and initial conditions of the system to be simulated, as shown in
Figure 2.

Initial-bac: used to define the initial bacillary load of the
challenge. Each initial bacillus will be located randomly.
Doubling-time: refers to the doubling-time of the bacilli.
Max-Ibac: this is the maximum bacillary load tolerated by
the AM. Once reached, the cell is destroyed. This parameter
defines the bacillary load tolerability (BLTOL).
Ebacs-PMN: this is the bacillary load required to attract
infiltration of the alveoli by PMNs.
Bacs-immunity: the total bacillary load in the grid required to
trigger the immune response.
Immunity-Kbac: chance of killing intracellular bacilli once an
AM is activated.
Inflamm-attract: global number of bacilli that should be
around an infected AM to be activated once the immune
response has been triggered.
Max-harbor: maximum bacillary load that can be supported
by an alveolus. Once this number is reached, the induced
inflammatory response has attracted sufficient cells (mainly
PMNs) that it is finally destroyed, thereby inducing
necrosis, and all the immerged bacilli become dormant
(Dbac).
Drain-alveoli:maximum distance that can be reached by Ebac
or Dbac every time-point, representing the BAM.
Drain-tissue: the drainage capacity of Ebac or Dbac once they
are located in PMN-filled alveoli, thus representing the BAM.
We have considered this to be equal to Drain-alveoli/2 in all
cases.
Reinfect: this is the probability of distant drainage of Dbac,
thus representing the process observed once immune response
is reached by those old aAMs that become foamymacrophages
(FMs). These FMs drain out of the lesions (plenty with Dbac)
and some of them destroyed on the way to reaching the upper
bronchi.
Drain-Dbac: this is the distance to which Dbac are drained as
a result of the reinfection phenomenon.
Anti-Th17 factor: to reduce the effect of the Th17 response,
which favors the entry of PMNs into the different lesions once
the immune response is reached.
Encapsulation-ratio: this defines the ability to encapsulate,
although we have defined only two conditions: when no
encapsulation is considered, the capsule frame is eliminated
from the program. It is only informed.

Sub-Models

Encapsulation
This sub-model affects spatial cells and is only applied when
the encapsulation-ratio is set to 1 in the initial conditions.
The encapsulation of a certain patch requires two simultaneous
conditions: (i) at least one neighboring cell must be already
fibrosed (brown); and (ii) at least one neighboring cell has a

Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org 6 March 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 354

http://www.frontiersin.org/Microbiology
http://www.frontiersin.org
http://www.frontiersin.org/Microbiology/archive


Cardona and Prats NetLogo TBPATCH

FIGURE 3 | Influence of maximum bacillary load per macrophage (Max-Ibac = 16, 32, 64) (BLTOL), encapsulation factor (−, no encapsulation, +,

encapsulation) and breathing amplitude (BAM) (0.1, 0.2, 0.3) on the time to reach a total bacillary population of 104 cells. Results for AntiTh17 factor are

not shown separately because no significant differences were found. Bars indicate the mean of 20 runs. *Only 50% of runs reached the bacillary population of 104

cells before day 42.

FIGURE 4 | Influence of different parameters on the number of intracellular bacilli at day 42. Maximum bacillary load per macrophage (BLTOL): 16 (A,D), 32

(B,E), 64 (C,F). AntiTh17 factor: 1 (A–C), 10 (D–F) Encapsulation factor: −, no encapsulation, +, encapsulation. Breathing amplitude (BAM): 0.1, 0.2, 0.3. Bars

indicate the mean of 10 runs.

Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org 7 March 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 354

http://www.frontiersin.org/Microbiology
http://www.frontiersin.org
http://www.frontiersin.org/Microbiology/archive


Cardona and Prats NetLogo TBPATCH

FIGURE 5 | Influence of different parameters on the number of extracellular bacilli at day 42. Maximum bacillary load per macrophage (BLTOL): 16 (A,D), 32

(B,E), 64 (C,F). AntiTh17 factor: 1 (A–C), 10 (D–F) Encapsulation factor: −, no encapsulation, +, encapsulation. Breathing amplitude (BAM): 0.1, 0.2, 0.3. Bars

indicate the mean of 10 runs.

non-resident AM (sky), an activated AM (aAM) (violet), PMN
infiltration or necrosis (pink). If these conditions are satisfied,
encapsulation takes place.

It is possible to set an Encapsulation-ratio lower than 1. In this
case, encapsulation would take place at this ratio.

Necrosis
This sub-model also affects spatial cells. The conditions for a
patch to get necrotized are, indistinctly: (i) a neighboring cell
already has necrosis; or (ii) the local bacillary load exceeds
Max-harbor. If one of these conditions is satisfied, the patch is
necrotized.

Bacillary growth
The individual reproduction-time of the bacilli is updated after
each time step. Ibac doubles once the duplication time is achieved
(Doubling-time), giving rise to the appearance of two intracellular
bacilli with age zero.

In the case of Ebac, the increase in reproduction-time and
duplication only occurs when the local patch is neutrophilic. A
maximum bacillary load is defined for each patch (Max-harbor).
Once this is reached, no more bacillary growth is accepted and
the whole bulk becomes dormant.

Infected macrophage destruction
A degree of tolerability of AM to a maximum intracellular
bacillary load is initially defined (Max-Ibac or BLTOL). Once

this concentration is reached, the AM is destroyed. Local bacilli
subsequently become extracellular (Ebac).

Immune response activation
When the total bacillary load exceeds the threshold given by Bacs-
immunity, the immune response is immediately activated. This
status is maintained until the end of the simulation.

Destroyed AM replacement
The replacement of a destroyed macrophage depends on the
immune status of the system.

If the immune response has not yet been activated, the
destroyed macrophage may be replaced by a new AM as long
as the bacillary load required to attract infiltration of the alveoli
by PMNs (Ebacs-PMN) is not exceeded. This AM is assumed
to enter the alveolus through the interstitial space, which is not
explicitly represented in the model because its size is negligible.
Otherwise, if the total bacterial load of neighboring patches
is greater than the ratio Bacs-immunity/Inflamm-attract, the
alveolus undergoes neutrophilic infiltration (see below).

Once the immune response has been activated, and if the
total bacterial load of neighboring patches is lower than the ratio
Bacs-immunity/Inflamm-attract, the AM is replaced by a new
(non-activated) one. If this ratio is exceeded butMax-harbor has
not yet been reached, AM activation or neutrophilic infiltration
takes place, depending on the corresponding sub-model.

Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org 8 March 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 354

http://www.frontiersin.org/Microbiology
http://www.frontiersin.org
http://www.frontiersin.org/Microbiology/archive


Cardona and Prats NetLogo TBPATCH

FIGURE 6 | Influence of different parameters on the number of dormant bacilli at day 42. Maximum bacillary load per macrophage (BLTOL): 16 (A,D), 32

(B,E), 64 (C,F). AntiTh17 factor: 1 (A–C), 10 (D–F) Encapsulation factor: −, no encapsulation, +, encapsulation. Breathing amplitude (BAM): 0.1, 0.2, 0.3. Bars

indicate the mean of 10 runs.

AM activation and neutrophilic infiltration
This sub-model takes into account the need for a certain
bacillary load or infected alveoli in the surroundings of the
patch considered in order to attract the PMNs or activate an
AM into an aAM. It is applied to those alveoli with a non-
activated macrophage (white and sky patches) and to those
alveoli with a destroyed AM (black), whenever the total bacterial
load of neighboring patches is higher than the ratio Bacs-
immunity/Inflamm-attract, the Max-harbor is not surpassed
and once the immune response has been activated. Then, the
probability of suffering a neutrophilic infiltration is given by a
new indicator: the local percentage of Ebac over Ebac and Ibac,
modulated by the factor Anti-Th17. The neutrophilic infiltration
takes place with this probability and through the capillary net,
which is not explicitly represented in the model because its size
is negligible. Alternatively, the AM is activated (in white and
blue patches) or a new aAM replaces the destroyed one (in black
patches).

Bacillary inactivation and destruction
The inactivation or destruction of Ibac and Ebac requires the
immune response to be present. As such, this sub-model only
applies once the immune response has been triggered.

In general, the destruction and inactivation of these bacilli
may only occur when an activated AM (aAM) is present (i.e.,

in violet patches). Destruction therefore takes place with a
probability immunity-Kbac, and inactivation into Dbac takes
place with a probability of immunity-Kbac/10.

The inactivation of Ebac into Dbac in an alveolus in which
the macrophage has been destroyed by bacillary growth is also
possible (i.e., without the presence of an aAM). This occurs with
a probability of immunity-Kbac/10.

Breathing amplitude (BAM) for bacillary drainage and

reinfection
There are two mechanisms for drainage: via a foamy infected
macrophage (FM) and via the tissue. The distance at which bacilli
can be drained is randomly chosen between 0 (no drainage) and
drain-Dbac (FM-driven) or drain-tissue (tissue-driven).

FM-driven drainage results in an endogenous reinfection
process. This occurs for all Dbac with a probability of Reinfect.
These bacilli may also be killed during this drainage, with a
10-fold increase in this probability.

Tissue-driven drainage is considered for all Dbac in
neutrophilic infiltration and is a consequence of the BAM. In
both cases, those Dbac that move into an alveolus with an AM
become intracellular (Ibac), whereas those that move into a
neutrophilic infiltration become extracellular (Ebac).

Tissue-driven drainage is also considered for Ebac in the
following cases:

Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org 9 March 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 354

http://www.frontiersin.org/Microbiology
http://www.frontiersin.org
http://www.frontiersin.org/Microbiology/archive


Cardona and Prats NetLogo TBPATCH

FIGURE 7 | Influence of different parameters on the number of killed bacilli at day 42. Maximum bacillary load per macrophage (BLTOL): 16 (A,D), 32 (B,E),

64 (C,F). AntiTh17 factor: 1 (A–C), 10 (D–F) Encapsulation factor: − = no encapsulation, + = encapsulation. Breathing amplitude (BAM): 0.1, 0.2, 0.3. Bars indicate

the mean of 10 runs.

TABLE 3 | Phenotypical characteristics of the lesions according to the

four main factors previously identified as being able to favor the

infiltration of Mtb-infected lesions with PMNs.

Max-Ibac (BLTOL)

16 32 64

B
re
a
th
in
g
A
m
p
lit
u
d
e
(B
A
M
)

0.1 C C C C C C 1

A
n
ti
-T
h
1
7

0.2 A B B B C C

0.3 A A B B B B

0.1 B B D D D D 10

0.2 A B B B D D

0.3 A A B B B D

− + − + − +

Encapsulation

These are the tolerability of infected macrophages to the bacillary load (BLTOL); the

capacity to modulate the Th17 response; the breathing amplitude (BAM); and the

encapsulation of Mtb-infected lesions. These results are obtained after running the

program until day 46 post-challenge. Figure 10 shows the phenotype. Type A.- In dark

blue, proliferative in progression, with low quantities of Dbac and a high proportion of

Kbac. Type C.- In red, exudative, based on a large necrotic center surrounded by an

active ring of alveoli filled with PMNs and the massive presence of Dbac. Type D.- In

orange, exudative controlled, with smaller lesions than in type C surrounded by a ring of

aAMs. Type B.- In sky blue, proliferative controlled, as there is a very low quantity of Dbac

and a very high proportion of Kbac.

- When they are released from a destroyed AM.
- When they are in a neutrophilic infiltration.
- When an Ebac replicates, both bacilli may be drained via tissue.

Those Ebac that move into an alveolus with an AM return to the
intracellular state.

Parameterization and Simulation
Scheduling
The local sensitivity analysis and parameter estimation followed
an iterative process that entailed successive simulations in
order to (i) delimit the ranges where parameters and outcome
results made biological sense, and (ii) identify those parameters
that were more sensitive with regards to different outcome
variables. During this stage, the parameters were varied on-
at-a-time a certain percentage (except for specific parameters
like encapsulation, that we only accounted for on/off) and
their effect was firstly checked on lesion patterns observed in a
qualitative way and secondly checked on the outcome variables
that we finally selected as indicators. This involved several rounds
from which we can highlight an initial broad analysis where
parameters were varied at wide ranges (typically 100 or 50%), a
subsequent stage for estimating parameters taking into account
what we observed at the first stage, and a final sensitivity analysis
where parameters were varied smaller percentages (typically
10%) and from which we finally selected the four parameters
to be studied, taking into account the basic principles of
the model.

This process allowed the selection of those values or ranges
that provided biologically viable results (Table S1). The aim
was to observe the different patterns in simulations that

Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org 10 March 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 354

http://www.frontiersin.org/Microbiology
http://www.frontiersin.org
http://www.frontiersin.org/Microbiology/archive


Cardona and Prats NetLogo TBPATCH

FIGURE 8 | Influence of different parameters on the percentage of infiltrated space at day 42. Maximum bacillary load per macrophage (BLTOL): 16 (A,D),

32 (B,E), 64 (C,F). AntiTh17 factor: 1 (A–C), 10 (D–F) Encapsulation factor: − = no encapsulation, + = encapsulation. Breathing amplitude (BAM): 0.1, 0.2, 0.3. Bars

indicate the mean of 10 runs.

FIGURE 9 | Phenotypical characteristics of the lesions after running the program until day 21 post-challenge. Colors: Alveoli: White: when a single AM is

present; Black: when the AM is destroyed; Blue: when the AM is destroyed and replaced by another AM from the interstitium; Violet: when an activated AM (aAM) is

present; Pink: when PMNs occupy the alveoli; Brown: capsule. Bacilli: Blue challenge bacilli; Red: Intracellular bacilli (Ibac); Green: Extracellular (Ebac); Brown:

growing Ebac; Orange: dormant (Dbac); Yellow: killed bacilli (Kbac).

Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org 11 March 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 354

http://www.frontiersin.org/Microbiology
http://www.frontiersin.org
http://www.frontiersin.org/Microbiology/archive


Cardona and Prats NetLogo TBPATCH

FIGURE 10 | Phenotypical characteristics of the lesions after running the program until day 46 post-challenge. Type A.- Proliferative in progression, with

low quantities of Dbac and a high proportion of Kbac (pictures B, C, F, b, c and f). Type C.- Exudative, based on a large necrotic center surrounded by an active ring

of alveoli filled with PMNs and the massive presence of Dbac (pictures A, G, J, M, N, P and Q). Type D.- Exudative controlled, with smaller lesions than in type C

surrounded by a ring of aAMs (pictures g, j, m, p, n, q and r). Type B.- Proliferative controlled, as there is a very low quantity of Dbac and a very high proportion of

Kbac (all other pictures). Colors: Alveoli: White: when a single AM is present; Black: when the AM is destroyed; Blue: when the AM is destroyed and replaced by

another AM from the interstitium; Violet: when an activated AM (aAM) is present; Pink: when neutrophils occupy the alveoli; Brown: capsule. Bacilli: Blue challenge

bacilli; Red: Intracellular bacilli (Ibac); Green: Extracellular (Ebac); Brown: growing Ebac; Orange: dormant (Dbac); Yellow: killed bacilli (Kbac).

represented around 50 days post-infection. As such, an initial
bacterial load of 10 bacilli was chosen, with a duplication
time of 24 h. The threshold for activation of the immune
response was set to 104 bacilli, a value similar to that
determined by Vilaplana et al. (2014). Other non-measurable
parameters were estimated to provide a visible but non-
exaggerated effect. In particular, Immunity-Kbac was set to 30%,
Inflamm-Attract was set to 75 bacilli, Max-harbor was set to
150 bacilli, Reinfect was set to 5 × 10−4%, Drain-Dbac was
set to 1 patch h−1 (equivalent to 0.3 mm h−1), and Ebacs-
PMN was set to 64 bacilli. The parameter space exploration
also reported the relationship Drain-tissue = 0.5 × Drain-
alveoli.

Once these 7 parameters were fixed, a set of in silico
experiments was designed in order to study the effect of the 4

processes and factors considered. The selected values to explore
were as follows:

- Max-Ibac or BLTOL: 16, 32, and 64 bacilli, as obtained from
experimental data (Lee et al., 2006).

- Drain-alveoli or BAM: 0.1, 0.2, and 0.3 patch h−1 (equivalent
to maximum velocities of 0.03, 0.06, and 0.09 mm h−1,
respectively).

- AntiTh17-factor: 1 and 10.
- Encapsulation: 0 (no encapsulation) and 1.

The simulations were scheduled using the Behavior Space tool
of NetLogo. All values were combined, i.e., a total of 36 possible
combinations were explored (i.e., a grid-search of 3 × 3 × 2 × 2
combinations), and 10 repetitions were run for each combination
(i.e., a total of 360 simulations was performed).

Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org 12 March 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 354

http://www.frontiersin.org/Microbiology
http://www.frontiersin.org
http://www.frontiersin.org/Microbiology/archive


Cardona and Prats NetLogo TBPATCH

FIGURE 11 | Interface of the program using four-times more patches to

show how important the encapsulation process is in a wider grid as

regards stopping the progression toward active TB. This is the case of a

typical proliferative response, with low BLTOL and high BAM (A,B), and a

medium BLTOL and low BAM (C,D), after running the program until day 46

post-challenge. Colors: Alveoli: White: when a single AM is present; Black:

when the AM is destroyed; Blue: when the AM is destroyed and replaced by

another AM from the interstitium; Violet: when an activated AM (aAM) is

present; Pink: when neutrophils occupy the alveoli; Brown: capsule. Bacilli:

Blue challenge bacilli; Red: Intracellular bacilli (Ibac); Green: Extracellular

(Ebac); Brown: growing Ebac; Orange: dormant (Dbac); Yellow: killed bacilli

(Kbac).

Aone-way ANOVAof the simulation results was subsequently
performed to determine the contribution of these parameters to
the variability in the outcomes of the model (Ginovart et al.,
2011). To do so, some representative outcomes of the model,
namely time to 104 bacilli (i.e., time to activation of immune
response), Ebac at day 42, Ibac at day 42, Dbac at day 42, Kbac
at day 42, percentage of infiltrated space at day 42, ratio between
aAM and PMNs at day 42, the time at which PMNs exceeded
aAM and the slope of aAM evolution at day 42, were chosen.
Table 1 shows the p-value for each parameter and outcome
considered. Table 2 broadens the one-way ANOVA for the three-
level parameters, showing a multiple comparison analysis. In
general, the lower the p-value, the higher the effect of that
parameter on the corresponding outcome.

RESULTS

Bacillary Load Tolerability (BLTOL) of AM
and Breathing Amplitude (BAM) Determine
Time to Immune Response
Figure 3 shows a clear negative correlation between BLTOL and
BAM and the time to reach a total of 104 bacilli. This threshold

has been defined as the minimum bacillary load needed to trigger
the immune response based on published experimental data
(Jung et al., 2005; Vilaplana et al., 2014). The encapsulation
process has a significant effect as regards increasing this period
of time as it hampers bacillary dissemination.

Breathing Amplitude (BAM) Is the Most
Important Factor Influencing Evolution of
the Bacillary Load (BL)
Figures 4–7 show the BL for the four bacillary forms considered
at day 42. The intracellular bacilli (Ibac) analysis (Figure 4)
shows a positive correlation with BAM, with one exception in the
case of a low BLTOL value, where the influence of BAM reaches
a plateau at the value of 0.2.

Encapsulation helps control the BL with one exception: it
favors an increase in bacillary load at an amplitude of 0.1.
Curiously, the antiTh17 factor also exhibits the same behavior.
These findings are logical as an increase in BAM facilitates
dissemination of the bacillary load, thus increasing expansion
and the possibility for intracellular growth. In addition, the anti-
Th17 response can be explained by its ability to stop PMN
infiltration and promote the entry of aAMs.

In contrast to what happens with the Ibac, there is a negative
correlation between evolution of the Ebac concentration and the
BAM (Figure 5). Again, this is logical as the accumulation of
bacilli favors the attraction of PMNs. This pattern changes at
the highest BLTOL, where there is a wide variation. This can
be explained by the fact that, once this value is reached (Max-
Ibac = 64), PMNs are immediately attracted, thus meaning that
BAM has only a limited influence. Both behaviors are reflected
in Table 2, where an increase in BAM to 0.3 does not make
any difference, whereas an increase in BLTOL to Max-Ibac = 64
induces significant changes.

The role of encapsulation tends to prevent Ebac progression,
although there are multiple exceptions. One explanation could
be that the speed of infiltration is greater than the ability to
encapsulate. What is more understandable is the role of anti-
Th17, which stops Ebac progression in all circumstances by
abrogating PMN infiltration.

The pattern for Ebac is almost the same as that for Dbac
(Figure 6), although in this case the highest BAM value appears
to have an influence on the reduction in its concentration in the
context of the highest BLTOL.

Finally, Kbac (Figure 7) seems to evolve in a similar manner
to Ibac as it is positively correlated with BAM. In this case,
the higher the BLTOL the lower the Kbac. Increasing BLTOL
promotes neutrophilic infiltration, and the fate of these bacilli is
to become dormant (Dbac) in the context of necrotic tissue rather
than being killed. As such, the results are coherent. In this case,
the encapsulation process clearly reduces the Kbac concentration.
This can be explained by control of the dissemination, which
results in an overall lack of living bacilli, and thus also necrosed
bacilli. What is more intriguing is the lack of influence of the
antiTh17 response, as this should stop PMN infiltration and favor
bacillary necrosis.

Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org 13 March 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 354

http://www.frontiersin.org/Microbiology
http://www.frontiersin.org
http://www.frontiersin.org/Microbiology/archive


Cardona and Prats NetLogo TBPATCH

FIGURE 12 | Influence of different parameters on the slope of aAM evolution at day 42. Maximum bacillary load per macrophage (BLTOL): 16 (A,D), 32 (B,E),

64 (C,F). AntiTh17 factor: 1 (A–C), 10 (D–F) Encapsulation factor: −, no encapsulation, +, encapsulation. Breathing amplitude (BAM): 0.1, 0.2, 0.3. Bars indicate the

mean of 10 runs. Individual legends indicate the percentage of 10 runs in which the PMN population exceeded the aAM population.

The Infiltration Percentage and Quality of
the Lesion Are Strongly Influenced by the
Breathing Amplitude (BAM)
We define four types of lesions according to two different
readouts, i.e., their quality and the infiltration percentage
(Table 3):

A.- Proliferative in progression, with low numbers of Dbac
and a high proportion of Kbac (Figure 10, pictures B, C, F, b,
c, and f) showing a high granulomatous infiltration.
B.- Proliferative controlled, as there is a very low number
of Dbac and a very high proportion of Kbac showing a low
granulomatous infiltration.
C.- Exudative, based on a large necrotic center surrounded by
an active ring of alveoli filled with PMNs andmassive presence
of Dbac (Figure 10 pictures A,G,J,M,N,P, and Q) showing a
high granulomatous infiltration.
D.- Exudative controlled, with smaller lesions than in type C
surrounded by a ring of aAMs (Figure 10 pictures g, j, m, p, n,
q, and r).

At low BLTOL, BAM is positively correlated with the percentage
infiltration, and encapsulation clearly decreases it, whereas the
anti-Th17 response only has an effect at low BAM (Figure 8).

As can be seen from Figure 9 together with Figure 4, there is
no immune response at day 21 in the majority of the cases.
Figure 10 shows the progression at day 46, with infiltration
increasing with an increase in BAM. Looking at the quality
of the lesion, it can be seen that the lesions are mainly
based on AM and Kbac, thus suggesting type B lesions
that become type A at high BAM. There is only one case
in which type C lesions can be seen, with low BAM, no
encapsulation, and a massive presence of Dbac being detected
(see Figure 6).

An unusual profile is observed at medium BLTOL, with both
low and high BAM inducing higher infiltration, although this
can be decreased with encapsulation (Figure 8). In this case, the
antiTh17 response is able to reduce infiltration at low BAM.
Looking at the appearance of the lesions on d21 (Figure 9), there
appears to be a slight increase in infiltration with BAM, which is
also reflected in the delay in the immune response at low BAM.
In contrast, the appearance of the lesions is very similar at day
46 (Figure 10) in terms of both infiltration and quality (type B
lesions), thus reflecting the presence of activated AM (aAM) with
Kbac. However, in the case of low BAM, the lesions are mainly
type C.

At high BLTOL, infiltration increases with an increase in
BAM from 0.1 to 0.2, and, logically, anti-Th17 has a critical

Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org 14 March 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 354

http://www.frontiersin.org/Microbiology
http://www.frontiersin.org
http://www.frontiersin.org/Microbiology/archive


Cardona and Prats NetLogo TBPATCH

FIGURE 13 | Influence of different parameters on the ratio between aAMs and PMNs at day 42. Maximum bacillary load per macrophage (BLTOL): 16 (A,D),

32 (B,E), 64 (C,F). AntiTh17 factor: 1 (A–C), 10 (D–F) Encapsulation factor: − = no encapsulation, + = encapsulation. Breathing amplitude (BAM): 0.1, 0.2, 0.3. Bars

indicate the mean of 10 runs. Horizontal dotted lines correspond to ratio 1 (ratio > 1 corresponds to aAM > PMNs, and ratio <1 corresponds to aAM < PMNs).

influence on controlling this infiltration as it is mainly caused by
the accumulation of PMNs and extracellular growth (Figure 8).
This can clearly be seen from Figure 9, which shows the necrosis
caused by the accumulation of PMNs and the presence of Dbac.
The fact that this becomes marked by day 46 is interesting as
the immune response appears at almost the same time (Figure 3)
for all three BAM values. The lesions for the lower and medium
BAM values are of type C and are therefore difficult to control by
encapsulation. In this case, as can be seen from Figure 8, anti-
Th17 clearly transforms these lesions to type D. Interestingly,
the highest BAM also induces a radical change in the fate of
the lesions, from exudative to proliferative, which clearly become
type B.

Figure 11 is the result of increasing the size of the canvas four-
fold, thus representing four secondary lobes instead of just one,
in order to gain a better understanding of the importance of the
encapsulation factor in stopping progression of the lesions, both
proliferative and exudative.

Overall, even though it originally seems that BLTOL is the
most important factor for lesions to become exudative, a proposal
supported by the global statistical analysis (Table 2), which seems
to show that BLTOL is slightly more influential than BAM, it
is clear that, qualitatively speaking, exudative lesions are always
induced at low BAM but the encapsulation process can abrogate
this at low BLTOL.

The Slope in aAM Evolution and in the
aAM/PMN Ratio Also Defines the Degree
of Infiltration and the Quality of the Lesions
It can be seen from Figure 12, which shows the slope in aAM
evolution at day 42, that the higher the slope the higher the
infiltration, but in this case the value is negative as neutrophilic
infiltration predominates. This can also be seen when the
aAM/PMN ratio is less than 1 (Figure 13).

The aAM/PMN ratio reflects the quality of the lesions
(Figure 13). A ratio >1 defines the dominance of aAMs in the
lesions, and thus the presence of a proliferative-type activated
macrophage lesion. Exudative lesions can be detected when this
ratio is <1. Interestingly, an increase in anti-Th17 clearly reverts
the exudative lesions to proliferative (values increasing from <1
to >1).

DISCUSSION

The modeling of biological systems allows us to determine and
evaluate the effect of different factors in an environment that
would be very difficult to predict or even to experiment using
in vitro or in vivo tools. So far a lot of efforts have been already
done to understand the granuloma induction in TB infection,
specially by the group of Kirschner (Segovia-Juarez et al., 2004;

Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org 15 March 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 354

http://www.frontiersin.org/Microbiology
http://www.frontiersin.org
http://www.frontiersin.org/Microbiology/archive


Cardona and Prats NetLogo TBPATCH

Marino et al., 2011; Gideon et al., 2015). Those works are
characterized by the use of a multiscale process that has more
emphasis on the molecular and cellular scale together with the
tissue and organ scale, including from the antigen presentation
phenomenon, cytokine/chemokine diffusion dynamics, or the
trafficking between the lung and the draining lymph node.
Their works usually combine the use of IBM and partial
differential equations for continuous variables. The originality of
our proposal is that we introduce a combination of two scales.
In particular our data help us to understand the role of four
factors related to the neutrophilic infiltration of Mtb lesions,
and thus to the induction of TB. Two of these, namely the
BAM and the encapsulation capacity of the intralobar septae, are
anatomical. These two factors have been combined with another
two that facilitate neutrophilic infiltration, which could be related
to the quality of the immune response and, to some extent, to
some degree of genetic susceptibility (Tobin et al., 2012). These
are the tolerability of the intracellular bacillary load (BLTOL)
(Ayres and Schneider, 2008) and the ability to counterbalance the
Th17 response during the immune phase. Although BLTOL has
received relatively little attention, it could be related to a known
defensive mechanism against intracellular pathogens, namely
apoptosis or organized cell-death, rather than necrosis, which is
unregulated (Dey and Bishai, 2014). In this case we have related
BLTOL to the ability of AM to hold more or less bacilli and, as
has been demonstrated experimentally, this holding capacity (or
tolerability) with the ability to attract PMNs. This is because in
vitro experiments have demonstrated that a high proportion of
Mtb bacilli per macrophage, known as multiplicity of infection
(MOI), induces more necrosis (Lee et al., 2006), which in turn
is related to a greater attraction of PMNs (Gan et al., 2008). We
have defined a parameter to represent the way in which PMNs
are attracted once a certain number of extracellular bacilli at an
alveolar site has been reached (Ebacs-PMN) simply because the
maximumMOI has been reached.

Similarly, the quality of the immune response has been
linked to the ratio between extracellular and extracellular-plus-
intracellular bacilli. As the Th17 response is associated with
extracellular pathogens (Korn et al., 2009), this proportion has
been found to be the most easily correct to determine this
response understood as the capacity to attract PMNs. What
could this so-called anti-Th17 factor be? Again, this is a virtual
concept that could include anything from a genetic factor to a
new prophylactic-therapeutic approach that can trigger it.

BAM has been associated with bacillary drainage capacity.
The values of this drainage capacity are scaled to the capacity
to drain the bacilli to neighboring alveoli as a result of the
breathing activity. This concept attempts to take into account
the anatomical particularities of the lung parenchyma, which
are organized into alveolar sacs that, in turn, are linked via the
bronchiole to form acini (Webb, 2006).

Although there are fibroblasts in the entire parenchyma,
we assumed that the encapsulation of granulomas is driven
by fibroblasts of interlobular septae. This is in accord with
observations by Gil et al. (2010). The encapsulation process has
been defined by assigning a 100% likelihood of being generated if
a normal alveolus has a capsule and another occupied alveoli (by

PMN or activated macs) as its neighbor. This gives very reliable
values when compared with the minipig model (Gil et al., 2010)
in terms of the size of encapsulated lesions, which can be as small
as 0.5 mm. A very interesting proposal in this regard is that
the high expansion speed of the exudative lesions overwhelms
the encapsulation process. This image has traditionally been
interpreted as the ability of a growing lesion to destroy the
capsule (Grosset, 2003). However, this is a very difficult process.
Indeed, in a similar process, namely necrotizing fasciitis, it is
very difficult to destroy the fascia that encapsulates the muscles,
thus resulting in necrosis of the muscle (Henningham et al.,
2015). We are faced with a very similar scenario here in which
the most important aspect is the ability to be faster than
encapsulation. If this is the case, then there is a chance to
overcome it.

It is interesting to note that the presence of PMNs in exudative
lesions is limited to just the outer ring, as we have also seen
in the C3HeB/FeJ murine model (Marzo et al., 2014) and in
human lesions (Cardona, 2015), and that the necrotic center
contains large numbers of dormant bacilli trapped in necrotic
tissue. Although these are not usually seen using conventional
stains (i.e., acid fast stain like Ziehl Neelsen’s), the use of specific
antibodies has demonstrated the massive presence of bacilli in
necrotic tissue (Seiler et al., 2003).

The capacity to drain bacilli (BAM), clearly an anatomical
factor, is very important as regards controlling the size and
quality of the lesions. Thus, higher BAM values increase the
possibility of infecting neighboring AMs, which results in faster
bacillary growth and thus a quicker induction of the immune
response. Similarly, a high BAM also allows for constant drainage
and a lower local accumulation of bacilli, which eventually stops
the infiltration of PMNs. This is why one interesting finding of
this study is that the highest BLTOL induces a higher number of
progressive exudative lesions, which is suddenly stopped when a
high BAM is reached. Thismodel therefore shows the importance
of BAM in the induction of exudative lesions. In the majority
of cases, a low value of BAM has been linked to induction of
this type of lesion, and only in one case, with a low bacillary
tolerability (BLTOL), is the encapsulation process able to stop
this.

The second most important factor with regard to the quality
of lesions is the degree of tolerability to intracellular bacilli
(BLTOL), a factor that is probably defined genetically (Tobin
et al., 2012). This is logical as it is decisive for determining
local infiltration by PMNs. As regards the values chosen, and
considering previous experimental data, the valueMax-Ibac= 16
is probably the least realistic one for humans, whereas the other
two appear to be more normal in light of the experimental data
reported by Lee et al. (2006), where the intracellular bacillary load
was usually between 40 and 60 bacilli. Interestingly, this value
could be suitable for the mouse infection as the size of the AM
is, on average, half that in humans (Suarez et al., 2012). This is
interesting as mice clearly develop such progressive proliferative
lesions whereas the proliferative lesions developed in humans are
not progressive (Cardona, 2015).

Our findings also show how an anti-Th17 response could
be particularly useful for stopping progression of the lesions,

Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org 16 March 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 354

http://www.frontiersin.org/Microbiology
http://www.frontiersin.org
http://www.frontiersin.org/Microbiology/archive


Cardona and Prats NetLogo TBPATCH

except in the case of low tolerability (BLTOL), where the
presence of PMNs is very low, thus showing that in this
case the Th17 response would not be very important. As
this low BLTOL could be related to previous findings in
mice, this could explain why an anti-Th17 factor had only
a minimal influence in defining new experimental options
against TB.

Finally, the model shows the importance of the encapsulation
process as regards stopping the progression of lesions, and also
how this protective factor can be overwhelmed, especially by
progressive exudative lesions, which are the ones usually related
to the induction of cavities (Cardona, 2015). Further work should
include a 3D spatial structure of the lung with septae in order to
better account for the encapsulation process. In addition, such
further work should also include a mode in-depth uncertainty
and sensitivity analysis that was able to capture the tiny dynamics
of the model from a global perspective (Marino et al., 2008),
which was not tackled in this paper.

Overall, this model has related four factors that would be
impossible to relate in a single experimental model and, perhaps
more importantly, as the interface is friendly, any interested
person can modify and interact with this model to better
understand or even better describe the process of evolution
from infection to active TB. The simulator TBPatch.nlogo

can be downloaded from http://mosimbio.upc.edu/ or
https://unitatdetuberculosiexperimental.wordpress.com/.

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS

PC conceived, designed and implemented the model. CP
supervised the model’s design and implementation. Both
designed and carried out in silico experiments, critically analyzed
and discussed the results and wrote the manuscript.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This project was funded by the Plan Nacional I+D+I and
co-financed by the ISCIII-Subdirección General de Evaluación
and EU Regional Development Fund (FEDER) via Projects
PI11/01702 and PI14/01038. We gratefully acknowledge Dr.
Marta Ginovart and Dr. Mònica Blanco for their help with the
statistical analysis.

SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL

The Supplementary Material for this article can be found
online at: http://journal.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fmicb.
2016.00354

REFERENCES

Ayres, J. S., and Schneider, D. S. (2008). A signaling protease required for

melanization in drosophila affects resistance and tolerance of infections. PLoS

Biol. 6, 2764–2773. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.0060305

Cardona, P.-J. (2015). The key role of exudative lesions and their encapsulation:

lessons learned from the pathology of human pulmonary tuberculosis. Front.

Microbiol. 6:612. doi: 10.3389/fmicb.2015.00612

Cardona, P.-J., Gordillo, S., Díaz, J., Tapia, G., Amat, I., Pallarés, A., et al. (2003).

Widespread bronchogenic dissemination makes DBA/2 mice more susceptible

than C57BL/6 mice to experimental aerosol infection with Mycobacterium

tuberculosis. Infect. Immun. 71, 5845–5854. doi: 10.1128/IAI.71.10.5845-

5854.2003

Converse, P. J., Dannenberg, A. M. Jr., Estep, J. E., Sugisaki, K., Abe, Y., Schofield,

B. H., et al. (1996). Cavitary tuberculosis produced in rabbits by aerosolized

virulent tubercle bacilli. Infect. Immun. 64, 4776–4787.

de Val Pérez, B., López-Soria, S., Nofrarías, M., Martín, M., Martin Vordermeier,

H., Villarreal-Ramos, B., et al. (2011). Experimental model of tuberculosis in

the domestic goat after endobronchial infection with mycobacterium caprae.

Clin. Vaccine Immunol. 18, 1872–1881. doi: 10.1128/CVI.05323-11

Dey, B., and Bishai, W. R. (2014). Crosstalk between Mycobacterium

tuberculosis and the host cell. Semin. Immunol. 26, 486–496. doi:

10.1016/j.smim.2014.09.002

Dock, W. (1954). Effect of posture in alveolar gas tension in tuberculosis:

explanation for favored sites of chronic pulmonary lesions. Arch. Int. Med. 94,

700–708. doi: 10.1001/archinte.1954.00250050014003

Flynn, J. L., Gideon, H. P., Mattila, J. T., and Lin, P. L. (2015). Immunology studies

in non-human primate models of tuberculosis. Immunol. Rev. 264, 60–73. doi:

10.1111/imr.12258

Gan, H., Lee, J., Ren, F., Chen, M., Kornfeld, H., and Remold, H. G. (2008).

Mycobacterium tuberculosis blocks crosslinking of annexin-1 and apoptotic

envelope formation on infected macrophages to maintain virulence. Nat.

Immunol. 9, 1189–1197. doi: 10.1038/ni.1654

Gideon, H. P., Phuah, J., Myers, A. J., Bryson, B. D., Rodgers, M. A.,

Teresa Coleman, M., et al. (2015). Variability in tuberculosis granuloma

T cell responses exists, but a balance of pro- and anti-inflammatory

cytokines is associated with sterilization. PLoS Pathog. 11:e1004603. doi:

10.1371/journal.ppat.1004603

Gil, O., Díaz, I., Vilaplana, C., Tapia, G., Díaz, J., Fort, M., et al. (2010). Granuloma

encapsulation is a key factor for containing tuberculosis infection in minipigs.

PLoS ONE 5:e10030. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0010030

Ginovart, M., Prats, C., and Portell, X. (2011). “Microbial individual-based models

and sensitivity analyses: local and global methods,” in International Conference

on Predicitive Modeling in Foods (Dublin), 313–316.

Grimm, V., Berger, U., Bastiansen, F., Eliassen, S., Ginot, V., Giske, J., et al. (2006).

A standard protocol for describing individual-based and agent-based models.

Ecol. Modell. 198, 115–126. doi: 10.1016/j.ecolmodel.2006.04.023

Grimm, V., Berger, U., DeAngelis, D. L., Gary Polhill, J., Giske, J., and Railsback,

S. F. (2010). The ODD protocol: a review and first update. Ecol. Modell. 221,

2760–2768. doi: 10.1016/j.ecolmodel.2010.08.019

Grosset, J. (2003). Mycobacterium tuberculosis in the extracellular compartment:

an underestimated adversary. Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 47, 833–836. doi:

10.1128/AAC.47.3.833-836.2003

Guo, B., George Xu, X., and Shi, C. (2011). Real time 4D IMRT treatment planning

based on a dynamic virtual patient model: proof of concept. Med. Phys. 38,

2639–2650. doi: 10.1118/1.3578927

Hashimoto, D., Chow, A., Noizat, C., Teo, P., Beasley, M. B., Leboeuf, M., et al.

(2013). Tissue-resident macrophages self-maintain locally throughout adult life

with minimal contribution from circulating monocytes. Immunity 38, 792–804.

doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2013.04.004

Henningham, A., Döhrmann, S., Nizet, V., and Cole, J. N. (2015). Mechanisms of

Group A streptococcus resistance to reactive oxygen species. FEMS Microbiol.

Rev. 39, 488–508. doi: 10.1093/femsre/fuu009

Hussell, T., and Bell, T. J. (2014). Alveolar macrophages: plasticity in a tissue-

specific context. Nat. Rev. Immunol. 14, 81–93. doi: 10.1038/nri3600

Jung, Y.-J., Ryan, L., LaCourse, R., and North, R. J. (2005). Properties and

protective value of the secondary versus primary T helper type 1 response

to airborne Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection in mice. J. Exp. Med. 201,

1915–1924. doi: 10.1084/jem.20050265

Korn, T., Bettelli, E., Oukka, M., and Kuchroo, V. K. (2009). IL-

17 and Th17 cells. Annu. Rev. Immunol. 27, 485–517. doi:

10.1146/annurev.immunol.021908.132710

Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org 17 March 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 354

http://mosimbio.upc.edu/
https://unitatdetuberculosiexperimental.wordpress.com/
http://journal.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fmicb.2016.00354
http://www.frontiersin.org/Microbiology
http://www.frontiersin.org
http://www.frontiersin.org/Microbiology/archive


Cardona and Prats NetLogo TBPATCH

Krombach, F., Münzing, S., Allmeling, A. M., Gerlach, J. T., Behr, J., and Dörger,

K. M. (1997). Cell size of alveolar macrophages: an interspecies comparison.

Environ. Health Perspect. 105(suppl.), 1261–1263.

Lee, J., Remold, H. G., Ieong, M. H., and Kornfeld, H. (2006). Macrophage

apoptosis in response to high intracellular burden of Mycobacterium

tuberculosis is mediated by a novel caspase-independent pathway. J. Immunol.

176, 4267–4274. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.176.7.4267

Marino, S., El-Kebir, M., and Kirschner, V. (2011). A hybrid multi-compartment

model of granuloma formation and T cell priming in tuberculosis. J. Theor. Biol.

280, 50–62. doi: 10.1016/j.jtbi.2011.03.022

Marino, S., Hogue, I. B., Ray, C. J., and Kirschner, D. E. (2008). A methodology

for performing global uncertainty and sensitivity analysis in systems biology. J.

Theor. Biol. 254, 178–196. doi: 10.1016/j.jtbi.2008.04.011

Marzo, E., Vilaplana, C., Tapia, G., Diaz, J., Garcia, V., and Cardona, P.-J. (2014).

Damaging Role of neutrophilic infiltration in a mouse model of progressive

tuberculosis. Tuberculosis 94, 55–64. doi:10.1016/j.tube.2013.09.004

North, R. J., and Jung, Y.-J. (2004). I Mmunity to T Uberculosis. Annu. Rev.

Immunol. 22, 599–623. doi: 10.1146/annurev.immunol.22.012703.104635

Peake, J. L., and Pinkerton, K. E. (2015). “Gross and subgross anatomy of

lungs, pleura, connective tissue septa, distal airways, and structural units,” in

Comparative Biology of the Normal Lung, 2nd Edn., ed R. A. Parent (San Diego,

CA: Academic Press), 21–32.

Segovia-Juarez, J. L., Ganguli, S., and Kirschner, D. (2004). Identifying control

mechanisms of granuloma formation during M. tuberculosis infection using

an agent-based model. J. Theor. Biol. 231, 357–376. doi: 10.1016/j.jtbi.2004.

06.031

Seiler, P., Ulrichs, T., Bandermann, S., Pradl, L., Jörg, S., Krenn, V.,et al. (2003).

Cell-Wall Alterations as an Attribute of Mycobacterium tuberculosis in Latent

Infection. J. Infect. Dis. 188, 1326–1331. doi: 10.1086/378563

Suarez, C. J., Dintzis, S. M., and Frevert, C. W. (2012). “Respiratory,” in

Comparative Anatomy and Histology. A Mouse and Human Atlas, 1st Edn., eds

P. M. Treuting and S. M. Dintzis (Oxford: Academic Press), 121–134.

Tissue, S., and Wilensky, U. (2004). “Netlogo: a simple environment for modeling

complexity,” in Proceedings of the International Conference on Complex Systems

(Boston, MA: The Pennsylvania State University), 1–10.

Tobin, D. M, Roca, F. J., Oh, S. F., McFarland, R., Vickery, T. W., et al. (2012).

Host genotype-specific therapies can optimize the inflammatory response to

mycobacterial infections. Cell 148, 434–446. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2011.12.023

Vilaplana, C., Prats, C., Marzo, E., Barril, C., Vegué, M., Diaz, J., et al.

(2014). To achieve an earlier IFN-γ response is not sufficient to control

Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection in mice. PLoS ONE 9:e100830. doi:

10.1371/journal.pone.0100830

Webb,W. R. (2006). Thin-section CT of the secondary pulmonary lobule: anatomy

and the image–the 2004 fleischner lecture. Radiology 239, 322–338. doi:

10.1148/radiol.2392041968

World Health Organization (2015). Global Tuberculosis Report 2015, 20th Edn.

Geneve: World Health Organization.

Conflict of Interest Statement: The authors declare that the research was

conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could

be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

Copyright © 2016 Cardona and Prats. This is an open-access article distributed

under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use,

distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original

author(s) or licensor are credited and that the original publication in this journal

is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution or

reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms.

Frontiers in Microbiology | www.frontiersin.org 18 March 2016 | Volume 7 | Article 354

http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
http://www.frontiersin.org/Microbiology
http://www.frontiersin.org
http://www.frontiersin.org/Microbiology/archive

	The Small Breathing Amplitude at the Upper Lobes Favors the Attraction of Polymorphonuclear Neutrophils to Mycobacterium tuberculosis Lesions and Helps to Understand the Evolution toward Active Disease in An Individual-Based Model
	Introduction
	Materials and Methods
	Overview
	Purpose
	Entities, State Variables, and Scales
	Patches or spatial cells
	Turtles or individuals
	Global variables

	Process Overview and Scheduling

	Design Concepts
	Basic Principles
	Emergence
	Interaction
	Stochasticity
	Observation

	Details
	Initialization
	Sub-Models
	Encapsulation
	Necrosis
	Bacillary growth
	Infected macrophage destruction
	Immune response activation
	Destroyed AM replacement
	AM activation and neutrophilic infiltration
	Bacillary inactivation and destruction
	Breathing amplitude (BAM) for bacillary drainage and reinfection


	Parameterization and Simulation Scheduling

	Results
	Bacillary Load Tolerability (BLTOL) of AM and Breathing Amplitude (BAM) Determine Time to Immune Response
	Breathing Amplitude (BAM) Is the Most Important Factor Influencing Evolution of the Bacillary Load (BL)
	The Infiltration Percentage and Quality of the Lesion Are Strongly Influenced by the Breathing Amplitude (BAM)
	The Slope in aAM Evolution and in the aAM/PMN Ratio Also Defines the Degree of Infiltration and the Quality of the Lesions

	Discussion
	Author Contributions
	Acknowledgments
	Supplementary Material
	References


