







































Editorial
Simulations of Heart Function

Rodrigo Weber dos Santos,1 Sergio Alonso,2 Elizabeth M. Cherry,3 and Joakim Sundnes4,5

1Graduate Program in Computational Modeling, Federal University of Juiz de Fora, 36036-330 Juiz de Fora, MG, Brazil
2Department of Applied Physics, Polytechnic University of Catalonia, Avenida Dr. Marañón 44, 08028 Barcelona, Spain
3School of Mathematical Sciences, Rochester Institute of Technology, 85 Lomb Memorial Drive, Rochester, NY 14623, USA
4Simula Research Laboratory, Martin Linges Vei 17, 1325 Lysaker, Norway
5Department of Informatics, University of Oslo, Gaustadalléen 23B, 0373 Oslo, Norway

Correspondence should be addressed to Rodrigo Weber dos Santos; rodrigo.weber@ufjf.edu.br

Received 8 October 2015; Accepted 8 October 2015

Copyright © 2015 Rodrigo Weber dos Santos et al. This is an open access article distributed under the Creative Commons
Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is
properly cited.

The heart is a robust and reliable organ that, approximately
once per second, pumps the blood to the whole body. This
activity involves the fine coupling of numerous components
involving a large variety of physical processes and covering
a wide range of scales. For instance, heart function depends
on cell metabolism, electrophysiology, and mechanics; ion
channels, ion concentrations, and gap junction distribution;
material and electrical properties of cardiac tissue and the
anatomical organization of this tissue in fibers and sheets; and
material properties and organization of the heart’s vascular
tree and their relation to cardiac perfusion. Understand-
ing the details of these complex systems, as well as the
interactions among them, is crucial for understanding heart
function in health and disease.

This special issue focuses on cardiac modeling and simu-
lations that can contribute to improving the understanding
of this multifaceted system under normal conditions and
different cardiac pathologies.Multiple types of computational
andmathematical models are used to describe heart function
at different levels of details. For instance, relatively simple
models have been employed to characterize the main prop-
erties of action potential propagation and wave dynamics
in cardiac tissue, and detailed physiological models have
been employed to improve our understanding of arrhythmia
generation, fibrillation, and defibrillation. Coupledmodels of
cardiac electromechanics that involve multiple scales, from
intracellular to whole-organ, have been developed to describe
the relation between electric signals and heart contraction.

In summary, cardiac modeling has advanced over several
decades to become a valuable tool for studying heart function.

The articles in this issue span a broad range of topics
related to simulating heart function. On the modeling side,
a detailed mathematical description of the heart’s function
involves the combination of different models, such as the
electrophysiology of membrane potential of cardiac cells, the
mechanics of the contracting tissue, and the fluid dynamics
of the blood inside the chambers of the heart. Such combi-
nation requires integrating descriptions of different physical
mechanisms, via multiphysics models, and the consideration
of processes at different scales, from individual ion channels
to the motion of the heart inside the human body, via
multiscale models. Mathematical models are required for all
these processes and scales. For example, in this special issue,
A. Jalali et al. apply mathematical modeling to the pressure
changes controlling the flow dynamics in the heart and in
particular the effects in the case of a pathological size of
the left ventricle. The coupling of the electrical signal with
mechanics is modeled by B. M. Rocha et al. to study changes
in mechanoelectric feedback due to heart failure and by P.
Brocklehurst et al. to study human atrial tissue and atrial
fibrillation using discrete approaches.

Several articles include findings with the potential for
clinical relevance. The results presented by B. M. Rocha
et al. suggest that, in both normal andheart failure conditions,
the information carried by the T-wave is highly related
to cardiac contraction—that is, electrocardiogram (ECG)

Hindawi Publishing Corporation
BioMed Research International
Volume 2015, Article ID 626378, 3 pages
http://dx.doi.org/10.1155/2015/626378

http://dx.doi.org/10.1155/2015/626378


2 BioMed Research International

waveforms carry not only information of cardiac electric
activity but also information of cardiac contraction.However,
the interpretation of ECGs taking contraction into account is
not straightforward for clinicians to perform using currently
available tools. Translation to clinical practice will require
the use of modern models of cardiac electromechanics
that consider nonlinear relations between contraction and
electrical excitation of the heart.

In another ECG study, A. Loewe et al. simulated 12-
lead ECGs to investigate the detection of early myocardial
ischemia. To this end, several simulations were performed to
represent different locations and sizes of ischemic regions in
the left ventricle. With these data, the authors tested different
setups and locations of ECG leads to optimize the detection
of early ischemic episodes. Improvementswere reported from
adding a single extra electrode, and these findings suggest the
need for further study of the setup of ECG leads in clinical
practice.

P. Ganesan et al. focus on the use of electrograms acquired
by invasive multipolar diagnostic catheters during clinical
electrophysiology studies of atrial arrhythmias. P. Ganesan et
al. use both simulated and clinically acquired electrograms
to study how these waveforms are related to the location
of the region in the atria that can be targeted for ablation,
that is, a region that sustains the arrhythmia. They present
an algorithm that uses electrogram information to guide the
catheter toward these arrhythmia-sustaining regions, which
in the case of atrial fibrillation then can be targets of ablation
during the same clinical electrophysiological studies.

The characterization and study of different types of
arrhythmias are the focus of a number of other papers in
this special issue. For instance, one of the main explanations
for the formation of reentrant waves is cardiac alternans.
K. Kulkarni et al. use an alternate pacing protocol to show
that the bifurcation to alternans for isolated whole rabbit
hearts occurs via a smooth bifurcation rather than a border-
collision mechanism. For the case of reentry in three-
dimensional tissue, the dynamics of the filaments govern-
ing such reentries may determine the persistence of the
arrhythmia. Filaments and waves resulting from numerical
simulations are studied by P. Pathmanathan and R. A. Gray
for rabbit and by S. Pravdin et al. and S. R. Kharche et al.
for human hearts. P. Pathmanthan and R. A. Gray use a
high-resolution biventricular anatomical model to show that
fine-scale anatomical details can affect scroll-wave dynamics
through behavior such as filament breakup, reattachment,
anchoring, and lengthening. In another study focusing on
the effects of ventricular anatomy, S. Pravdin et al. study how
filament tension (positive versus negative), ventricular shape,
and strength of anisotropy determine filament location. S.
R. Kharche et al. show that anatomical structures can affect
scroll-wave dynamics in atria; variations in tissue thickness,
such as at pectinate muscle bridges, can cause breakthrough
patterns and transiently anchor waves. Characterizations of
wave dynamics in these ways can be useful for the study of
the influence of pathological conditions on the dynamics of
the waves. For example, A. Bueno-Orovio et al. study the
conditions needed for phase-2 reentry to give rise to tissue-
level arrhythmias in the form of spiral and scroll waves in

the context of electrophysiological changes associated with
Brugada syndrome.

At the mesoscopic scale, the network formed by the
Purkinje fibers, which propagates the electrical signal from
the atria to the ventricles, becomes relevant. Two articles
address ways to model and simulate the Purkinje system. W.
Ying and C. S. Henriquez propose and test a new adaptive
method to improve the efficiency of simulations of electrical
activity in Purkinje fibers while retaining accuracy. Because
the topological features of the Purkinje network may vary
significantly from one individual to another, B. R. Liu and
E. M. Cherry propose a new method for generating three-
dimensional Purkinje networks based on imaging data, that
is, on histological data. This approach was used to create
models of the combined ventricle-Purkinje system, which
have the potential to help elucidate the role of Purkinje
network during ventricular arrhythmias.

The continuous approach in the macroscopic limit nor-
mally used by mathematical models is clearly broken when
the microscopic details of single cells are to be taken into
account. P. Brocklehurst et al. use a discrete approach in
modeling human atrial tissue. Another interesting question
that is difficult to address via continuum models is why
fibrotic regions of the heart are usually associatedwith ectopic
beats or triggers of arrhythmia. One possible mechanism
suggests that fibroblasts promote arrhythmogenesis through
direct electrical interactions with cardiomyocytes via gap
junctions. T. R. Brown et al. present a review on this specific
topic as well as new results on how voltage-dependent gap
junctions affect fibroblast-myocyte interactions.

Another suggested mechanism is that fibroblasts pro-
duce excess extracellular matrix that slows and fractionates
propagation, causing zig-zag conduction paths that may act
as a substrate for arrhythmia. This mechanism is studied
extensively by B. G. de Barros et al. who present results
obtained using two different models: one is heterogeneous
with subcellular discretization and the other is a discrete
model. Both noncontinuum models show the initiation of
reentry inside fibrotic tissue through generation of an ectopic
pacemaker using a mixture of excitable and nonexcitable
regions.The resulting fractionation of propagation combined
with the topology of the mixed region allows an electric wave
to reexcite the fibrotic tissue before leaving it. These results
may explain previous work suggesting a connection between
ectopic pacemakers (or arrhythmia triggers) and complex
fractionated electrograms.

Another topic addressed in this special issue is improving
the computational performance of algorithms and numerical
methods, which is key for simulations of cardiac function
that involve large, complex, multiscale, and multiphysics
phenomena such as those described above. The use of finite
elements for the integration of the continuous cable equations
has become very popular because of the freedom it gives in
defining the integration domain and the ability to simulate
wedges of tissue or the whole heart. G. Cuccuru et al. go a
step farther by considering all-hexahedra spectral elements,
which result in a more efficient method for 3D monodomain
and bidomain representations. Modeling the structure of
individual cells and the effects on propagation through the



BioMed Research International 3

tissue demands efficient microscopic and discrete model rep-
resentations, as considered in the papers by P. Brocklehurst
et al. and B. G. de Barros et al. Adaptation of the spatial
and temporal discretization can also increase computational
efficiency, as discussed by W. Ying and C. S. Henriquez.

In summary, this special issue addresses some of the
most challenging areas of research currently associated with
cardiac modeling. We are confident that researchers will find
this collection of papers interesting and useful.

Rodrigo Weber dos Santos
Sergio Alonso

Elizabeth M. Cherry
Joakim Sundnes


