

















































Microsoft Word - 5 CIEAEM 67_Pproceedings_QRDM_Issue 25, Suppl.2_WG1.doc


“Quaderni di Ricerca in Didattica (Mathematics)”,  n. 25, Supplemento n.2, 2015 
G.R.I.M. (Departimento di Matematica e Informatica, University of Palermo, Italy) 

 

 125 

A classroom activity to work with real data and diverse 
strategies in order to build diverse models with the help of 

the computer 
Marta Ginovart 

Department of Applied Mathematics III, Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya 
Edifici D4, Esteve Terradas 8, 08860 Castelldefels (Barcelona), Spain 

marta.ginovart@upc.edu 
 
Abstract: Taking into account that the majority of the models with more tradition in the mathematical 
curriculum to represent temporal evolutions of the number of individuals are continuous models in the class 
of empirical models, it has an added value to deal with these models, but where the parameters involved are 
claimed to have a biological meaning. These types of models are not completely mechanistic o heuristics, 
and therefore they are called pseudo-mechanistic models. It is a challenge to link mathematical tools and 
concepts with biological ideas, and also a chance to use the help that computers provide in this context. The 
aim of this study was to design a set of rich tasks to be performed with the help of the computer and 
implement them in the classroom in order to investigate a real data set to deal with empirical models and 
pseudo-mechanistic models. One of the main purposes in the designing of this set of tasks was to configure a 
framework showing different strategies to deal with the data and also, how each of these approaches could 
generate a variety of responses to the problem in hand. The sequence and structure of these tasks, according 
to the students’ perceptions collected, enhanced the understanding about the construction and use of these 
primary growth models. 

Résumé: Étant donné que la plupart des modèles programmes de mathématiques les plus traditionnels pour 
représenter l'évolution temporelle du nombre de gens sont des modèles continus appartenant à la classe des 
modèles empiriques, a ajouté la valeur de travailler avec ces modèles, mais où les paramètres impliqués Ils 
ont une signification biologique. Ces types de modèles ne sont pas totalement mécaniste ou heuristiques, et 
sont donc appelés modèles pseudo-mécaniste. Il est un défi de relier les outils et concepts mathématiques 
avec des idées biologiques, et aussi une chance d'utiliser les ordinateurs d'assistance fournies dans ce 
contexte. Le but de cette étude était de concevoir un riche ensemble de tâches à accomplir avec l'aide de 
l'ordinateur et de les mettre en œuvre dans la salle de classe afin d'étudier et de décrire un ensemble de 
données réelles avec des modèles empiriques et les modèles de pseudo-mécaniste. L'un des principaux 
objectifs dans la conception de cet ensemble de tâches a été de mettre en place un cadre pour montrer 
différentes stratégies pour traiter les données et aussi comment chacune de ces approches pourrait générer 
une variété de réponses au problème à la main. La séquence et la structure de ces tâches, selon les 
perceptions recueillies auprès des étudiants, sont susceptibles d'améliorer la compréhension de la 
construction et l'utilisation de ces modèles de croissance primaires. 
 

Introduction 
Actually, in the twenty-first century, computation is more than an assistant support of scientific 
activity, computation is changing the fundamental way that science is practised and also how this it 
is being learnt and taught (Shiflet and Shiflet, 2014).  

Computation allows us to obtain and analyse big data, consider and solve problems inaccessible 
until now, build sophisticated models, visualize phenomena, conduct experiments difficult or 
impossible in laboratories, among other options. Teaching and learning mathematics in any context 
should promote the development of thinking and the possibility of an appropriate use of the 
technology available nowadays. Processes such as developing curiosity, critical thinking, reasoning, 
as well as developing modes of verification, refutation, and deduction should be found in the 
activities proposed to our students in classroom, and for some of these processes the help of a 



“Quaderni di Ricerca in Didattica (Mathematics)”,  n. 25, Supplemento n.2, 2015 
G.R.I.M. (Departimento di Matematica e Informatica, University of Palermo, Italy) 

 

 126 

computer can be very valuable. In this context, for instance, analysis of real data and the building of 
different kinds of models for this data could be good opportunities to train in those processes. In the 
teaching of applied mathematics, it would be desirable to design and develop profitable strategies to 
tackle real data and deal with models that require thinking at multiple levels of abstraction or 
understanding, plus to know how to use the computational resources offered by general or specific 
software accessible nowadays. The computer must be seen as a convenient work “companion” and 
an attractive resource, and never as an obstacle for the mathematics learning. The potential of the 
software present in the majority of the computers of our laboratories cannot remain unexplored and 
unexploited when activities related to quantitative modelling and numerical methods are carried out 
in the classroom. In this line, teachers need to have (or develop) suitable knowledge and 
competences in digital technologies, otherwise their teaching will not be so effective (Bennison & 
Goos, 2010).  
It is widely accepted that mathematical thinking arises and develops in a complex interplay of 
languages and representations. There is a relatively new term or idea that is “Computational 
Thinking” (Papert, 1996; Wing, 2006), that although its definition is still under discussion, it 
appears to focus on computer science concepts in relation to processes of problem solving such as: 
pattern recognition, pattern generation, abstraction (composition, de composition, generalization, 
and specialization), modelling, algorithm design (sequence, iteration, and selection), data analysis 
and visualization (Caspersen & Nowack, 2014). Thus, it is also accepted that “Computational 
Thinking” can be envisaged as a fundamental skill for everyone and in particular that it is very 
attractive for anyone who is involved in teaching and learning mathematics. In the context of the 
Millennium Mathematics Project (a maths education and outreach initiative) can be found the 
NRICH website (http://nrich.maths.org/) containing a list with some characteristics that make a task 
rich, highlighting the fact that it is the way in which the task is planned and used in the classroom 
that makes it rich. Some of those characteristics can be common to the way in which 
“Computational thinking” can be practised and trained. 
In the field of mathematical biology, the capability of designing classroom activities that encompass 
quantitative modelling with mathematical concepts and tools to deal with biosystems is much 
appreciated (de Vries, Hillen, Lewis, Müller & Schönfisch, 2006). In addition, these activities can 
justify and give room for the introduction and workout of complementary computational methods 
(Ginovart, 2014). Mechanistic or heuristic models are those whose development comes from the 
understanding of the underlying biochemical or biological processes governing populational 
phenomenon and their parameters have biological meaning, while empirical models are 
mathematical functions simply describing observations of the phenomenon. Taking into account 
that the majority of the models with more tradition in the mathematical curriculum to represent 
temporal evolutions of the number of individuals that configure the populations in certain 
environments reported in periods of time are continues models in the class of empirical models, it 
has and added value to deal with these models but in which the parameters involved are claimed to 
have a biological meaning. These types of models are not completely mechanistic o heuristics, and 
therefore they are called pseudo-mechanistic models (Perez-Rodriguez, 2014), and it is a challenge 
to link mathematical tools and concepts with biological ideas, and also a chance to use the help that 
the computers can provide.  

The aim of this study was to design a set of rich tasks to be performed with the help of the computer 
and implement them in the classroom in order to investigate a real data set (a temporal evolution of 
a microbial population grown in a specific environment) to deal with empirical models and pseudo-
mechanistic models. One of the main purposes in the designing of this set of tasks was to configure 
a framework showing different strategies to deal with the data and also, how each of these 
approaches could generate a variety of responses to the problem in hand. The students’ perceptions 
about if the sequence and structure of these tasks have enhanced their understanding about the 
construction and use of these primary growth models were collected and analysed. 



“Quaderni di Ricerca in Didattica (Mathematics)”,  n. 25, Supplemento n.2, 2015 
G.R.I.M. (Departimento di Matematica e Informatica, University of Palermo, Italy) 

 

 127 

 

Material and methods 
The participants in this study were a group of 50, third-year students of a Bachelor's degree in the 
field of Biosystems Engineering at the Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya (Barcelona, Spain). The 
prior coursework for these students was related with the following compulsory subjects: 
Mathematics I and II, Physics I and II, Chemistry I and II, General Biology, Microbiology, 
Statistics, among others. This previous preparation guarantees a good knowledge of some biological 
systems (microbial systems in particular) and basic mathematical concepts and tools.  

Students’ responses regarding analyses and modelling of the growth population data and the distinct 
methodologies applied sequentially for the study of the different phases observed in the pattern of 
this temporal evolution, were collected via commented spreadsheets, outputs of statistical software, 
open-ended questionnaires, and face-to face dialogues during the development of the sessions in the 
computer lab. The students' perceptions about the set of tasks conducted were explicitly questioned 
and collected at the end.  

A set of 17 observations corresponding to the size of a population (numbers of microbes) grown in 
a liquid medium of 1 mL with an initial quantity of sugar and no further addition of nutrient during 
a period of 48 hours is the data to be analysed (Table 1), and used to build empirical models and 
pseudo-mechanistic models. Each student had a computer with access to spreadsheet (Excel), 
mathematical software (Maple) and statistical software (Minitab and R) utilized in previous 
subjects, and with a free connexion to Internet when looking for specific information. The activities 
were designed to be carried out individually, however, with lab sessions and small groups of 
students, comments, suggestions, and interactions with the teacher were always held whenever 
required or considered appropriate. 
 

Time (h) Number of microbes 
0 145349 
3 146217 
6 139333 
9 143620 

12 168557 
15 287768 
18 972270 
21 2996236 
24 4444266 
27 5953756 
30 7245644 
33 7614686 
36 8187928 
39 10214427 
42 11842517 
45 13650985 
48 12837014 

 
Table 1. The experimental data to be analysed. 

 
Some preliminary questions were answered without reading the guide to the activity, as a first task, 
so that the students had the possibility to reflect on what they have studied and learned up to now, 
as well as what was convenient to apply to solve this kind of problem. These preliminary questions 
were: Taking into account that the set of data in Table 1,  



“Quaderni di Ricerca in Didattica (Mathematics)”,  n. 25, Supplemento n.2, 2015 
G.R.I.M. (Departimento di Matematica e Informatica, University of Palermo, Italy) 

 

 128 

• Which strategies or resources that already know can be used to analyse this data? 
• Which type of function or model can be adjusted? 
• Which programs can be utilised for that purpose? 

The outline of the set of tasks to be performed with the help of the computer 
Part A. To perform an exploratory analyse of the data and decide the best way to represent it, 
performing or not some nonlinear transformations of this data. It is important to point out that the 
context application of this data is microbiology and we are dealing with the growth of huge number 
of microbes.  

Part B. To deal with the use of polynomial functions to describe or fit the data and highlighting 
some advantages and disadvantages of this type of approach. 

Part C. To identify the three different phases in the temporal evolution and use straight lines to 
describe each of these phases. The succession of phases may be conveniently distinguished because 
they are characterized by variations of the growth rate: first, the lag phase with growth rate null, 
second, the exponential phase with a constant rate, and third, the stationary phase with no clear 
growth. The reading of the paper of Buchannan and coauthors (Buchanan, Whiting & Damert, 
1997), where the so-called three-phase linear model is presented, completes this part where the 
students can recognize their own work.   
Part D. To build, step by step, a discrete logistic model by means of set of calculations and linear 
approximations of the transformed data. After this, the comparison of the built model with the 
observed data is carried out with a simulation in a simple way in a spreadsheet assessing the 
agreement between them. 
Part E. To introduce the family of mathematical models known as sigmoid functions and their 
relation to the growth models, being the continuous logistic model one of them. The use of the 
mathematical software to manipulate their mathematical expressions and graphical representations 
with the purpose of identifying the role of the set of parameters involved in their definitions. The 
identification of the meaning of these parameters is followed by a convenient reparameterization of 
them, allowing us to have parameters with a clearer biological meaning and models utilized in the 
prediction of microbial growth in real applications. 
Part F. To explore the options that R, a free statistical software, and the packages developed to 
manage growth curves have to deal with this data (http://www.inside-
r.org/packages/cran/nlstools/docs/growthmodels). 

At the end of the activity, and after the work was carried out through the six parts describe above, 
the questions posed at the start were presented again to the students in a new context: If you have to 
analyse another set of microbial growth data, what would your answers be to those preliminary 
questions?, and one more: What would your priority be in the set of tasks to be carried out in order 
to model the new data set?  

Results and discussion 
Students’ responses regarding the analyses of the data and the various microbial growth models 
were prepared individually and collected by means of file texts, giving answers to the questions 
posed, spread sheets with comments, and outputs of mathematical and statistical programs inserted 
in an explicative text. In addition, interviews and personal communication during the sessions in the 
computer lab made it possible to collect further information on the development of the activity. 
This activity has been divided into a set of tasks which have been grouped in six different parts (A, 
B,..., F) facilitating the organization of the work to be performed by the students. The various parts 
were carried out in three lab sessions of two hours each, so the extension and diversity of the results 



“Quaderni di Ricerca in Didattica (Mathematics)”,  n. 25, Supplemento n.2, 2015 
G.R.I.M. (Departimento di Matematica e Informatica, University of Palermo, Italy) 

 

 129 

obtained by the students were remarkable. 

The answers to the preliminary questions before beginning the tasks of the activity (“Which 
strategies or resources already known can be used to analyse this data?”, “Which type of function 
or model can be adjusted?, and Which programs can be utilised for that purpose?”) were rather 
disappointing and poor. The majority of these responses were about the use of a spreadsheet to 
achieve a graphical representation, but no references to the use of mathematical programs like 
Maple or statistical programs like Minitab or R, programs that had been used in the previous 
mathematical and statistical subjects. Undoubtedly, it was also evident that no relationships or links 
between the previous knowledge of microbiology and different phases of the growth of the 
population were made or identified, in spite of these phases being linked with the numerical 
derivatives of the data by means of growth rates. The possibility of connecting the two disciplines 
involved in the modelling process, microbiology and mathematics, did not appear in those first 
answers. Only the 10% approximately of the students mentioned the fact that the transformation of 
the data by means of the logarithm function could be helpful in this microbial context, due to the 
magnitude of the numbers and the rate in the population growth. It was really a discouragement to 
see the lack of association with other subjects in these students’ answers. Maybe, this is something 
not really surprising in the teaching in general, taking into account that subjects and teachers have 
their own specific areas, and on very few occasions do they allow interference or collaboration in 
sharing activities that involve simultaneously diverse areas of knowledge, and it that moment the 
students were in a mathematical-computing context.  

The set of results that the students obtained, analysed and discussed in connection with their 
knowledge of biology were graphic representations of the temporal evolutions of the number of 
individuals in the population and the transformations performed with the data, definitions and 
manipulations of mathematical functions to construct and formulate different models, together with 
the calculation of the corresponding parameters involved in those models, plus the assignment of 
biological meaning to them in the case of pseudo-mechanistic models. Only some aspects or parts 
of the processes involved in the tasks designed will be presented in this section, accompanied by 
some computer screenshots to illustrate them.  

Regarding the tasks in Part A which were in some way conducted with questions like: 
- Is it better to work with the original data or can you imagine a linear or nonlinear 

transformation of this data?  
- Are the magnitudes of the observed values (and their changes) at the beginning of growth 

very different from those obtained at the end of the experiment?  
- What mathematical function can be used to modify or modulate this behaviour? 

the students completed an exploratory analysis of the data by deciding which was the best way to 
represent it, considering the nature of the experimental observations that they handled and 
remembering the way to present data in a microbiology field. The graphical representation of the 
original data at different scales and through some nonlinear transformations were options examined 
by the students. At the beginning of the temporal evolution the original data had values of about 105 
and values of around 107 were reached at the end of the evolution, so the magnitude of the range to 
be represented was considerable. The increases (in absolute values) of one time to another time 
showed very different magnitudes depending on the time sampled. At this point, the students 
appreciated why in the context of microbial communities, the populations are usually expressed in 
logarithmic units (base 10). Logarithm transformations with different bases were one of the 
strategies tested by students in the spreadsheet (Figure 1). 
In Part B, and after verifying that neither linear nor exponential growth were detected with this data, 
the fittings with polynomials of diverse degrees to describe the original data were examined and 
discussed by students, focusing this discussion on some advantages of this empirical modelling and 
emphasis on some of its disadvantages. In particular, the concept of the model or what a model 



“Quaderni di Ricerca in Didattica (Mathematics)”,  n. 25, Supplemento n.2, 2015 
G.R.I.M. (Departimento di Matematica e Informatica, University of Palermo, Italy) 

 

 130 

should be, together with its purpose was debated, and the conclusion in this part was that this type 
of model (polynomial functions) did not exemplify it very well. They discussed what it was like to 
work with empirical models (fittings of functions) and what the limitations were, and applauded the 
possibility of providing a pseudo-mechanistic model in this context. The coefficients of the fitted 
polynomials showed no opportunity to incorporate any of the ideas behind the microbial growth 
phenomenon. The purpose would be to try the description of this phenomenon: a population located 
in a space, in a new environment with nutrient, using the energy resources found in it, thus enabling 
the reproduction of individuals in the population, increasing its size; nevertheless, with this 
utilization of nutrient from the environment without its replacement, leads to an unfavourable 
situation, which is no longer possible for the population to continue to grow. The inability of these 
empirical models to explain the biological phenomenon, added to the fact that some of the fitted 
polynomials reached negative values, made it evident that they are not appropriate and these 
mathematical expressions had lost all meaning to represent this data. 

In Part C of the activity, the use of the logarithm transformation of the number of microbes 
observed over time, along with the increases observed in each of the sample time (Figure 2), 
allowed the identification of various growth phases that occurred during the temporal evolution of 
the population size. A first approach for the construction of a simple model with the capability to 
pick up the features or major trends in this type of growth goes through consideration or recognition 
of the three main phases of the growth, lag phase, exponential phase and stationary phase, and it 
uses piecewise linear functions for its formulation. The students studied this option with the 
spreadsheet using linear regressions to describe each of these phases which are characterized by 
significant variations in growth: first, the lag phase with a zero growth rate, after the exponential 
phase with a constant growth rate, and finally no growth for the stationary phase (Figure 3). 
Reading the companion document of Buchannan and others [2] to which the students could access, 
entitled "When good enough is simple: a comparison of the Gompertz, Baranyi, and three-phase 
linear fitting models for bacterial growth curves", illustrated and revealed that the piecewise linear 
model built by the students was in tune with one of the possible solutions that researchers presented 
and accepted in the environment of predictive microbiology. The three-phase linear model was the 
first pseudo-mechanistic model obtained, as in its formulation parameters with biological 
significance were recognized, such as the logarithm of the initial population and the final 
population, duration of the lag phase (intersection of the two first straight lines) and the maximum 
growth rate (slope of the second line), start of the stationary phase (intersection of the second and 
third lines). Students were able to recognize their own work in a spreadsheet as a simple modelling 
choice but well placed in a broader context of interest in biotechnology and predictive 
microbiology. 

 
Figure 1. Temporal evolution of the logarithm of the number of microbes. 



“Quaderni di Ricerca in Didattica (Mathematics)”,  n. 25, Supplemento n.2, 2015 
G.R.I.M. (Departimento di Matematica e Informatica, University of Palermo, Italy) 

 

 131 

 

 
Figure 2. Variations in the logarithm of the number of microbes during the temporal evolution. 

 
Figure 3: The three-phase linear fitting model for microbial growth, a simple pseudo-mechanistic 

model. 

 
In relation to the possible use of the logistic function and other functions of the sigmoid family 
(corresponding to the Parts D and E), only some results will be presented and discussed here, those 
connected with the process of assigning biological meaning to the parameters involved in the 
definitions of those functions. Figure 4 shows some parameters illustrating or denoting important 
features of the microbial population growth. The logistic function is one of the most frequently 
studied, but in this study we focus on the use of Gompertz function, another sigmoidal function also 
widely used for certain temporal evolutions, and defined as follows: 

 
where A, B and C are the parameters involved. The process allowing reassignment of these 
parameters to others with biological meaning makes it possible to connect and use previous 
mathematical knowledge. As we know that microorganisms can grow exponentially over a period 
of time, it is useful to apply the logarithmic transformation on population size (N = N (t)) as has 
been mention before. Thus, working with the natural logarithm (or logarithm) in this case, the 
relative size of the population can be considered a new variable as follows: 



“Quaderni di Ricerca in Didattica (Mathematics)”,  n. 25, Supplemento n.2, 2015 
G.R.I.M. (Departimento di Matematica e Informatica, University of Palermo, Italy) 

 

 132 

 

The three main phases of the microbial growth curve can be described by three parameters (Figure 
4): 

1) The maximum specific growth rate, μm, which is defined as the tangent at the inflection point of 
the curve. 

2) The latency or lag time, λ, which is defined as the value of the intersection of this tangent with 
the abscissa. 

3) The asymptote determined by the maximum value that the population can reach, Max. 
 

 
Figure 4. Generic microbial growth curve parameters: maximum growth rate (µm), lag time (λ), and 

the maximum possible value that can be achieved (Max). 

 
A study of the first derivative and second derivative of the function allows us to identify the role 
played by the parameters involved in the definitions. Identifying the meaning of the parameters of 
these Gompertz functions, followed by a suitable reassignment, enables us to have a function with 
meaningful biological parameters in the context of microbial growth, and consequently obtaining a 
new pseudo-mechanistic model for this context [12].

The purpose of this task is to rewrite the Gompertz function using the Maple program, a new 
expression replacing the parameters A, B, and C given in the above expression (with no biological 
significance) by the parameters μ, λ, and Max (with biological significance) as Figure 4 illustrates. 
Whereas this could be solved by hand (with pencil and paper), and because one of the purposes is 
the use of the computer, the calculations involved in this process were carried out with Maple, 
avoiding errors in transcription or errors in simplification, and making these calculations faster. The 
students’ responses to this part of parameters’ reassignment to obtain the pseudo-mechanistic model 
were surprisingly interesting. It allowed students to use the incessantly repeated knowledge during 
their previous stages in Mathematics: first derivative, second derivative, inflection point, slope of 
the tangent line at a point, asymptote ..., but this time in a context that gave meaning to everything 
they had learned in both mathematics and microbiology.  
A screenshot of the sequence of steps performed with Maple to get this pseudo-mechanistic model 
with μ, λ, and Max is as follows: 

>  



“Quaderni di Ricerca in Didattica (Mathematics)”,  n. 25, Supplemento n.2, 2015 
G.R.I.M. (Departimento di Matematica e Informatica, University of Palermo, Italy) 

 

 133 

 

>  

 

>  

 

>  

 

>  

 

>  
 

>  
 

>  

 

>  

 

>  

 

>  

 

>  

 

>  

 

>  

 

>  



“Quaderni di Ricerca in Didattica (Mathematics)”,  n. 25, Supplemento n.2, 2015 
G.R.I.M. (Departimento di Matematica e Informatica, University of Palermo, Italy) 

 

 134 

 

>  
 

>  

 

 

Now considering that  , , we obtain 

 

. 

This last expression, which is the formulation of a pseudo-mechanistic model of the population 
growth from Gompertz function, is appropriate for microorganisms when population sizes are 
expressed in logarithmic units, and it is one of the models that the program R uses. This model has 
been carried out with our set of data (Table 1) and the results achieved are shown in Figure 5, where 
the punctual estimations of the parameters μm, λ, Log10(N0) and Log10(Nmax) were 12.6, 0.35, 5.15 
and 7.03 respectively. 

 
Figure 5. The Gompertz model adjusted to the data with the free statistical software R. 

 
The perceptions of the students carrying out these tasks were collected by means of the following 
question: “Please, indicate any positive aspect of the activity performed”, and some of the answers 
were: 

 Tracking the activity in parts I think it is good and helps you to get a pretty solid idea of the 
different ways to build a model from the same data and compare these models. 

 One of the positive aspects of the activity is the use of software tools for processing data. In 
order to improve the development of this practice, I think it would be necessary to have 
prior explanations or recall programs used in previous years. 

 The previous analysis of the data that has been done with spreadsheets helped me a lot. I 
think the section corresponding to the use of R is a higher level because you have to 



“Quaderni di Ricerca in Didattica (Mathematics)”,  n. 25, Supplemento n.2, 2015 
G.R.I.M. (Departimento di Matematica e Informatica, University of Palermo, Italy) 

 

 135 

understand the program and run it properly. You should also have a very clear idea of what 
you are analysing and what you want to achieve, because R gives you more information 
(graphs and tables) than what is absolutely necessary for the analysis or which for me is not 
completely understandable. 

 We have built and represented models which are easily understood in a particular case like 
the growth of microorganisms.  

 It is important to learn to manage helpful data processing programs, and this practice gives 
us an idea of how to do this. Plot some functions using Maple and compare the differences 
between Excel solver and the R program has helped me to better understand the data 
analysis and modelling. However, I think prior oral explanation of the practice would have 
been helpful to refresh some mathematical concepts and programming. 

 On my part, the entire process, applying different ways of analysing the same data, trying to 
discover which is the best fit for the data, testing what happened when increasing, or 
decreasing or increasing the parameters of functions, was a good idea. So, the whole process 
of going slowly and answering the questions has helped me learn a way to try using some 
experimental data, and also the fact that you can apply many models and some of them will 
adjust better or worse. Nevertheless, it is really important to try to understand the situation 
and not just end up having results or numerical values of certain parameters, for example. If 
you have not made the effort to think about the data, may not be able to interpret these 
results correctly. 

 One positive aspect of this activity could be the use of mathematical programs such as 
Maple, because it is a very useful when solving differential equations, representing data, 
drawing graphs of functions, and manipulating expressions. 

 It helps you understand that in order to solve the problem with the data available you can 
choose different methods. My opinion is that the practice has been very good. The fact that 
it is structured in straightforward steps makes it possible to follow without getting lost, 
while improving learning. At the same time it encourages an order and an explanation of the 
steps. It teaches us that every experiment fits a certain model and goes through a series of 
steps to obtain the best result. 

 I have seen many different models to fit the initial data and that means that I will be able to 
analyse data using methods which I did not know before this activity. 

 I learned various methods to address a situation that may recur in my studies such as the 
growth of microorganisms, and also the fact that what I did can be extrapolated to other 
populations. 

 I found it very positive to understand the fundamentals of a solid growth model used in the 
R program. Testing other available options and how these can help us to solve our problems 
as biological engineers, using our current knowledge without advanced programming skills, 
have been profitable. 

Final remarks 
A rich context for exploring mathematical ideas and developing mathematical skills is biology. In 
this context, the models have been used in order to analyse and understand phenomena and to 
design and construct instruments that make a virtual “experimentation” possible, improving in an 
iterative way our representation of reality. The tasks designed have encouraged some imaginative 
applications using previous mathematical knowledge that students already had in order to build new 
models, starting with initial and not complicated approximations and relatively simple models to go 
deeper into the mathematical understanding of more sophisticated models, where the help of the 
computer has been revealed as indispensable. Its use was justified and integrated efficiently, 
training and improving the digital literacy of the students, that is, the general ability to use 
computers to tackle real problems.  

 



“Quaderni di Ricerca in Didattica (Mathematics)”,  n. 25, Supplemento n.2, 2015 
G.R.I.M. (Departimento di Matematica e Informatica, University of Palermo, Italy) 

 

 136 

REFERENCES 
Papert, S. (1996). An exploration in the space of mathematics educations. International 
Journal of Computers for Mathematical Learning, 1, 95-123. 
Bennison, A., & Goos, M. (2010). Learning to Teach Mathematics with Technology: A 
Survey of Professional Development Needs, Experiences and Impacts. Mathematics 
Education Research Journal, 22, 31-56. 

Buchanan, R.L., Whiting, R.C., Damert, W.C. (1997). When is simple good enough: a 
comparison of the Gompertz, Baranyi, and three-phase linear models for fitting bacterial 
growth curves. Food Microbiology, 14, 313-326. 
Caspersen, M.E., & Nowack, P. (2014), Model-based thinking and practice: a top-down 
approach to computational thinking. In: Koli Calling '14 Proceedings of the 14th Koli Calling 
International Conference on Computing Education Research. ACM New York, pp.147-15. 

de Vries, G., Hillen, T., Lewis, M., Müller, J. & Schönfisch, B. (2006). A course in 
mathematical biology: quantitative modeling with mathematical & computational methods. 
Philadelphia: Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics. 
Ginovart, M. (2014). Discovering the power of individual-based modelling in teaching and 
learning: the study of a predator-prey system. Journal of Science Education and Technology, 
23, 496-513. 

Perez-Rodriguez, F. (2014). Development and application of predictive microbiology models 
in food. In: D. Granato & G. Ares (Eds.) Mathematical and statistical methods in food science 
and technology (321-361). IFT Pess, Wiley Blackwell.  
Shiflet, A.B, & Shiflet, G.W. (2014). Introduction to computational science: Modelling and 
simulation for the science. Princenton: Princenton University Press. 
Wing, J.M. (2006). Computational thinking. Communications of the ACM, 49, 33-35. 

 
 

 


