

























































































Ectopic beats arise from micro-reentries near infarct regions in simulations of a patient-specific heart model


1SCIEntIFIC REPORtS |         (2018) 8:16392  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-34304-y

www.nature.com/scientificreports

Ectopic beats arise from micro-
reentries near infarct regions in 
simulations of a patient-specific 
heart model
Rafael Sachetto Oliveira  1,2, Sergio Alonso2,3, Fernando Otaviano Campos4,6, 
Bernardo Martins Rocha2, João Filipe Fernandes4, Titus Kuehne4,5 & Rodrigo Weber dos Santos2

Ectopic beats are known to be involved in the initiation of a variety of cardiac arrhythmias. Although 
their location may vary, ectopic excitations have been found to originate from infarct areas, regions 
of micro-fibrosis and other heterogeneous tissues. However, the underlying mechanisms that link 
ectopic foci to heterogeneous tissues have yet to be fully understood. In this work, we investigate 
the mechanism of micro-reentry that leads to the generation of ectopic beats near infarct areas using 
a patient-specific heart model. The patient-specific geometrical model of the heart, including scar 
and peri-infarct zones, is obtained through magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). The infarct region is 
composed of ischemic myocytes and non-conducting cells (fibrosis, for instance). Electrophysiology 
is captured using an established cardiac myocyte model of the human ventricle modified to describe 
ischemia. The simulation results clearly reveal that ectopic beats emerge from micro-reentries that 
are sustained by the heterogeneous structure of the infarct regions. Because microscopic information 
about the heterogeneous structure of the infarct regions is not available, Monte-Carlo simulations are 
used to identify the probabilities of an infarct region to behave as an ectopic focus for different levels of 
ischemia and different percentages of non-conducting cells. From the proposed model, it is observed 
that ectopic beats are generated when a percentage of non-conducting cells is near a topological metric 
known as the percolation threshold. Although the mechanism for micro-reentries was proposed half 
a century ago to be a source of ectopic beats or premature ventricular contractions during myocardial 
infarction, the present study is the first to reproduce this mechanism in-silico using patient-specific 
data.

A myocardial infarction (MI) usually involves the occlusion of a coronary artery of the ventricle or other types 
of coronary artery diseases. In the acute phase, ischemia and necrosis in the injured region lead to the deteriora-
tion of electrical activity at the cellular and tissue levels1,2. Early revascularization and new medicaments greatly 
improve survival after MI. During the healing phase of MI, fibrosis occurs to replace necrotic cells3. However, 
post-MI patients remain at substantial risk for ventricular arrhythmia4. In fact, most deaths in post-MI patients 
are due to arrhythmias and recurrent MI, i.e., a second episode of an acute MI in the same region of the first5. 
Variant and unstable angina are also manifestations of different coronary artery diseases, such as a vasospasm 
versus a partial obstruction, which have recurrent episodes of chest pain at rest and the development of ventricu-
lar arrhythmias in common6. As a result of multiple episodes, injured tissue is highly heterogeneous where both 
fibrosis (one week old or older episodes) and necrosis (more recent episodes) co-exist7.

1Department of Computer Science, Universidade Federal de São João del-Rei, São João del-Rei, Brazil. 2Graduate 
Program in Computational Modeling, Universidade Federal de Juiz de Fora, Juiz de Fora, Brazil. 3Department of 
Physics, Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya, Barcelona, Spain. 4Institute for Computational and Imaging Science in 
Cardiovascular Medicine, Charité – Universitätsmedizin, Berlin, Germany. 5Department of Congenital Heart Disease, 
German Heart Centre Berlin (DHZB), Berlin, Germany. 6School of Biomedical Engineering and Imaging Sciences, 
King’s College London, London, UK. Rafael Sachetto Oliveira and Sergio Alonso contributed equally. Correspondence 
and requests for materials should be addressed to R.W.d.S. (email: rodrigo.weber@ufjf.edu.br)

Received: 15 February 2018

Accepted: 12 October 2018

Published: xx xx xxxx

OPEN

http://orcid.org/0000-0003-0800-5984
mailto:rodrigo.weber@ufjf.edu.br


www.nature.com/scientificreports/

2SCIEntIFIC REPORtS |         (2018) 8:16392  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-34304-y

Although different in many aspects, the aforementioned myocardial infarctions have heterogeneous injured 
tissues that actively participate in both the generation and maintenance of cardiac arrhythmias in common. 
Experimental and clinical findings have suggested that the main trigger of a variety of these arrhythmias is focal 
excitations, which can lead to premature ventricular complexes, or ectopic beats, that are co-located within the 
infarct and ischemic regions of the heart8–10. In addition, as mentioned before, the injured tissue has an important 
feature that is exploited in this work: the presence of ischemic myocytes next to non-conducting cells (fibrosis in 
the case of recurrent MI, necrosis in the case of a first acute MI, or both).

Today, there are three main hypotheses for the mechanisms of ectopic beat formation: abnormal automaticity, 
triggered activity and micro-reentries11–13. However, until now, none of these mechanisms have been fully under-
stood nor elucidated. In this work, we combine computational models and non-invasive imaging techniques of 
the heart to study the mechanism of micro-reentries. This mechanism was first described and proposed half a 
century ago as a result of clinical and animal studies13–15. In particular, Boineau and Cox13 presented a detailed 
hypothesis based on experimental data that linked electrophysiology findings, such as fractionated electrograms, 
to the heterogeneity of acute infarct tissues. The micro-reentry mechanism may be related to the zig-zag course 
of activation that occurs due to the intricate morphology of a two-phase medium composed of conducting (myo-
cytes) and non-conducting (necrosis or fibrosis) materials. This two-phase medium forms a maze in which waves 
fractionate and follow zig-zag pathways. Depending on the topology of this maze, intricate circuits can be formed 
that permit sustained activation, via re-entries, inside the infarct region. In addition, this electrical activity 
trapped inside the infarct region may continuously or transiently escape and generate ectopic beats. This escape 
occurs whenever the activity crosses the peri-infarct zone (PZ), i.e., the interface between the injured region and 
surrounding healthy cardiac tissue.

Unfortunately, a final demonstration that re-entry is the underlying mechanism by which an infarct or 
ischemic region becomes an abnormal source of fast-pacing stimuli, i.e., an ectopic pacemaker, is still pending. 
While fractionated electrograms have been frequently observed near the infarct region, combined and simulta-
neous characterization of the underlying heterogeneous 3D structure poses a great challenge for experimental 
studies. Biological variability defies reproducibility, and the micro-scale of the cardiac structure cannot currently 
be determined using in-vivo microscopy tools.

In this computational study, we combined different methods and models to simulate, for the first time, the 
generation of ectopic beats near infarct regions via the micro-reentry mechanism in a patient-specific biventricu-
lar model. The simulation results reveal that ectopic beats emerge from micro-reentries that are sustained by the 
heterogeneous structure of the infarct regions. The collection of results also suggests conditions for the generation 
of ectopic beats in terms of degree of tissue heterogeneity and level of ischemia. Therefore, we believe the results 
presented in this work are an important step toward the validation of the hypothesis that micro-reentries may be 
the mechanism by which an infarct or ischemic region becomes an abnormal source of ectopic beats.

Similar to previous works, the uncertainty related to the topological structure of the heterogeneous tissue 
during myocardial infarction was treated via Monte Carlo simulations16–27. In this work, as in previous computa-
tional studies, non-conducting material was also related to fibrosis26–31. The excessive deposition of collagen in the 
extracellular matrix of injured tissue may physically and electrically separate neighboring myocytes or completely 
replace dead myocytes32,33. Late gadolinium-enhanced Magnetic Resonance Imaging (LE-MRI) is a new and 
commonly used non-invasive exam used for detecting regions of fibrosis, as well as the severity of its extension, 
in patients who have experienced a myocardial infarction34.

The key methods and models are: 1) an accurate model of the anatomy of the heart, as well as the location and 
geometry of both the infarct and PZ regions, which were generated by processing images of the late-enhancement 
MRI of a patient who has experienced a recent myocardial infarction; 2) modern mathematical models of 
the electrophysiology for healthy and ischemic cells; 3) Monte Carlo simulations to identify which levels of 
non-conducting cells and ischemia of the infarct region have a high probability to generate micro-reentries, and, 
in particular, the use of previous theoretical results that related fractions of non-conducting cells, reentries and 
the percolation threshold to allow us to significantly reduce the number of simulations26–31; and 4) a modern 
and efficient parallel cardiac simulator that ran hundreds of complex 3D simulations within a feasible amount of 
time35.

Methods
Generation of a patient-specific heart model based on cardiac MR imaging. Patient Data. Data 
from a single patient were used to build the computer models in this proof of concept study. The main criteria 
used for patient selection were to be diagnosed with a recent myocardial infarction and to have cardiac images 
that could be used to represent the heart geometry as well as the infarct location, size and geometry. The chosen 
patient used in this work fulfilled these main requirements. In addition, this patient also had two different infarct 
regions, with distinct locations, sizes and geometries. This enabled us to study how the size of the infarct region 
influences the whole phenomenon.

Coronary angiography was performed in the patient (58 years old; weight, 80 kg; height, 170 cm) two months 
before the cardiac MRI study and revealed a 50% stenosis of the proximal RCX. An intervention was not per-
formed. ECG at rest showed a sinus rhythm, PQ 136 ms, QRS 100 ms, QT/QTc 370/445 ms and descending ST 
and pre-terminal negative T wave in II, III and avF. The patient also had moderate aortic valve stenosis (gradi-
ent by Doppler, 50 mmHg). Cardiac MR imaging was performed on the whole body using a 1.5 Tesla scanner 
(Achieva R 3.2.2.0, Philips Medical Systems, Best, The Netherlands) with a five-element cardiac phased-array coil. 
The three-dimensional anatomy of the ventricles was determined using the balanced turbo field echo cine short 
axis and 3D whole heart scans. The contrast media, Gadolinium, was administered for late-enhancement and 
T1-mapping to visualize the scars and measure extracellular volumes (ECV), which correlated with myocardial 



www.nature.com/scientificreports/

3SCIEntIFIC REPORtS |         (2018) 8:16392  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-34304-y

fibrosis. Left ventricle function and tissue structure was characterized by MRI: EF 40%, LV EDV 88 ml/m2 and 
ECV = 26%. In this study we used retrospective anonymized data. The Clinical Ethics Committee at the DHZB 
(German Heart Center Berlin), following the ethical guidelines of the 1975 Declaration of Helsinki, approved 
the study, under the name of Cardioproof, and granted the use of retrospective data without informed consent of 
patients for anonymized data.

Image Segmentation. An 8-label structural segmentation of the ventricles (left and right), blood pools, atria 
(left and right), aortic root and pulmonary artery was performed via a semi-automatic, watershed 3D-based 
algorithm embedded in ZIBAmira (Zuse Institute Berlin, Germany). Late gadolinium-enhanced MR was used to 
image the myocardial scar. Infarct regions were defined based on their higher gray value intensity compared to 
the healthy myocardium. Next, the infarct region was subdivided into scar tissue and a PZ by creating a threshold 
for the images based on the intensity values of the voxels. We have considered as infarct regions those with sig-
nal intensity (SI) values 20% higher than the mean myocardial intensity. Within each infarct region, we labeled 
as PZ the regions with SI values lower than 50% of the maximum SI found in the corresponding infarct region. 
Because both structural and scar segmentations were based on images acquired during the same procedure, the 
MR sequences only had a slight misregistration, which was manually corrected. Thus, the new tags (scar and PZ 
zone) were directly incorporated into the structural segmentation, as presented in Fig. 1.

After the completion of the segmentation process for each region of interest, such as the left ventricle, scar 
and PZ zone, we extracted the surface mesh with the aid of the Seg3D filter isosurfaces. Then, with the surfaces 
defined in an appropriate format (STL), we embedded them in a bounding box region and applied an algorithm 
that considered the desired mesh resolution as the input. With this algorithm, we generated meshes to simulate 
cardiac electrical activity using the finite volume method. The different surfaces of the LV, PZ and SCAR were 
used to tag different volumes in their respective regions of the mesh. These tags identified the type of model used: 
LV referred to myocardium without lesions and with a normal electrophysiology; SCAR identified regions with 
severe perfusion deficits in a future, recurrent MI or upon the first acute MI episode. Therefore, the model for this 
region included myocytes with severe ischemia and a certain amount, φ, of non-conducting tissue (representing 
fibrosis in the case of a recurrent MI or necrosis for the first acute MI); PZ identified the ischemic border zone, a 
region with a moderate perfusion deficit in the case of a recurrent MI or the first acute MI36,37. Therefore, we mod-
eled myocytes with moderate ischemia and a lower fraction of non-conducting tissue, φPZ < φ. The next section 
presents the further details of these models.

Electrophysiology modeling. Cardiac myocyte modeling under normal and ischemic conditions. To per-
form the computational experiments, we used a modified ten Tusscher model of human ventricle myocyte38 
(TT3), which is a simplified version of the original model39. In this particular model, the transmembrane poten-
tial (V) and ionic currents (Iion) are related as follows:

Figure 1. Segmented MR image. Representative 2D slices in the three main planes and 3D reconstruction are 
shown. Labels: right atrium (RA), left atrium (LA), right ventricle (RV), left ventricle (LV), aorta artery (AA), 
pulmonary artery (PA) and peri-infarct zone (PZ).



www.nature.com/scientificreports/

4SCIEntIFIC REPORtS |         (2018) 8:16392  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-34304-y

−
∂
∂

= = + + + + +

+ + + + + + +

C
V
t

I I I I I I I

I I I I I I I , (1)

m ion Na K to Kr Ks CaL

NaCa NaK pCa pK bCa bNa KATP

1

where Cm is the membrane capacitance, and each ion channel, exchanger or pump on the right side depends on 
the transmembrane potential and gating variables38. Under normal conditions, Eq. (1) produces an action poten-
tial (AP) with a duration of approximately 300 ms.

To include the effects of ischemia, we modified the TT3 model to reproduce hypoxia, hyperkalemia and acido-
sis as described before40,41. Briefly, hypoxia was modeled by the inclusion of a K+ current activated by Adenosine 
Triphosphate (ATP) called IK(ATP) and by modifying the PCa(L) conductivity to also be dependent on ATP. The 
formulations for IKATP and PCa(L) are:

= − =

= ×

=
+

−

.( )

I g V E g G P K K

G Nichols nS cm

P

( ), ([ ] /[ ] ) ,

195 10 / ( / ),
1

1
,

(2)

KATP K k K K ATP o o normal
n

K area

ATP
ATP
k

H

,

6 2

[ ]

ATP ATP ATP

ATP

i

0 5

where Ek is the potassium reversal potential, Nicholsarea = 5 × 103, n = 0.24, H = 2, k0.5 = 0.250 μM according to40 
and

=
+ .( )

P
1

1
,

(3)

CaL ATP
k

ATP

H,

[ ]i
0 5

with H = 2.6, k0.5 = 1.4 mM.
Hyperkalemia was introduced by increasing the extracellular potassium concentration [Ko], and acidosis was 

modeled by reducing the L-type calcium and sodium current conductances (gcal and gna, respectively). The behav-
ior of our implemented model is in accordance with previous work regarding the conduction velocity (CV), 
resting membrane potential and APD changes40–44. Figure 2 presents how the level of [ATPi] (in a range of 3.0 to 
6.8 mM) affects AP waveforms.

Modeling Action Potential propagation on heterogeneous cardiac tissue. The patterns of the two-phase media 
composed by non-conducting (fibrosis) and conducting cells inside infarct regions have been shown to be 
extremely complex45. Unfortunately, the non-invasive imaging techniques available today do not have the needed 
spatial resolution to reveal the underlying topology yet. Therefore, a solution is to artificially create many patterns 
via stochastic methods. In this work, we have performed this by randomly replacing conducting myocytes by 
non-conducting cells (fibrosis) for a given probability, φ. This same methodology was used before16–18,21–27 and 
has been usually referenced as diffuse fibrosis, characterized by the distribution of non-conducting tissue along 
normal myocytes and a lack of well defined compact blocks of non-conducting areas. Non-conducting and con-
ducting tissues are interleaved and may form a complex maze.

We modeled diffuse fibrosis by randomly removing active tissue volumes of a regular size of (100 μm)3, and 
replacing it with non-conducting inert tissue. This block roughly represented a pack of 25 cardiac myocytes (each 
approximately 100 × 20 × 20 μm). This approach has been extensively employed to study reentries in cardiac tis-
sue16,17,21,22,25. The maze of conducting tissue co-located within an inert fibrotic structure produced a fractionation 

Figure 2. Dependence of the AP waveforms, obtained with the modified TT3 model, on the parameter [ATPi] 
to characterize the degree of hypoxia. AP waveforms were obtained at different points for the small wedge 
simulation (scar, PZ and healthy regions) with the pair (φ = 0, [ATPi] = 3 mM). In the same region with the 
same value of [ATPi], different waveforms were found due to the influence of the neighboring myocytes via 
electrotonic effects.



www.nature.com/scientificreports/

5SCIEntIFIC REPORtS |         (2018) 8:16392  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-34304-y

of the AP propagation on active cardiac tissue, ΩA. This propagation was modeled with the monodomain model, 
a partial differential equation of the reaction-diffusion type:

β β η σ
∂
∂

+ = ∇ ⋅ ∇ +C
V
t

I V V I( , ) ( ) ,
(4)m ion stim

η
η

∂
∂

=
t

f V( , ),
(5)

where V is the transmembrane potential; Iion is the total ionic current that may also depend on gating variables η, 
as described in Eq. (1); β is the surface-volume ratio; Cm is the membrane capacitance; Istim is the current due to 
an external stimulus; and σ is the monodomain conductivity tensor. The model is further equipped with appro-
priate initial conditions and no–flux boundary conditions: σ∇V. n = 0 on ∂ΩA, where n is the normal vector of 
the surface, ∂ΩA. In this way, there is no exchange of currents between the active myocytes and non-conducting 
regions because, by definition, non-conducting regions do not belong to ΩA.

Numerical Methods. To solve the monodomain equations and simulate the action potential propagation in het-
erogeneous tissue, we used an efficient parallel cardiac solver35. This particular solver can handle non-uniform 
and non-conforming adaptive meshes. We used this feature to create a fine mesh (hexahedral segments of 
100 μm) only in the damaged region (scar and PZ). For the rest of the mesh, discretization varied between 200 
and 800 μm. The finite volume method was used to solve the partial differential equation (PDE), see Eq. (4), 
whereas the Rush-Larsen method was used to solve the ordinary differential equations (ODE) associated with the 
TT3 model. Both methods used a time discretization of 0.02 ms.

Micro-reentry mechanism. In previous works, we associated the genesis of ectopic beats in 2D simulations 
of ventricular tissue and in 3D simulations of atrial tissue with the mechanism of micro-reentries26,27. Common 
features of these two studies revealed the minimum conditions for the creation of micro-reentries in heterogene-
ous tissues: 1) long reentrant paths within the damaged region; 2) short action potential and wavelength. Figure 3 
illustrates the basic mechanism. The first condition for the creation of a reentrant path is a unidirectional block. 
As illustrated in Fig. 3(b), the unidirectional block is the result of a source-sink mismatch. The second condition 
is to have a wavelength shorter than the created reentrant pathway. Figure 3(e) shows that when the wave reenters 
the path where it was first blocked, the AP can only propagate if the cells are already repolarized.

In this work, diffuse fibrosis was used to generate patterns that could induce source-sink mismatches, unidi-
rectional blocks and reentrant pathways. Other patterns of fibrosis exist, such as patchy, interstitial and compact45. 
Different patterns of fibrosis were modeled before and were able to generate long reentrant pathways18,20,46. In this 
work, we chose the simplest model, i.e., diffuse fibrosis, since this is enough to fulfill the first condition for the 
generation of micro-reentries: the creation of long reentrant pathways.

The second important ingredient is to have a wavelength (APD × CV) that is short enough to allow the wave 
to re-excite the location where the unidirectional block occurred. As previously described, ischemia decreases 
the wavelength by reducing both APD and CV. In fact, any of the described mechanisms that take place dur-
ing ischemia, hypoxia, hyperkalemia or acidosis can reduce the AP wavelength alone. Therefore, many dif-
ferent combinations of hypoxia, hyperkalemia and acidosis can result in the same modified wavelength and, 
as a consequence, satisfy the second condition for micro-reentry. As an example, Fig. 4 presents the results 

Figure 3. A schematic representation of the micro-reentry mechanism. The first necessary condition is the 
creation of a reentry path via a unidirectional block. Panel (b) presents this unidirectional block due to a 
source-sink mismatch. When the wave is confined in a thin tunnel (source), it does not have enough power to 
propagate the AP to the neighboring cells on the left when the thin tunnel suddenly opens (sink). The second 
necessary condition is presented in panel (e). When the wave reenters the thin path where it was blocked, it 
can only propagate if the cells are already repolarized, i.e., the wavelength has to be shorter than the created 
reentrant pathway.



www.nature.com/scientificreports/

6SCIEntIFIC REPORtS |         (2018) 8:16392  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-34304-y

of two simulations on a thin slab of tissue with diffuse fibrosis. In both simulations we observed sustained 
micro-reentries (see Supplementary Video 1) and that the wavelengths of the fractionated waves were similar. 
However, for the first simulation, as shown in Fig. 4(a), we had [ATPi] = 4 mM, [Ko] = 7 mmol/l and a 50% reduc-
tion of gCaL and gNa, whereas, for the second simulation, Fig. 4(b), we had only changed [ATPi] to 3 mM (hypoxia 
only). With these parameters, in the first simulation, we had APD = 100 ms and CV reduced to half of its normal 
value, whereas for the second simulation, we had APD = 50 ms and a normal CV, i.e., both simulations had the 
same wavelength.

Figure 4 suggests that similar results, in terms of propagating wavelength and induction of micro-reentries in 
heterogeneous media, were obtained with two different models: one that considered the three processes (hyper-
kalemia, acidosis and hypoxia) and the other that only considered hypoxia. Indeed, among hypoxia, hyper-
kalemia and acidosis, it has been shown before that hypoxia is the process that has the greatest influence on APD 
and wavelength during ischemia40,41. Therefore, for the next simulations, we chose the simplest model since it 
fulfills the second condition for the generation of micro-reentries, i.e., it can create short wavelengths, and it also 
reproduces AP waveforms with APD values that are usually found during acute ischemia40.

Monte Carlo simulations. Even if a fast, state-of-the-art cardiac simulator35 is available, full heart or 
bi-ventricular 3D simulations could still be a time-consuming task for Monte Carlo studies. For this reason, 
we restrict our parameter space to the pair (φ, [ATPi]). According to the previous sections, two conditions were 
necessary for the mechanism of micro-reentries: long reentrant pathways and short wavelengths. The parameter 
φ was used to parameterize the non-conducting patterns. To reduce the amount of simulations, we parameter-
ized the wavelengths during ischemia by [ATPi], since Fig. 4 shows that this choice has generated similar results 
in terms of propagating wavelength and induction of micro-reentries in an ischemic and heterogeneous media.

Figure 4. Two simulations on a thin slab of tissue with diffuse fibrosis. In both simulations, we observed 
sustained micro-reentries and that the wavelengths of the fractionated waves were similar. In Panel (a) we 
simulated ischemia with [ATPi] = 4 mM, [Ko] = 7 mmol/l and a 50% reduction of gCaL and gNa, whereas in the 
simulation depicted in Panel (b), we only changed [ATPi] to 3 mM.

Figure 5. Left ventricular wedges (Wedge 1 and Wedge 2) highlighting the infarct region (in white), peri-infarct 
zone (in red), and normal tissue (in blue). (a) and (c) Whole LV Wedges used in the Monte Carlo simulations. 
(b) and d) Cuts in the longitudinal direction to facilitate the 3D visualization of the transmural extension of the 
infarct and peri-infarct zone regions.



www.nature.com/scientificreports/

7SCIEntIFIC REPORtS |         (2018) 8:16392  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-34304-y

In addition, to further reduce the amount of computations in our numerical experiments, we evaluated the 
probability of each of the two patient-specific infarct regions to become an ectopic pacemaker separately. From 
the bi-ventricular mesh, we extracted two smaller sub-meshes, i.e., two cardiac wedges, that surrounded each 
infarct region. The first cardiac wedge is depicted in Fig. 5(a) and contained a large infarct region and PZ. The sec-
ond wedge is shown in Fig. 5(c) and contained a small infarct scar. Each wedge was built in a way that it contains 
one of the infarct regions. Its size was chosen to guarantee that healthy tissue surrounds the infarct, i.e., at the 
borders of the wedge there is healthy tissue and the infarct is at the center of the wedge. In addition, both wedges 
are transmural cuts, i.e., they include both epi- and endocardial surfaces.

For each wedge, we generated a total of 240 different realizations by varying the fraction φ of the disconnected 
volumes (non-conducting material) from 0.64 to 0.69 in steps of 0.01; using two different values of [ATPi] for the 
myocytes in the center of the scar, 2 and 3 mM; and generating 20 different, non-conducting mazes for each pair 
(φ, [ATPi]) of parameters. In the PZ we incorporated a certain degree of fibrosis and ischemia by modulating the 
parameters [ATPi] and φ linearly inside the PZ depending on its distance to the center of the scar. Therefore, in 
the PZ, [ATPi] and φ linearly changed from their values inside the scar to their values in the healthy surrounding 
tissue, 6.8 mM and zero, respectively.

It is important to note that because we randomly disconnected volumes to model diffuse fibrosis, each of the 
240 realizations of the same geometrical wedge was unique with respect to both the anatomical microstructure 
and electrophysiological properties. The uniqueness of the microstructure was straightforward and came from 
the random method of modeling diffuse fibrosis. The uniqueness of the electrophysiological properties came 
from the interplay of the distinct topology and electrotonic effects between neighboring myocytes47. For instance, 
Fig. 2 presents AP waveforms obtained at different points for the small wedge simulation (SCAR, PZ, and healthy 
regions) for the pair (φ =  0, [ATPi] = 3 mM). In the same region, with the same value of [ATPi], different wave-
forms were found due to the influence of the neighboring myocytes via electrotonic effects. Therefore, the specific 
topology of fibrosis affected the AP waveforms, conduction velocity and number and locations of the unidirec-
tional blocks of AP propagation in the infarct region due to the different levels of source-sink mismatch48.

Biventricular patient-specific simulations. The Monte Carlo studies performed for each wedge allowed 
us to statistically verify the genesis of ectopic pacemakers due to micro-reentries in the infarct region. Using these 
results, we saved two topologies (one for each wedge) that generated micro-reentries and formed ectopic beats. 
Without changing any characteristics of these models, i.e., keeping the exact topology and electrophysiological 
properties, we patched each wedge back into the whole biventricular model. The patient-specific heart model was 
then evaluated using two different initial stimulus protocols, a single point-like stimulus at the apex and multiple 
point-like stimuli on the endocardial surface, to reproduce the normal excitation via the Purkinje system. It is 
important to highlight that the use of non-conforming meshes was crucial for this step. This feature of the cardiac 
simulator35 allowed us to patch back the different wedge models in the whole biventricular model without the 
need for any re-meshing steps.

Results
In this study, we employed a biventricular model generated from MRI images of a patient with two infarct regions 
and evaluated whether these regions could interact with an action potential wave to generate ectopic beats. The 
following sections present the results of the simulations using the wedges presented in Fig. 5 and the whole biven-
tricular mesh obtained from patient MRI images.

Wedge simulations. We performed Monte Carlo simulations using the two wedge models, as shown in 
Fig. 5. The pair of parameters (φ, [ATPi]) was varied to generate different scenarios, as described in the methods 
section. For the wedge with the large infarct region, 39 realizations of infarctions, out of a total of 240, presented 
spontaneous pacemaker-like behaviors after a single point stimulus. The mechanism behind the ectopic pace-
maker was the appearance of sustained micro-reentries inside the infarct region.

A typical pattern of an AP propagation is shown in Fig. 6 (see Supplementary Video 2) for wedge 1 with 
φ = 0.66 and [ATPi] = 2 mM at the center of the infarct region. In frame (a), we can observe a single stimulus 
that was applied at the upper-right region of the wedge. Then, the AP wave propagated towards the left side of 
the LV wedge. Inside the infarct region, we observed some electrical activity due to the fractionated propagation 
that occurred in the maze formed by non-conducting and conducting myocytes, as show in frame (b). After 
220 ms (c), the LV wedge was fully depolarized, and micro-reentries led to the formation of a fractionated spiral 
wave inside the infarct region. The LV wedge then began to repolarize, and an AP wave began to leave the infarct 
region at its right side, as shown in frame (d). After 420 ms (e), an ectopic beat was generated at the right side of 
the infarct region and propagated towards the healthy tissue. Another ectopic beat left the infarct region from the 
top and entered the PZ region. The LV wedge began to depolarize again. After 520 ms (f) the micro-reentries per-
sisted inside the infarct region. Another AP wave began to leave the infarct region at the right side of the infarct 
region, as shown in frame (g). Then, a second ectopic beat was generated at the right side of the infarct region and 
propagated towards the healthy tissue, as shown in frame (h). A complex pattern of AP waves was formed via the 
interaction between micro-reentries inside the infarct region and AP propagation in the healthy tissue, as show in 
frame (i). After approximately 800 ms, the infarct region was able to produce several ectopic beats that propagated 
throughout the rest of the wedge.

For the wedge containing the small infarct region, only 20 infarct realizations, out of 240, presented spon-
taneous pacemaker-like behaviors. Nevertheless, as shown in Fig. 7, similar dynamics were observed (see 
Supplementary Video 3). Once again, the mechanism behind the ectopic activity was the appearance of sustained 
micro-reentries inside the infarct region.



www.nature.com/scientificreports/

8SCIEntIFIC REPORtS |         (2018) 8:16392  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-34304-y

Figure 8(a) presents the statistical results of the Monte Carlo study using ventricular wedge 1 with the 
large scar. The blue bars show the percentage of sustained reentries observed 1 s after a single stimulus with 
[ATPi] = 2 mM and varying φ from 0.64 to 0.69 (steps of 0.01). Reentries were found for values of φ near the theo-
retical limit for the percolation threshold, which is equal to 0.6825. The orange bars show the number of sustained 
reentries obtained for different values of φ with [ATPi] = 3 mM. Fewer reentries were found in the last case. The 
decrease of the percentage of reentries with [ATPi] was associated with the dependence of the APD on the value 
of [ATPi]. The probability of generating micro-reentries in an infarct region decreased when APD increased, in 
accordance with our previous observations25.

A similar set of simulations was performed using the small wedge (wedge 2), and the results are shown in 
Fig. 8(b). We observed a similar behavior for the second wedge. Sustained reentries were generated for similar 
values of φ, close to the percolation threshold. However, there was a decrease in the total number of wedges with 
sustained reentries. This reduction in the number of reentries was expected and is mainly related to the size of the 
infarct. The probability of randomly generating a reentry circuit naturally decreases with the size of the infarct 
region27.

Biventricular simulations. After the set of simulations using cardiac wedges shown in the previous section 
were carried out, we performed simulations using the full biventricular mesh. We chose specific configurations 
of the fibrotic structure that generated an ectopic beat in the previous wedge simulations and incorporated these 
infarct patterns back into the full biventricular mesh. Both wedge models used for the full biventricular simu-
lations were generated using φ = 0.66 and [ATPi] = 2 mM. The patient-specific heart model was then evaluated 
using two different initial stimulus protocols; a single point-like stimulus at the apex (see Supplementary Video 4) 
and multiple point-like stimuli on the endocardial surface, to reproduce the normal excitation via the Purkinje 
system (see Fig. 9 and Supplementary Video 5). For these two simulations, the results were similar. Sustained 
reentries were found in the large infarct region. These micro-reentries were the mechanism for the genesis of 
ectopic beats that came out of the large infarct region (see Fig. 9), spread through the whole heart and induced a 
cardiac arrhythmia (see Supplementary Videos 3 and 4).

A different trend was observed for the small infarct because it only behaved like an ectopic pacemaker with 
a single point-like stimulus at the apex (see Supplementary Video 3). For simulations with multiple point-like 
stimuli on the endocardial surface, micro-reentries were not observed in the region of the small infarct, despite 
the fact that we did not change any of the characteristics of this model, i.e., we kept the exact topology and 

Figure 6. Visualization of the transmembrane potential of one of the simulations performed during Monte 
Carlo analysis using the ventricular wedge containing a large scar. This is one of the observed sustained 
reentries with φ = 0.66 and [ATPi] = 2 mM. (a) A single stimulus is applied at the upper-right region of the 
wedge. (b) The AP wave propagates towards the left of the LV wedge. Inside the infarct region we observe some 
electrical activity due to a fractionated propagation that occurs in the maze formed by non-conducting fibrosis 
and conducting myocytes. (c) The LV wedge is fully depolarized. Micro-reentries lead to the formation of a 
fractionated spiral wave inside the infarct region. (d) The LV wedge begins to repolarize. An AP wave begins to 
leave the infarct region at its right side. (e) An ectopic beat is generated at the right side of the infarct region and 
propagates towards the healthy tissue. Another ectopic beat leaves the infarct region on the top and enters the 
peri-infarct zone region. (f) The LV wedge begins to depolarize again. Inside the infarct region, micro-reentries 
persist. (g) Another AP wave begins to leave the infarct region at the right side of the infarct region. (h) A 
second ectopic beat is generated at the right side of the infarct region and propagates towards the healthy tissue. 
(i) A complex pattern of AP waves is formed via the interaction between micro-reentries inside the infarct 
region and AP propagation in the healthy tissue.



www.nature.com/scientificreports/

9SCIEntIFIC REPORtS |         (2018) 8:16392  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-34304-y

Figure 7. Visualization of the transmembrane potential of one of the simulations performed during Monte 
Carlo analysis using the ventricular wedge containing the small scar. This is one of the observed sustained 
reentries with φ = 0.66 and [ATPi] = 2 mM. (a) A single stimulus is applied at the right region of the wedge. 
(b) The AP wave propagates towards the left of the LV wedge. (c) The LV wedge is almost fully depolarized. 
Micro-reentries lead to the formation of a fractionated figure-of-eight pattern inside the infarct region. (d) The 
LV wedge begins to repolarize. (e) Two ectopic beats simultaneously leave the infarct region and re-excite the 
healthy tissue. (f and g) The LV wedge begins to depolarize again. Inside the infarct region a fractionated figure-
of-eight pattern persists (h). Healthy tissue repolarizes. (i) The sustained fractionated figure-of-eight pattern 
re-excites the tissue again.

0,63 0.64 0.65 0.66 0.67 0.68 0.69 0.7

φ
0

10

20

30

40

50

%
 re

en
tr

ie
s

[ATPi]= 2 mM
[ATPi]= 3 mM

Wedge 1

0.63 0.64 0.65 0.66 0.67 0.68 0.69 0.7

φ
0

10

20

30

40

50

%
 re

en
tr

ie
s

Wedge 2a) b)

Figure 8. Results obtained from Monte Carlo simulations of the ventricular wedges by varying the percentage 
of fibrosis, (φ), and the degree of ischemia in the infarct region ([ATPi]). For each fixed value of φ, 20 different 
realizations are generated and simulated, each one with a different topological structure of the fibrotic network. 
The blue bars show the percentage of sustained reentries observed for different values of φ with [ATPi] = 2 mM. 
The orange bars show the number of sustained reentries obtained for different values of φ with [ATPi] = 3 mM. 
Reentries are found for values of φ near the theoretical limit for the percolation threshold, which is equal to 0.68.



www.nature.com/scientificreports/

1 0SCIEntIFIC REPORtS |         (2018) 8:16392  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-34304-y

electrophysiology properties as those that gave rise to micro-reentries in the wedge simulations. This is a clear 
suggestion that the path and direction by which the AP wave arrives at the infarct region may also play important 
roles in the genesis of micro-reentries and ectopic beats.

On the other hand, the topology chosen for the large infarct region was very robust in terms of pro-arrhythmic 
features and did not show a dependency on the stimulation protocol. Figure 9 shows the transmembrane poten-
tial of one simulation performed using the whole biventricular, patient-specific mesh. In frame (a), we observe 
the application of multiple stimuli on different subendocardial regions. The main idea behind this protocol is to 
mimic an activation via the Purkinje network43,49. After 120 ms, both ventricles were fully depolarized, which is 
in close agreement with the patient QRS duration of 100 ms, as recorded by an ECG. During this period, there 
was no electrical activity inside the small infarct region at the upper region of the LV. This behavior held during 
the entire simulation. However, inside the large infarct region, we observed some electrical activity due to the 
fractionated propagation of AP waves. Frame (c) shows that after 400 ms, the ventricles began to repolarize. Inside 
the large infarct region, micro-reentries led to the formation of two fractionated spiral waves, in a figure-of-eight 
pattern. After 660 ms, an ectopic beat was generated at the right side of the large infarct region and propagated 
towards the healthy tissue.

Discussion
The trigger. Computational modeling has been used before to study the relationship of arrhythmias and 
fibrosis or other non-conducting media in cardiac tissue16–23,28,31. However, only a few studies have focused on the 
genesis of ectopic beats or premature ventricular contractions (PVCs)25,26,30. We quote Boineau and Cox13 to high-
light how our work differs from other important studies: “Our studies differ from these in that premature beats 
were not used to evoke re-entry. We were primarily concerned with the spontaneous development of PVCs as a 
natural consequence of the single intervention of coronary occlusion”. Therefore, we did not use S1-S2 or fast pac-
ing stimulation protocols50. After a single stimulus, we observed how the AP wave fractionated inside the infarct 
region, gave rise to micro-reentries, and re-excited the heart via ectopic beats that left the PZ of the infarct region.

It is worth mentioning that the main goal of the simulations performed in this work was to verify whether the 
mechanism of micro-reentries, proposed half a century ago, could generate ectopic beats and trigger arrhythmias 
using patient-specific data of myocardial infarction. However, this is a purely theoretical work, and many simplifi-
cations and hypotheses were adopted in the development of the models. One important hypothesis is that the scar 
and PZ regions detected by LE-MRI were used as markers for severe and moderate ischemic regions, respectively. 
Therefore, our results reflect cases of recurrent MI, where fibrosis and ischemic myocytes are found next to each 
other. However, other interpretations are possible. Fibrosis, as detected by LE-MRI, indicates the locations of 
necrotic cells at the time of the acute phase of the disease. Therefore, we can also interpret our results as simula-
tions of the acute MI episode of the patient, where necrosis and ischemic myocytes are found next to each other. 
In summary, we can use our simulations to look ahead and predict the scenarios that can be pro-arrhythmic in 
situations of recurrent MI or look into the past, and study how dangerous untreated acute MI can be.

Different mechanisms have been proposed to explain the appearance of ectopic beats near infarct regions, 
such as abnormal automaticity, triggered activity, micro-reentries, or even the combination of some of these 

Figure 9. Visualization of the transmembrane potential of one of the simulations performed using the 
biventricular patient-specific mesh (to facilitate the visualization only half of the ventricles is shown in the 
figure). The simulation presents sustained reentries with φ = 0.66 and [ATPi] = 2 mM. (a) Multiple stimuli were 
applied to different subendocardial regions to mimic an activation via the Purkinje network. (b) Both ventricles 
are fully depolarized. No electrical activity inside the small infarct region at the upper region of the LV is found. 
This behavior holds during the entire simulation. However, inside the larger infarct region we observe persistent 
electrical activity due to the fractionated propagation of AP waves. (c) The ventricles begin to repolarize. Inside 
the large infarct region micro-reentries lead to the formation of two fractionated spiral waves. (d) An ectopic 
beat is generated at the right side of the large infarct region and propagates towards the healthy tissue.



www.nature.com/scientificreports/

1 1SCIEntIFIC REPORtS |         (2018) 8:16392  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-34304-y

three. For instance, experimental and computational studies have suggested that post-acidosis arrhythmias dur-
ing acute reperfusion may be triggered by delayed after-depolarizations (DADs)51,52. Computer simulations have 
also shown that DADs can overcome the source-sink mismatch that arises from inter-cellular coupling and pro-
duce a PVC at the tissue level either by increasing the source via synchronization53 or by decreasing the sink via 
fibrosis54. Therefore, in the near future we plan to improve our model, that here focus only on the micro-reentry 
mechanism, to be able to study the combination of the different aforementioned mechanisms in the triggering 
of PVCs.

Biological uncertainties and complexity. In terms of the methods used in this work, the Monte Carlo 
approach was crucial to evaluate the uncertainties of our patient-specific model. In particular, those associated 
with the intricate topology and heterogeneity of the electrophysiology properties of the infarct and PZ regions. 
This method allowed the presentation of results in a more solid and statistical framework. Instead of a binary 
result for a certain pair of values (φ, [ATPi] ) we found, as a result, the probability of an infarct to behave as an 
ectopic pacemaker. It is worth noting that the strategy to perform Monte Carlo simulations using first tissue 
wedges containing scars proved to be successful. With this scheme, we narrowed down the number of simulations 
using the full biventricular mesh; we were able to generate ectopic beats on the first try using two different stimu-
lation protocols (apex stimulation and Purkinje-like endocardial stimulation). It is important to mention that the 
use of non-conforming finite volume meshes was crucial for this strategy. This feature of the cardiac simulator35 
allowed us to extract cardiac wedges and later patch them back into the whole biventricular model without the 
need for any re-meshing steps.

Reentry patterns. It is interesting to note that in recent animal experiments most of the reentry activity 
measured near infarct regions was similar to a figure-of-eight pattern55. Likewise, our simulations, see Fig. 7(h,i), 
also presented sustained micro-reentries with a similar figure-of-eight pattern. Nevertheless, quite complex and 
chaotic patterns were also present, see, for instance, Fig. 6(h). In addition, our final biventricular simulation 
showed that the ectopic beat could also be very similar to a focus origin or point-like source, a pattern that could 
be easily misinterpreted as coming from an abnormal automaticity, see Fig. 9(d). This shows how challenging it is 
to demonstrate the micro-reentry mechanism in animal experiments or clinical studies.

Simple model but complex relations. In this work, we used simple computational models to reproduce 
ischemia and diffuse fibrosis. Nevertheless, the results of this combination are far from trivial. We observed that 
ectopic beats were generated for a range of values of the percentage of fibrosis, which was near a topological 
metric known as the percolation threshold, confirming previously reported results25–27. Figure 8 shows that the 
size of the infarct is also an important parameter for the appearance of reentries, which is in agreement with 
previous studies56. From these results, we observed that the probability of generating ectopic beats is higher in 
cases of severe ischemia, with [ATPi]  values in a range that is likely to occur during acute ischemia40,41. In addi-
tion, although our results suggest that the two investigated parameters, the percentage of fibrosis φ and degree of 
ischemia, are relevant in the genesis of ectopic beats near the infarct region, the direction of the approaching AP 
wave also played an important role. This dependence was observed in cases of small infarct regions. By chang-
ing only the location of the initial stimulations, the same infarct model (with the same topology and electro-
physiology) that gave rise to micro-reentries in the wedge simulations was electrically silent in the biventricular 
simulation with multiple point-like stimuli on the endocardial surface. This dependence on the direction of the 
approaching AP wave is in accordance with our previous results26,41.

A new protocol, its limitations and future works. The use of the aforementioned models and methods 
allowed the first assessment of a protocol based on cardiac imaging and computational modeling techniques that 
has the potential to test and quantify the pro-arrhythmic nature of some specific regions of the heart. The proto-
col has, as inputs: 1) data of late-enhancement MRI from a patient who experienced a myocardial infarction; 2) 
modern models for the electrophysiology of cardiac myocytes under normal and ischemic conditions38,40; and 3) 
a simple model of diffuse fibrosis. Each one of these can be further improved or complemented in future works. 
To reproduce the shortening of wavelengths due to ischemia, we focused on hypoxia to reduce the number of 
parameters to be investigated by our Monte Carlo analysis. In the near future, we plan to study how hyperkalemia 
and acidosis would affect our results. We used a very simple model of diffuse fibrosis. Different models could be 
considered to describe compact, interstitial or patchy fibrosis or to include myocyte-fibroblast connections22,31,45. 
Nevertheless, it is worth mentioning that we obtained similar results, in terms of micro-reentry and the genera-
tion of ectopic beats, in a previous work that used a more detailed and realistic model of diffuse fibrosis by con-
sidering a fine sub-cellular spatial resolution of 8 μm26. In addition, it would be interesting to study how cellular 
uncoupling due to gap-junction remodeling in ischemic regions57 could influence the micro-reentry mechanism. 
Finally, the coupling of the Purkinje network to the ventricles was simulated by multiple point-like stimuli. In the 
near future, we will couple our 3D biventricular model to a Purkinje network model58.

A promising tool for the planning of clinical interventions. Our results align with recent findings of 
clinical electrophysiology studies that indicate the ablation procedure for the treatment of ventricular tachycar-
dia (VT) or fibrillation (VF). For instance, the clinical study presented by Peichl et al.59 concludes that catheter 
ablation of ectopic beats triggering VT or VF could successfully abolish these arrhythmias. Different types of 
techniques of ablation for VT exist. The multicenter study presented in Di Biase et al.60 compared mapped VT 
(induction of VT via fast pacing) and the substrate or homogenization technique, which maps the electrical activ-
ity during sinus rhythms. Mapped VT is used to localize macro-reentries, usually believed to be associated with 
an isthmus, i.e., a conducting path that connects two opposite sites of a non-conducting scar. After the isthmus is 
localized, this conductive pathway is disrupted by, for instance, a linear ablation that transversely crosses it. The 



www.nature.com/scientificreports/

1 2SCIEntIFIC REPORtS |         (2018) 8:16392  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-34304-y

substrate technique identifies all regions with fractionated and low-amplitude electrograms inside both scar and 
PZ regions. These are the targets for ablation. The results reported in Di Biase et al.60 suggested that the substrate 
technique was superior to the mapped VT. We can interpret this result as additional clinical evidence that sup-
ports the micro-reentry mechanism. In fact, using our diffuse fibrosis model and, replacing every active cell with 
fibrosis (via ablation), we would completely suppress any electrical activity inside the infarct region; whereas, 
by splitting the infarct region in half (via a linear ablation), we would only reduce the probability of generating 
micro-reentries. Nevertheless, the generation of new fibrotic regions via ablation can also be pro-arrhythmic. 
Fibrosis is a dynamic process, and recent reviews on this topic highlight the disappointing efficacy of VT ablation 
in structural heart disease and note that new technologies are needed to optimize and improve this procedure61,62. 
In this direction, the protocol and methods described in this work, which combine imaging techniques and com-
putational models, could be extremely useful for the planning and optimization of clinical interventions, such 
as catheter ablation. It is important to note that the pipeline of methods proposed in this work can be promptly 
used for the study of other patients with a recent history of myocardial infarction and available cardiac MRI data. 
Therefore, a future study that involves more patients might prove the potential clinical prognostic value of the 
protocol proposed in this work which combines patient-specific data, uncertainty evaluation and computational 
simulations.

Conclusion
In this work we investigated, using a patient-specific heart model, the mechanism of micro-reentry in the genera-
tion of ectopic beats near infarct areas. This mechanism was described and proposed half a century ago as a result 
of clinical and animal studies13–15. However, the lack of techniques that provide the needed spatial resolution in 
animal experiments or clinical studies has prevented a final proof of this mechanism63. We believe the results 
presented in this work are an important step toward this goal. Our study uses a heart model based on patient MRI 
data that contains detailed 3D information of the human ventricle anatomy and the shape and location of the 
myocardial infarction as well as an established electrophysiology model of the human ventricle that is modified 
to describe different levels of ischemia. The generated model was able to reproduce the genesis of an ectopic pace-
maker near an infarct region. After normal activation via multiple sites on the endocardial surface, which mimics 
activation via the Purkinje network, the AP propagation fractionates inside the infarct region and gives rise to 
sustained micro-reentries. In turn, this sustained activity leaves, periodically, the infarct region and re-excites the 
surrounding healthy tissue, i.e., micro-reentries transform the infarct region into an ectopic pacemaker. Finally, 
we believe that the validation process of the micro-reentry mechanism will benefit from the combination of data 
from late-enhancement MRI and the computational models used in this work with data from new electrical 
mapping techniques55,64.

Data Availability
All data generated or analyzed during this study are included in this published article (and its supplementary 
information files).

References
 1. Chiong, M. et al. Cardiomyocyte death: mechanisms and translational implications. Cell death & disease 2, e244 (2011).
 2. Coronary-Revascularization-Writing-Group et al. ACC/AATS/AHA/ASE/ASNC/SCAI/SCCT/STS 2017 Appropriate use criteria 

for coronary revascularization in patients with stable ischemic heart disease. J. Am. Coll. Cardiol., https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jacc.2017.02.001 (2017).

 3. Shi, H. et al. Metabolites of hypoxic cardiomyocytes induce the migration of cardiac fibroblasts. Cell. Physiol. Biochem. 41, 413–421 
(2017).

 4. Pouleur, A.-C. et al. Pathogenesis of sudden unexpected death in a clinical trial of patients with myocardial infarction and left 
ventricular dysfunction, heart failure, or both. Circ. 122, 597–602 (2010).

 5. Ørn, S., Cleland, J. G., Romo, M., Kjekshus, J. & Dickstein, K. Recurrent infarction causes the most deaths following myocardial 
infarction with left ventricular dysfunction. The Am. journal medicine 118, 752–758 (2005).

 6. Kundu, A. et al. Variant angina and aborted sudden cardiac death. Curr. cardiology reports 20, 26 (2018).
 7. Dominitz, I., Boruchow, I. B. & Hutchins, G. M. Focal myocardial ischemic necroses associated with unstable angina pectoris. J. Am. 

Coll. Cardiol. 28, 910–914 (1996).
 8. Raftery, E., Rehman, M., Banks, D. & Oram, S. Incidence and management of ventricular arrhythmias after acute myocardial 

infarction. Br. heart journal 31, 273 (1969).
 9. Bigger, J. T., Dresdale, R. J., Heissenbuttel, R. H., Weld, F. M. & Wit, A. L. Ventricular arrhythmias in ischemic heart disease: 

mechanism, prevalence, significance, and management. Prog. cardiovascular diseases 19, 255–300 (1977).
 10. Arutunyan, A., Swift, L. M. & Sarvazyan, N. Initiation and propagation of ectopic waves: insights from an in vitro model of ischemia-

reperfusion injury. Am. J. Physiol. Circ. Physiol. 283, H741–H749 (2002).
 11. Campos, F. O. et al. Stochastic spontaneous calcium release events trigger premature ventricular complexes by overcoming 

electrotonic load. Cardiovasc. research 107, 175–183 (2015).
 12. Campos, F. O., Shiferaw, Y., Vigmond, E. J. & Plank, G. Stochastic spontaneous calcium release events and sodium channelopathies 

promote ventricular arrhythmias. Chaos: An Interdiscip. J. Nonlinear Sci. 27, 093910 (2017).
 13. Boineau, J. P. & Cox, J. L. Slow ventricular activation in acute myocardial infarction. Circ. 48, 702–713 (1973).
 14. Cox, J., Daniel, T., Sabiston, D. & Boineau, J. De-synchronized activation in myocardial infarction-a re-entry basis for ventricular 

arrhythmias. In Circulation, vol. 40, II63 (Lippincott Williams & Wilkins 227 East Washington SQ, Philadelphia, PA 19106, 1969).
 15. Kaplinsky, E., Yahini, J. H. & Neufeld, H. N. On the mechanism of sustained ventricular arrhythmias associated with acute 

myocardial infarction. Cardiovasc. research 6, 135–142 (1972).
 16. Ten Tusscher, K. H. & Panfilov, A. V. Influence of diffuse fibrosis on wave propagation in human ventricular tissue. Eur. 9, vi38–vi45 

(2007).
 17. Jacquemet, V. & Henriquez, C. S. Genesis of complex fractionated atrial electrograms in zones of slow conduction: a computer 

model of microfibrosis. Hear. Rhythm 6, 803–810 (2009).
 18. Hubbard, M. L. & Henriquez, C. S. A microstructural model of reentry arising from focal breakthrough at sites of source-load 

mismatch in a central region of slow conduction. Am. J. Physiol. Circ. Physiol. 306, H1341–H1352 (2014).
 19. Christensen, K., Manani, K. A. & Peters, N. S. Simple model for identifying critical regions in atrial fibrillation. Phys. Rev. Lett. 114, 

028104 (2015).

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jacc.2017.02.001
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jacc.2017.02.001


www.nature.com/scientificreports/

13SCIEntIFIC REPORtS |         (2018) 8:16392  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-34304-y

 20. Vigmond, E., Pashaei, A., Amraoui, S., Cochet, H. & Hassaguerre, M. Percolation as a mechanism to explain atrial fractionated 
electrograms and reentry in a fibrosis model based on imaging data. Hear. Rhythm 13, 1536–1543 (2016).

 21. Kazbanov, I. V., Ten Tusscher, K. H. & Panfilov, A. V. Effects of heterogeneous diffuse fibrosis on arrhythmia dynamics and 
mechanism. Sci. reports 6 (2016).

 22. Zimik, S. & Pandit, R. Reentry via high-frequency pacing in a mathematical model for human-ventricular cardiac tissue with a 
localized fibrotic region. Sci. reports 7, 15350 (2017).

 23. Cherry, E. M., Ehrlich, J. R., Nattel, S. & Fenton, F. H. Pulmonary vein reentry—properties and size matter: insights from a 
computational analysis. Hear. rhythm 4, 1553–1562 (2007).

 24. Kaplan, D. T., Smith, J. M., Saxberg, B. E. & Cohen, R. J. Nonlinear dynamics in cardiac conduction. Math. biosciences 90, 19–48 
(1988).

 25. Alonso, S. & Bär, M. Reentry near the percolation threshold in a heterogeneous discrete model for cardiac tissue. Phys. review letters 
110, 158101 (2013).

 26. Gouvêa de Barros, B., Weber dos Santos, R., Lobosco, M. & Alonso, S. Simulation of ectopic pacemakers in the heart: multiple 
ectopic beats generated by reentry inside fibrotic regions. BioMed research international 2015 (2015).

 27. Alonso, S., dos Santos, R. W. & Bär, M. Reentry and ectopic pacemakers emerge in a three-dimensional model for a slab of cardiac 
tissue with diffuse microfibrosis near the percolation threshold. PLoS one 11, e0166972 (2016).

 28. Spach, M. S., Dolber, P. C. & Heidlage, J. F. Influence of the passive anisotropic properties on directional differences in propagation 
following modification of the sodium conductance in human atrial muscle. a model of reentry based on anisotropic discontinuous 
propagation. Circ. Res. 62, 811–832 (1988).

 29. Campos, F. O. et al. Electroanatomical characterization of atrial microfibrosis in a histologically detailed computer model. IEEE 
Transactions on Biomed. Eng. 60, 2339–2349 (2013).

 30. Zimik, S., Nayak, A. R. & Pandit, R. A computational study of the factors influencing the pvc-triggering ability of a cluster of early 
afterdepolarization-capable myocytes. PloS one 10, e0144979 (2015).

 31.  Sridhar, S., Vandersickel, N. & Panfilov, A. V. Effect of myocyte-fibroblast coupling on the onset of pathological dynamics in a model 
of ventricular tissue. Sci. reports 7 (2017).

 32. De Jong, S., van Veen, T. A., van Rijen, H. V. & de Bakker, J. M. Fibrosis and cardiac arrhythmias. Journal of cardiovascular 
pharmacology 57, 630–638 (2011).

 33. Silver, M. A. et al. Reactive and reparative fibrillar collagen remodelling in the hypertrophied rat left ventricle: two experimental 
models of myocardial fibrosis. Cardiovasc. research 24, 741–747 (1990).

 34. Ichikawa, Y. et al. Late gadolinium-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging in acute and chronic myocardial infarction: Improved 
prediction of regional myocardial contraction in the chronic state by measuring thickness of nonenhanced myocardium. J. Am. Coll. 
Cardiol. 45, 901–909 (2005).

 35. Sachetto Oliveira, R. et al. Performance evaluation of gpu parallelization, space-time adaptive algorithms, and their combination for 
simulating cardiac electrophysiology. Int. J. for Numer. Methods Biomed. Eng. e2913–n/a 34(2) (2018).

 36. Janse, M. J. et al. The “border zone” in myocardial ischemia. an electrophysiological, metabolic, and histochemical correlation in the 
pig heart. Circ. Res. 44, 576–588 (1979).

 37. Smith, R. M., Black, A. J., Velamakanni, S. S., Akkin, T. & Tolkacheva, E. G. Visualizing the complex 3d geometry of the perfusion 
border zone in isolated rabbit heart. Appl. optics 51, 2713–2721 (2012).

 38. Ten Tusscher, K. & Panfilov, A. Cell model for efficient simulation of wave propagation in human ventricular tissue under normal 
and pathological conditions. Phys. medicine biology 51, 6141 (2006).

 39. Ten Tusscher, K., Noble, D., Noble, P. & Panfilov, A. V. A model for human ventricular tissue. Am. J. Physiol. Circ. Physiol. 286, 
H1573–H1589 (2004).

 40. Shaw, R. M. & Rudy, Y. Electrophysiologic effects of acute myocardial ischemia: a theoretical study of altered cell excitability and 
action potential duration. Cardiovasc. Res. 35, 256–272 (1997).

 41. Campos, F. O. et al. Influence of ischemic core muscle fibers on surface depolarization potentials in superfused cardiac tissue 
preparations: A simulation study. Med. Biol. Eng. Comput. 50, 461–472, https://doi.org/10.1007/s11517-012-0880-1 (2012).

 42. Kazbanov, I. V. et al. Effect of global cardiac ischemia on human ventricular fibrillation: insights from a multi-scale mechanistic 
model of the human heart. PLoS computational biology 10, e1003891 (2014).

 43. Abbasi, M. & Clayton, R. A comparison of two models of human ventricular tissue: Simulated ischaemia and re-entry. In Computing 
in Cardiology Conference (CinC), 2013, 385–388 (IEEE, 2013).

 44. Dutta, S., Mincholé, A., Quinn, T. A. & Rodriguez, B. Electrophysiological properties of computational human ventricular cell action 
potential models under acute ischemic conditions. Prog. biophysics molecular biology 129, 40–52 (2017).

 45. Nguyen, T. P., Qu, Z. & Weiss, J. N. Cardiac fibrosis and arrhythmogenesis: the road to repair is paved with perils. J. Mol. Cell. 
Cardiol. 70, 83–91 (2014).

 46. McDowell, K. S. et al. Mechanistic inquiry into the role of tissue remodeling in fibrotic lesions in human atrial fibrillation. Biophys. 
journal 104, 2764–2773 (2013).

 47. Dos Santos, R. W. et al. ATX-II effects on the apparent location of m cells in a computational model of a human left ventricular 
wedge. J. cardiovascular electrophysiology 17 (2006).

 48. Dhein, S. et al. Remodeling of cardiac passive electrical properties and susceptibility to ventricular and atrial arrhythmias. Front. 
physiology 5 (2014).

 49. Pashaei, A., Romero, D., Sebastian, R., Camara, O. & Frangi, A. F. Fast multiscale modeling of cardiac electrophysiology including 
purkinje system. IEEE Transactions on Biomed. Eng 58, 2956–2960, https://doi.org/10.1109/TBME.2011.2162841 (2011).

 50. Dutta, S. et al. Early afterdepolarizations promote transmural reentry in ischemic human ventricles with reduced repolarization 
reserve. Prog. biophysics molecular biology 120, 236–248 (2016).

 51. Said, M. et al. Increased intracellular ca2+ and sr ca2+ load contribute to arrhythmias after acidosis in rat heart. role of ca2+/
calmodulin-dependent protein kinase ii. Am. J. Physiol. Circ. Physiol. 295, H1669–H1683, https://doi.org/10.1152/ajpheart.00010. 
2008 (2008).

 52. Lascano, E. C. et al. Role of camkii in post acidosis arrhythmias: A simulation study using a human myocyte model. J. Mol. Cell. 
Cardiol. 60, 172–183, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.yjmcc.2013.04.018 (2013).

 53. Bai, J., Yin, R., Wang, K. & Zhang, H. Mechanisms underlying the emergence of post-acidosis arrhythmia at the tissue level: A 
theoretical study. Front. Physiol. 8, 195, https://doi.org/10.3389/fphys.2017.00195 (2017).

 54. Campos, F. O., Shiferaw, Y., Weber dos Santos, R., Plank, G. & Bishop, M. J. Microscopic isthmuses and fibrosis within the border 
zone of infarcted hearts promote calcium-mediated ectopy and conduction block. Front. Phys. 6, 57, https://doi.org/10.3389/
fphy.2018.00057 (2018).

 55. Anter, E., Tschabrunn, C. M., Buxton, A. E. & Josephson, M. E. High-resolution mapping of post-infarction reentrant ventricular 
tachycardia: electrophysiological characterization of the circuit. Circ. Circulationaha–116 (2016).

 56. Roes, S. D. et al. Comparison of myocardial infarct size assessed with contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging and left 
ventricular function and volumes to predict mortality in patients with healed myocardial infarction. The Am. journal cardiology 100, 
930–936 (2007).

 57. Cabo, C. & Boyden, P. A. Heterogeneous gap junction remodeling stabilizes reentrant circuits in the epicardial border zone of the 
healing canine infarct: a computational study. Am. J. Physiol. Circ. Physiol. 291, H2606–H2616 (2006).

http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11517-012-0880-1
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TBME.2011.2162841
http://dx.doi.org/10.1152/ajpheart.00010.2008
http://dx.doi.org/10.1152/ajpheart.00010.2008
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.yjmcc.2013.04.018
http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/fphys.2017.00195
http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/fphy.2018.00057
http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/fphy.2018.00057


www.nature.com/scientificreports/

1 4SCIEntIFIC REPORtS |         (2018) 8:16392  | DOI:10.1038/s41598-018-34304-y

 58. Ulysses, J. et al. An optimization-based algorithm for the construction of cardiac purkinje network models. IEEE Transactions on 
Biomed. Eng. 1–12, https://doi.org/10.1109/TBME.2018.2815504 (2018).

 59. Peichl, P. et al. Catheter ablation of arrhythmic storm triggered by monomorphic ectopic beats in patients with coronary artery 
disease. J. of interventional cardiac electrophysiology 27, 51–59 (2010).

 60. Di Biase, L. et al. Ablation of stable VTs versus substrate ablation in ischemic cardiomyopathy: the vista randomized multicenter 
trial. J. Am. Coll. Cardiol. 66, 2872–2882 (2015).

 61. Koutalas, E. et al. Contemporary mapping techniques of complex cardiac arrhythmias–identifying and modifying the 
arrhythmogenic substrate. Arrhythmia & electrophysiology review 4, 19 (2015).

 62. Graham, A. J., Orini, M. & Lambiase, P. D. Limitations and challenges in mapping ventricular tachycardia: New technologies and 
future directions. Arrhythmia & electrophysiology review 6, 118 (2017).

 63. Ideker, R. E. et al. Can mapping differentiate microreentry from a focus in the ventricle? Hear. rhythm: official journal Hear. Rhythm. 
Soc. 6, 1666 (2009).

 64. Punshchykova, O., Svehlikova, J., Kneppo, P., Maksymenko, V. & Tysler, M. Noninvasive localization of the ectopic focus using time 
integral ecg mapping. Exp. Clin. Cardiol. 20, 1564–1570 (2014).

Acknowledgements
We acknowledge support from CAPES, grant 88881.065002/2014-01 of the Brazilian program science without 
borders, from MINECO of Spain under the Ramon y Cajal program with grant RYC-2012-11265 and from 
SMART (Systems Medicine of Heart Failure) project, Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF), grant 
031A427A. We also thank UFJF, UFSJ, FAPEMIG, CNPq and FINEP.

Author Contributions
R.S., S.A. and R.W. conceived the numerical experiments, F.O., J.F., B.M. and T.K. contributed on the generation 
of the patient-specific heart models, R.S., and B.M. generated the meshes, R.S. conducted the numerical 
experiments, R.S., S.A. and R.W. analyzed the results, All authors reviewed the manuscript.

Additional Information
Supplementary information accompanies this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-34304-y.
Competing Interests: The authors declare no competing interests.
Publisher’s note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.

Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International 
License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or 

format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Cre-
ative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this 
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the 
material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not per-
mitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the 
copyright holder. To view a copy of this license, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
 
© The Author(s) 2018

http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TBME.2018.2815504
http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-34304-y
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/

	Ectopic beats arise from micro-reentries near infarct regions in simulations of a patient-specific heart model
	Methods
	Generation of a patient-specific heart model based on cardiac MR imaging. 
	Patient Data. 
	Image Segmentation. 

	Electrophysiology modeling. 
	Cardiac myocyte modeling under normal and ischemic conditions. 
	Modeling Action Potential propagation on heterogeneous cardiac tissue. 
	Numerical Methods. 

	Micro-reentry mechanism. 
	Monte Carlo simulations. 
	Biventricular patient-specific simulations. 

	Results
	Wedge simulations. 
	Biventricular simulations. 

	Discussion
	The trigger. 
	Biological uncertainties and complexity. 
	Reentry patterns. 
	Simple model but complex relations. 
	A new protocol, its limitations and future works. 
	A promising tool for the planning of clinical interventions. 

	Conclusion
	Acknowledgements
	Figure 1 Segmented MR image.
	Figure 2 Dependence of the AP waveforms, obtained with the modified TT3 model, on the parameter [ATPi] to characterize the degree of hypoxia.
	Figure 3 A schematic representation of the micro-reentry mechanism.
	Figure 4 Two simulations on a thin slab of tissue with diffuse fibrosis.
	Figure 5 Left ventricular wedges (Wedge 1 and Wedge 2) highlighting the infarct region (in white), peri-infarct zone (in red), and normal tissue (in blue).
	Figure 6 Visualization of the transmembrane potential of one of the simulations performed during Monte Carlo analysis using the ventricular wedge containing a large scar.
	Figure 7 Visualization of the transmembrane potential of one of the simulations performed during Monte Carlo analysis using the ventricular wedge containing the small scar.
	Figure 8 Results obtained from Monte Carlo simulations of the ventricular wedges by varying the percentage of fibrosis, (φ), and the degree of ischemia in the infarct region ([ATPi]).
	Figure 9 Visualization of the transmembrane potential of one of the simulations performed using the biventricular patient-specific mesh (to facilitate the visualization only half of the ventricles is shown in the figure).




