

















































ELGRA Newsletter 2016


ESA education 27

Leguy C.1∗, González-Cinca R.2, Lockowandt Ch.3,
1Division Space Physiology, German Aerospace Institute, Linder
Hoehe 1, D-51147 Cologne, Germany,
2Department of Applied Physics Universitat Politècnica de
Catalunya-BarcelonaTech Ed. C3, c/ E. Terradas, 5, 08860
Castelldefels (Barcelona), Spain,
3Science Services Division, Swedish Space Corporation, Solna
strandväg 86, SE-171 04 Solna, Sweden
The cooperation between ELGRA and ESA education office on stu-
dent hand-on projects have been successfully expended with the
new edition of the program Fly Your Thesis that completes the two
other student programs Spin Your Thesis and Drop Your Thesis
offered by ESA education office.

ELGRA have during these last years supported ESA education
office in the selection of student teams and by offering the support
of ELGRA mentors who are providing the student group with ex-
pertise in the field of gravity research over the entire duration of
their project.

These programs have allowed many students from all over Eu-
rope to discover gravity research using ground based facilities as
the large diameter centrifuge (LDC, ESA ESTEC centre, NL) for
Spin Your Thesis, a 146 meter Drop Tower at ZARM (Bremen, DE)
for Drop Your Thesis and parabolic flight for Fly Your Thesis.

Students during parabolic flight during the Fly Your Thesis
2016 campaign (Photo credit: ESA).

Spin Your Thesis
In October 2016, two enthusiastic student teams have launched
their experiment at ZARM. STAR team, from University of Padova,
tested a mechanism to deploy and retrieve a filamentous tether,
whilst the Break Team from Queen Mary University of London and
University of Seville investigated the break-up of colloidal liquids.

Drop Your Thesis
In October 2016, two enthusiastic student teams have launched
their experiment at ZARM. STAR team, from University of Padova,
tested a mechanism to deploy and retrieve a filamentous tether,
whilst the Break Team from Queen Mary University of London and
University of Seville investigated the break-up of colloidal liquids.

Preparing a syringe for hypergravity droplet generation (Photo
credit: ESA).

Fly your thesis 2016
In November 2016, four teams of university students conducted
their experiments during the 65th ESA parabolic flight campaign,
this project will remain for them an extraordinary experience. The
TEPiM team from the Universidad Politécnica de Madrid (UPM)
in Spain studied the melting process of Phase Change Materials
in weightlessness conditions. The CFVib team, also from UPM,
investigated the behaviour of fluids subjected to high frequency low
amplitude vibrations. The Italian team PoliTethers from Politecnico
di Milano tested the control dynamics and algorithms for tether-
based systems, in view of possible future applications to tow space
debris to be deorbited, and the team from the Universitöt Duisburg-
Essen in Germany, Anemoi4 examined the wind speeds needed to
lift dust in an Martian-like atmosphere.

Outlook
We are now looking forwards reading about the students’ exiting
findings that should been soon reported. In the meanwhile, we have
been working on the selection of new motivated students for the
new edition of these three programs which are already planned for
2017.



28 ESA education

For more information, please visit ESA education office website:
http://www.esa.int/Education/Fly_Your_Thesis

http://www.esa.int/Education/Drop_Your_Thesis
http://www.esa.int/Education/Spin_Your_Thesis

Fly Your Thesis 2016 selection workshop in The Hague (NL) with the contribution of ELGRA’s general secretary Dr. Carole Leguy
(Photo: ESA).

Promotiing ELGRA in Portugal (Photo: Dr. Carole Leguy).

http://www.elgra.org
http://www.elgra.org
http://www.elgra.org

