












































Calcium alternans is a global order-disorder phase transition. Robustness on
Ryanodine Receptor release dynamics

Enrique Alvarez-Lacalle 1, Angelina Peñaranda1, Inmaculada R. Cantalapiedra 1, Yohannes
Shiferaw2, Blas Echebarria 1

1 Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya, UPC, Spain
2 California State University-Northridge (CSUN), Los Angeles, United States

Abstract

Electromechanical alternans is a beat-to-beat alterna-
tion in the strength of contraction of a cardiac cell which
appears often due to an instability of calcium cycling. The
global calcium signal in cardiomyocytes is the result of the
combined effect of several thousand micron scale domains
called Calcium Release Units (CaRU), coupled through
diffusion, where the flow of calcium among different cell
compartments is regulated by stochastic signaling involv-
ing the ryanodine receptor (RyR). Recently, numerical sim-
ulations have suggested that the transition from regular Ca
cycling to alternans is an order-disorder phase transition
consistent with the Ising universality class. Inside the cell,
groups of CaRU form transient areas within the cell where
alternans appear. However, global alternans appears only
as a result of the synchronization of the oscillation phase
among different subunits. We show here that this transi-
tion is indeed robust and universal upon changes in the
behavior of the RyR. Using three different set of parame-
ters for the transition rates among open, closed and inacti-
vated states in the RyR, we show that different RyR behav-
ior leads to the same type of order-disorder transition.

1. Introduction

Cardiac patients diagnosed with T-wave alternans, a
beat-to-beat alternation in the shape of the electrocardio-
gram (ECG), are known to be at a higher risk of suffering
from life threatening arrhythmias [1–3]. This beat-to-beat
alternation in the strength of contraction of a cardiac cell
is related either to a dysregulation of membrane voltage
or, most commonly, to an instability of calcium (Ca) cy-
cling dynamics in cardiac myocytes. When a cardiac cell is
rapidly paced by a periodic stimulus it is known to exhibit
complex aperiodic dynamics of both voltage and calcium.
The most commonly observed behavior is the phenomenon
of alternans where the action potential duration (APD) and
Ca transient of a cardiac cell alternates from one beat to

the next [2, 4, 5] . Earlier work showed that cellular al-
ternans could arise from a period-doubling bifurcation as-
sociated to the nonlinear kinetics of ion channels regulat-
ing the membrane potential. However, later experimental
studies revealed that alternans may also appear due to an
instability of Ca cycling independently of the dynamics of
membrane voltage [3, 6], thus stressing the important role
of subcellular Ca signaling.

Calcium cycling is an intracellular process regulated by 
several thousand micron scale domains, referred to as Ca 
release units (CaRUs), where the flow of calcium in and 
out of the cell is regulated by stochastic signaling [7]. 
While an average (or mean field) description of intracellu-
lar calcium alternans leads naturally to a period doubling 
bifurcation when the pacing period is decreased, the under-
lying stochasticity of its multiple subcellular domains sug-
gests a more complex behavior close to the transition point. 
An approach based on an average description focuses on 
the effects and causes of the nonlinear release, either by 
strong dependency of calcium release on SR load, or RyR 
recovery from inactivation [8]. On the contrary, an analysis 
of the local stochastic Ca dynamics focuses on the combi-
nation of stochasticity of Ca signaling and nearest neighbor 
interactions as sources of calcium alternans [7, 9]. In this 
line, theoretical studies of Ca dynamics have attributed 
alternans to the combination of the underlying 
stochasticity of Ca signaling and the regenerative 
recruitment of Ca release due to nearest neighbor 
interactions [10], suggesting that Ca alternans is a direct 
consequence of the collective behavior of the thousands 
of signaling complexes in the cell.

Recently, a detailed model of stochastic Ca cycling
showed that the transition from regular Ca cycling to alter-
nans occurs via an order-disorder phase transition consis-
tent with the Ising universality class [11]. This transition
follows from the described features of the Ca cycling ar-
chitecture, specially the coupling between signaling units
due to Ca diffusion. Calcium signalling exhibits features
that can be described using equilibrium statistical mechan-

329ISSN 2325-8861 Computing in Cardiology 2015; 42:329-332.

blas
Sticky Note
Marked set by blas

blas
Sticky Note
Marked set by blas



ics, where stochasticity at the ion channel level serves the
role of temperature, while cellular diffusion leads to spatial
cooperativity.

A consequence of this understanding of calcium alter-
nans is that the appearance and nature of alternans must be
similar even under very different local calcium dynamics
as long as the local stochastic dynamics presents a strong
non-linearity in the probability of calcium release upon
some local variable of the CaRU in the release unit. Thus,
very different RyR behavior can lead to the same transition
as long as this nonlinearity is present. In this paper, we re-
port that three different scenarios for the functioning of the
RyR at the local level lead, all of them, to the same kind of
order-disorder transition presented in previous works.

2. Materials and methods

We model a Z-plane of the cell as a two dimensional
(2D) network of diffusively coupled compartments using
the same equations and parameters indicated in the sup-
plement material of [11] except for the transition rates of
the RyR and a 20 % reduction of the exchanger strength
to obtain alternans at pacing of 4 Hz. This model cap-
tures the local signal transduction via a direct simulation
of 5 LCC channels in close proximity with 70 RyR chan-
nels in each CaRU. Each channel is modeled by simulating
the stochastic channel transitions between states of experi-
mentally derived Markovian schemes [See Fig. 1 ]. These
junctions are coupled via diffusive currents in the cytosol
and SR and buffers are added in the cytosol but not in the
SR. To study the dynamics of Ca cycling we pace a L×
L array of signaling units using an action potential (AP)
clamp. The numerical scheme makes use of a propagator
and slaving procedure which prevents the numerical spuri-
ous generation or elimination of calcium due to numerical
artifacts guaranteeing that calcium is globally conserved.

3. Review of the different RyR behavior
scenarios

The ryanodine receptor is organized in clusters, (to-
gether with the LCC) the core of the Calcuim Release Unit.
The opening of RyRs allows the calcium flow from the SR
to the dyadic space. Besides the open configuration, the
Ryanodine Receptor is known to have at least a closed state
ready to open and an inactivated state. The different behav-
ior of the RyR can be understood in terms of at least four
different states as seen in Fig 1. The transition rates fix the
general behavior of the receptor. It is generally agreed that
the opening rateKa depends nonlinearly on the concentra-
tion of dyadic calcium itself. Calcium induces the release
of calcium (CICR), normally considering a quadratic co-
operativity Ka = ko(cd/Kcd)2 where cd is the concentra-
tion of calcium in the dyadic space in the proximity of the

RyR cluster and Kcd ' 100 µM.

Figure 1. The 4-state RyR model . Changing the expres-
sion and the parameters of the transition rates from close
(C) to open (O) Ka, and from activated (C+O) towards in-
activated (RI + I) Ki , τ , one sets the different behavior
scenarios for the Ryanodine Receptor, specially changing
τ which fixes the recovery time from inactivation.

Besides that, different scenarios of how the RyR works
have been proposed. Under a classic scenario the inactiva-
tion and recovery from inactivation rates are on the scale of
ms, leading to a rapid equilibium between the inactivated
and activated states. We define this as the first scenario.
It corresponds to the parameters indicated as set I in the
table. This case was studied in [11] and has been shown
to generate calcium alternans based on a highly nonlinear
dependence of release on SR load. This appears due to the
dependence of the release flux from the SR on SR load.
A larger flux increases the dyadic calcium concentration
that, in turn, opens the RyR, boosting even further SR Ca
release.

1+x

In this paper, we address if other possible scenarios 
of the RyR lead to the same kind of transitions. Some 
authors have suggested (see [8] and references therein) 
that the RyR has a rather slow recovery from inactivation. 
Equilibration time between inactivated and closed states 
is comparable with the heart pacing rate. Inactivation in 
this scenario is normally considered to be dependent on 
calcium concentration Ki = ki(cd/Kcd) with very low 
inactivation for pre-systolic calcium concentration of 0.1 
µ M but linearly increasing as dyadic calcium increases. 
This produces a self-inactivation of the RyR which is de-
pendent on the strength of the calcium released. We de-
fine this as a second scenario using set II of parameters 
in the table. Finally, opening rates and inactivation rates 
may depend on calsequestrin concentration, making it di-
rectly dependent on SR load. Although this dependence 
is not needed to generate alternans with alternation in SR 
content, the following opening rate has been proposed 
Ka = koG(cjSR)c2d together with Ki = ki/G(cjSR)cd
where the function G is sigmoid [12]. In this paper, we 
use G(x) = 10+x2

2 
with x = cjSR/400 (µM), as an exam-

ple of this dependence (together with set III parameters).

330

blas
Sticky Note
Marked set by blas

blas
Sticky Note
Marked set by blas

blas
Sticky Note
Marked set by blas

blas
Sticky Note
Marked set by blas

blas
Sticky Note
Marked set by blas



Table 1. Three different set of RyR2 transition rates used
to test the universality of the calcium alternans transition.

RyR parameters Set I Set II Set III
Opening strength ko ms−1 2.1 2 0.2
Inactivation strength ki ms−1 0.2 0.02 0.2
Recovery time τ ms 1 400 400

4. Results

We find global alternans using the new set of parame-
ters (II and III). Figure 2 shows global alternans in a fully 
stochastic model of calcium signaling where recovery from 
inactivation is slow. In Figure 2 the second set of param-
eters of the tables is used but similar results are obtained 
using the third set. Figure 2 shows alternation both in SR 
pre-systolic content and in the level of recovered RyRs. 
This reproduces the results obtained in analyzing this type 
of dynamics in whole-cell models. The graphs of Figure 
2 also show how the ratio of inactivated versus activated 
states is not at equilibrium at the millisecond scale,i.e. it is 
not constant but presents a periodic dynamics linked to the 
pacing rate. More important, alternans are clearly global in 
nature and stochastic at the CaRU level, as clearly demon-
strated in Figure 2 (right). On top, the average concentra-
tion of dyadic calcium presents clear and consistent alter-
nans. A large transient alternates with a small transient. 
However, the three examples of the dyadic calcium con-
centration at the single CaRU level shows that there is no 
local persistent alternation. The release is locally stochas-
tic, some beats present release and others do not. However, 
the coordination of a large amount of units makes that, at 
each beat, a majority of them release (strong beat) or not 
release it (weak beat).

This is more clearly seen in Figure 3. We depict the dif-
ferent domains in a rather large cell of 200 by 200 units 
in a Z-plane. We compute at each unit the difference be-
tween the load of the junctional SR at the local level in 
one beat and subtract the value of this level at the previ-
ous beat. The strength of alternans is proportional to the 
difference in those to levels. However, this difference can 
be either positive or negative at a given beat. We code this 
difference going from red (strong sign positive alternans) 
to blue (strong sign negative alternans). The four different 
representations in Figure 3 correspond to simulations done 
at different pacing rates. We reproduce the same domain 
structure observed in [11]. The system presents areas with 
alternans in phase which do not lead to global alternans 
because different areas have different phases. The signa-
ture of these domains resembles the transitions observed 
in the Ising model. Although we have not cheked that the 
critical exponents are the same, the transition is clearly an

Figure 2. Using the first RyR set of parameters. On the
left, from top to bottom, the average cytosolic and SR cal-
cium concentrations showing alternans. Below, the ratio of
RyR in the closed state (C), open state (O) and inactivated
(RI plus I) . On the right, the average dyadic concentration
on top. Below three examples of the dyadic concentration
in three CaRU units in the cell. Global avarage arises from
a coordination of partial domains of CaRUs. Each unit re-
leases calcium stochastically.

order-disorder phase transition.
Another check of the nature of the order-disorder tran-

sition can be made testing if an order parameter presents 
the system size dependence expected in this type of transi-
tions. We have performed simulation for system sizes 40 
by 40 and 80 by 80 and computed the time average of the 
order parameter m, representing the global phase of oscil-
lation. This parameter is defined locally at release unit i 
and beat n as mi(n) = sign[(−1)n(cijSR(n) − c

i
jSR(n − 

1))]. Computing first the spatial average at beat n, taking 
its square value and then averaging over n beats we ob-
tain < m2 > as a function of pacing rate. Figure 4 shows 
that it is clearly dependent of system size for the sets of 
parameters II and III. Notice however, how alternans us-
ing the third set of parameters is less spatially coordinated. 
It does not reach the level of full spatial ordering at pac-
ing rates close to the bifurcation. We have found that in-
troducing the SR dependence has a tendency to weaken 
the presence and strength of alternans. We have found pa-
rameters, for example strenghtening the NaCa ex-changer, 
where the third set of parameters does not present alternans 
while the first does. Contrary to intuition, direct SR depen-
dence does not seem to help the presence of alternans due 
to SR nonlinearities.

In conclusion, we have found alternans as an order-
disorder phase-transition which coordinates local stochas-
tic elements in three very different RyR behaviors. Con-
sequently, we have found alternans where both the pre-

331

blas
Sticky Note
Marked set by blas

blas
Sticky Note
Marked set by blas

blas
Sticky Note
Marked set by blas

blas
Sticky Note
Marked set by blas

blas
Sticky Note
Marked set by blas

blas
Sticky Note
Marked set by blas



Figure 3. A map showing how different alternans domains
form in a 200 by 200 CaRU Z-plane at different pacing
rates using the second set of parameters for the RyR. We
measure the presystolic calcium load in one beat and sub-
tract the same value of the previous beat. The color code
is saturated in blue or red at absolute differences of 150
µ M. The pacing periods used in these graphs are, from
left to right and up to bottom, 240, 260, 280 and 320 ms.
Domains are already present but are not coordinated and
global alternans are not present.

systolic calcium load and the level of recovered RyR alter-
nate. This demonstrates that the general picture developed 
in [11] holds. Alternans needs two key ingredients. First, 
a nonlinear local release probability and, second, coupling 
via diffusion. The particulars of the local non-linear be-
havior do not seem to affect the characteristics of the 
transition, as one would expect given the universal features 
of an order-disorder transition.

Acknowledgements

This work was supported by the Secretaria de Estado
de Investigación, Desarrollo e Innovación (Spain), under
grants FIS2011-28820-C02-01, SAF2014-58286-C2-2-R
and the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute grant
RO1HL101196.

References

[1] Amit G, Rosenbaum DS, Super DM, Costantini O. Micro-
volt T-wave alternans and electrophysiologic testing predict
distinct arrhythmia substrates: implications for identifying
patients at risk for sudden cardiac death. Heart Rhythm
2010 7(6):763-768.

[2] Weiss JN, Qu Z, Chen PS, Lin SF, Karagueuzian HS,
Hayashi H, Garfinkel A, Karma A. The dynamics of car-
diac fibrillation. Circulation 2005 112(8):1232-1240.

Figure 4. Order parameter of the transition as a function
of the pacing period for two different set of RyR param-
eters. Set II was used on the left and set III on the right.
We compute the order parameter for two different system
sizes, 40 by 40 (blue) and a 80 by 80 (green) Z-planes af-
ter 20000 beats. The larger the system size, the steeper the
transition becomes, a signature of system size dependence.
The continuous line is a polynomial fit, guide to the eye

[3] Restrepo JG, Weiss JN, Karma A. Calsequestrin-mediated
mechanism for cellular calcium transient alternans. Bio-
physical Journal 2008 95: 37673789.

[4] Clusin WT Calcium and cardiac arrhythmias: DADs,
EADs, and alternans. Crit Rev Clin Lab Sci 2003
40(3):337-375.

[5] Weiss JN, Karma A, Shiferaw Y, Chen PS, Garfinkel A, Qu
Z. From pulsus to pulseless: the saga of cardiac alternans.
Circulation research 2006 98(10):1244-1253.

[6] Chudin E, Goldhaber J, Garfinkel A, Weiss J, Kogan B. In-
tracellular Ca(2+) dynamics and the stability of ventricular
tachycardia. Biophysical Journal 1999 77(6):2930-2941.

[7] Restrepo JG, Karma. A Spatiotemporal intracellular cal-
cium dynamics during cardiac alternans. Chaos 2009
19(3):037115.

[8] Alvarez-Lacalle E, Cantalapiedra IR, Peñaranda A, Cinca 
J, Hove-Madsen L, Echebarria B. Dependency of Calcium 
Al-ternans on Ryanodine Receptor Refractoriness. PLoS 
One 2013 8 (2), e55042

[9] Qu Z, Nivala M, Weiss JN Calcium alternans in cardiac my-
ocytes: order from disorder. Journal of molecular and cel-
lular cardiology 2013 58:100-109.

[10] Rovetti R, Cui X, Garfinkel A, Weiss JN, Qu Z Spark-
induced sparks as a mechanism of intracellular calcium
alternans in cardiac myocytes. Circulation research 2010
106(10):1582-1591.

[11] Alvarez-Lacalle E, Echebarria B, Spalding J, Shiferaw Y.
Calcium Alternans is Due to an Order-Disorder Phase Tran-
sition in Cardiac Cells. Physical Review Letters 2015 
114 (10), 108101

[12] Shannon TR, Wang F, Puglisi J, Weber C, Bers DM.
A mathematical treatment of integrated Ca dynamics 
within the ventricular myocyte. Biophysical Journal 
2004 87(5):3351-71.

Address for correspondence:
enric.alvarez@upc.edu

332

blas
Sticky Note
Marked set by blas

blas
Sticky Note
Marked set by blas

blas
Sticky Note
Marked set by blas

blas
Sticky Note
Marked set by blas

blas
Sticky Note
Marked set by blas

blas
Sticky Note
Marked set by blas

blas
Sticky Note
Marked set by blas

blas
Sticky Note
Marked set by blas

blas
Sticky Note
Marked set by blas

blas
Sticky Note
Marked set by blas

blas
Sticky Note
Marked set by blas

blas
Sticky Note
Marked set by blas

blas
Sticky Note
Marked set by blas

blas
Sticky Note
Marked set by blas

blas
Sticky Note
Marked set by blas




