







































Ramirez-Sancho-EPJB-resub-sin_boldface.dvi


EPJ manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)

Physical properties of voltage gated pores

L. Ramı́rez–Piscina1 and J.M. Sancho2

1 Departament de F́ısica, Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya, Avinguda Doctor Marañón 44, E-08028 Barcelona, Spain
2 Departament de F́ısica de la Matèria Condensada, Universitat de Barcelona, Universitat de Barcelona Institute of Complex
Systems (UBICS), Mart́ı i Franqués 1, 08028 Barcelona, Spain

March 8, 2018

Abstract. Experiments on single ionic channels have contributed to a large extent to our current view on
the function of cell membrane. In these experiments the main observables are the physical quantities: ionic
concentration, membrane electrostatic potential and ionic fluxes, all of them presenting large fluctuations.
The classical theory of Goldman–Hodking–Katz assumes that an open channel can be well described by
a physical pore where ions follow statistical physics. Nevertheless real molecular channels are active pores
with open and close dynamical states. By skipping the molecular complexity of real channels, here we
present the internal structure and calibration of two active pore models. These models present a minimum
set of degrees of freedom, specifically ion positions and gate states, which follow Langevin equations
constructed from an unique potential energy functional and by using standard rules of statistical physics.
Numerical simulations of both models are implemented and the results show that they have dynamical
properties very close to those observed in experiments of Na and K molecular channels. In particular a
significant effect of the external ion concentration on gating dynamics is predicted, which is consistent
with previous experimental observations. This approach can be extended to other channel types with
more specific phenomenology.

PACS. PACS-05.10.Gg Stochastic analysis methods (Fokker-Planck, Langevin, etc.) – 87.15.A Theory,
modeling, and computer simulation

1 Introduction

Ionic transport across the cell membrane is a very com-
mon process in all cells. In most situations the transport
is done by very specific pores called molecular channels.
These devices are embedded into lipid membranes and op-
erate between different ionic concentrations at both sides,
and subjected to the membrane voltage. Molecular chan-
nels are not passive pores but they have internal struc-
tures (gates) that present conformational states such as
open and close configurations. When the channel is in the
open state it allows the flux of charges driven by the ionic
density gradient and the membrane electrostatic poten-
tial. This flux can modify also this potential. Moreover the
whole process is very selective: only a particular ion can
cross a specific channel. In the close state no flux of ions
is in principle allowed, except for some small leak. The
transitions between these two conformational states are
controlled by the membrane potential and thermal fluctu-
ations.

The synchronized dynamics of a large number of such
channels of several types, coupled to the ionic concen-
trations at both sides of the cellular membrane, provides
mechanisms for action potentials in neurons, cardiac cells,
etc [1–3]. Beyond the study of the conductivity properties
of the membrane (i.e. resulting from a large number of

channels), experiments performed on single channels have
provided a good deal of information on the gating dy-
namics of individual channels [2]. Such experiments have
shown that, in addition to the inherent randomness of the
gate open-close dynamics, there are also very strong fluc-
tuations in the charge flux.

The biochemical structure of a molecular channel is
quite complex at the molecular level. From the physical
point of view the relevant observables of a channel are
the ionic concentrations, the membrane electrostatic po-
tential, and the ionic fluxes. Here we will address the dy-
namics of these observables by modeling the channel as a
simple active pore, with a reduced set of observables ful-
filling known physical laws and consistently incorporating
thermal fluctuations.

Most theoretical modelings follow the Hodking-Huxley
approach [4] for the dynamics of membrane permeabil-
ity. Fluctuations have been incorporated by using either
Langevin or master equations [5–9]. In previous publica-
tions, a semi-microscopic Langevin modelization was used
to show the excitable properties of a single pore mimick-
ing a Na channel in the presence of a leak of K ions [10],
and the periodic firing of a pair of Na, K–like active pores
[11]. In this approach all microscopic relevant variables
(a reduced set of degrees of freedom) follow stochastic



2 L. Ramı́rez–Piscina, J.M. Sancho: Physical properties of voltage gated pores

(Langevin) dynamical equations according to very gen-
eral principles of statistical physics. The main aim is to
use only the necessary physical mechanisms involved, and
to obtain their effects by using standard physical laws ap-
plied in a consistent way. Additional biological complexity
would indeed be necessary to explain more specific phys-
iological features, but it is here stripped away in order
to identify the essential elements for explaining the basic
channel gating phenomenology observed in experiments.

By using this approach we will study in detail the
stochastic dynamics of two different pore models. Although
we will reduce the elements of the modeling to the mini-
mum necessary to account for the behavior of single chan-
nels, we will show that the dynamics do present the behav-
ior observed in Na and K channel experiments. Moreover
the physical consistency of the model results to be a key
element in such agreement.

The outline of this paper is as follows. In the following
section, we summarize the theoretical structure of the ap-
proach. In the next section we present the calibration and
dynamical properties of two pore models, and its compar-
ison with the available experimental information. Finally
we end with some conclusions and perspectives. The spe-
cific technical details of the approach are presented in the
Appendix.

2 Gating pore models

2.1 Summary of the approach

Our approach [10] follows the path opened by the Goldman–
Hodking–Katz (GHK) equation [12] and the Hodking–
Huxley theory [4]. It is formulated by constructing an en-
ergy functional modeling the interaction between all vari-
ables, over which the application of standard rules of sta-
tistical physics leads to a dynamics described in terms of
Langevin equations. The basic constituents of the model
are the following: (i) the movement of ions can be mod-
eled with Langevin equations; (ii) the gate-ions interaction
appears as the form of a barrier potential, whose height
depends on the state (open or close) of the gate; (iii) the
dynamics of the gate is modeled by a variable following a
Langevin equation with a potential energy that depends
on the membrane potential; and finally (iv) the membrane
potential obeys the physics of a capacitor.

The mechanical variables of the model are the position
of the ions xi (inside the channel domain [0, L]) and the
gate variables Yj , where j indicates the possibility of sev-
eral gates. All the physical information concerning these
variables are incorporated into a single potential:

U(xi, Yj , ∆V ) =
∑

i

Vi(xi, ∆V ) +

∑

j

V (Yj , ∆V ) +
∑

i,j

VI(Yj , xi). (1)

Here the term Vi(xi, ∆V ) (see Eq. A-8) is the potential
energy originated by the membrane potential ∆V on the

ions inside the pore at position xi. This term is responsi-
ble for the physics contained in the GHK equation. The
term V (Yj , ∆V ) (see Eq. A-9) is the potential due to the
membrane potential for the dynamics of the j−gate, rep-
resented by the variable Yj . The last term VI(Yj , xi) (see
Eq. A-10) corresponds to the interaction of i−ions with
the j−gate. See explicit expressions of these terms in the
Appendix. Note that we have neglected ion-ion interac-
tions inside the pore, according with the hypotheses be-
hind the GHK equation. Such interactions could straight-
forwardly be implemented into the approach if more quan-
titative results were required.

According to this energy functional, the dynamics for
the physical variables xi, Yj is given by the following set
of Langevin equations:

γxẋi = −∂xiU(xi, Yj , ∆V ) + ξi(t), (2)

γYj Ẏj = −∂YjU(xi, Yj , ∆V ) + ξYj (t), (3)

where thermal noises fulfill

〈ξa(t)ξb(t
′)〉 = 2γa kBT δa,b δ(t− t

′), (4)

and γa are the corresponding frictions.
We model thus the motion of the ions inside the chan-

nel as a one-dimensional brownian motion, driven by ther-
mal fluctuations, electrostatic potential and the different
ionic concentrations between the two sides of the mem-
brane. Whereas fluctuations and potentials are explicitly
put into the Langevin equations, the ionic concentrations
appear as boundary conditions at both ends of the chan-
nel. Regarding gating, we have assumed that the degree of
freedom Yj behaves as a nonlinear spring with two steady
states: YC ∼ 0 (close) and YO ∼ 1 (open). This hypothesis
is similar to the modeling of the gating currents of Ref.
[13], where gating experiments were correlated to a model
in which a gating variable undergoes Brownian motion in
a one-dimensional diffusion landscape.

These equations are complemented with the capacitor
equation for the dynamics of the membrane potential

CM
d∆V

dt
=

∑

i

Ii, (5)

where CM is the membrane capacity assumed to be con-
stant and the r.h.s term includes all the ionic fluxes either
across the pore, membrane leaks or from an external per-
turbating flux.

The most important feature of this approach is that
all interactions between ions and gates come from the en-
ergy functional of Eq. 1, and hence statistical mechanics
can be applied consistently. In particular the dynamical
equations verify fluctuation-dissipation relations and the
parameters of the model have a clear physical meaning.
Statistical physics consistency is most relevant, since the
main features of the results will not depend on parame-
ter fits. The system is autonomous, and the only source
of energy, apart from an applied electrostatic potential,
is the chemical energy associated with the different ionic
concentration at both sides of the membrane.



L. Ramı́rez–Piscina, J.M. Sancho: Physical properties of voltage gated pores 3

Furthermore the degrees of freedom of the gates are
coupled to those of the brownian motion of ions by means
of the interaction potential VI(Yj , xi). A similar interac-
tion was also considered in Ref. [14] in the study of a Cl
channel. By means of this term the ions see the gate as a
barrier potential. As we will see the fact that the model
is formulated by a single energy functional implies that
interaction between ion and gate is mutual. In particular,
gate dynamics could be affected by the collision with ions,
which will be of capital importance in the results.

2.2 A and B pore models

We will treat two pore models, A and B, representative
of two generic channel families for the Na and K ions.
Regarding the Na permeability, and following notation of
Refs. [4,15], the H–H formulation considers two different
modulated functions m(∆V ) (activating) and h(∆V ) (de-
activating). Accordingly A-type pore will have an acti-
vation gate Y1 and an inactivation gate Y2. B-type pore
will have only one activation gate Y3, corresponding to
the modulating function n as the K channel in the litera-
ture [15]. Results for these two pores will be compared to
available experimental data on Na and K channels. This
theoretical scenario is complemented with the table of pa-
rameter values used to work in the appropriate biological
scale (Table 1). Graphical representation of the gate effec-
tive potentials for both models are shown in Fig. 1.

γA particle friction 2 µs meV/nm
2

γB particle friction 8 µs meV/nm
2

KBT 25 meV
L channel length 4 nm
A channel section 4 nm2

c
A
0 (in), c

A
1 (out) 0.092, 0.5 M

c
B
0 (in), c

B
1 (out) 0.54, 0.075 M

CM effective capacity 1.25 charges/mV

Table 1. Physical parameter values used in the simulations.
Both ions have a positive charge q = +1 e.

3 Results and Discussion

3.1 Pore Gating

A relevant experimental information on the channel gat-
ing is the probability of being open as a function of the
membrane potential, Po(∆V ) [16]. We will evaluate this
probability for both A and B models by performing sim-
ulations of ion fluxes and gating dynamics by using the
Langevin equations 2, 3 for ions and gates at fixed values
of the membrane potential, as it is done experimentally.
The gate parameters have been chosen to exhibit the ex-
perimental gating properties: flux, gating dynamics, time
scales, etc (see Tables 1-2).

0

100

200

(m
V

)

0 1 2 3 4
x  (nm)

0

100

200

(m
V

)

V
I
(Y

1
,x) VI(Y2,x)

A

V
I
(Y

3
,x)B

OUT IN

Fig. 1. Gate potentials for ions corresponding to both channel
models A and B, evaluated for the steady values of closed gates
Y1 = 0.029, Y2 = 0.022 and Y3 = 0.029.

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

P
o 

(A
)

-50 -40 -30 -20
∆V  (mV)

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

P
o 

(B
)

Y
1

Y
2

Y
3

Fig. 2. Voltage gating characterization of A and B model
gates. Top: Pore A, Y1 (black) and Y2 (red) gates. Bottom:
Pore B, Y3 gate. Empty symbols: simulations of only gates,
i.e. without ions. Full symbols: simulations with ion concen-
trations as in Table 1. Lines are the fits of expression 6 with
the parameters values of tables 1, 2 and 3.

Pore A: Y1 and Y2 gates. We proceed with the study
of the two gates of the A model.

Gate Y1. The two equations 2 and 3 for j = 1 intro-
duced in the previous section are simulated. The second
gate Y2 of the channel is also simulated and let fluctu-
ate in its open state, but it is forced to never close. For
each value of the membrane potential we record a very
long run of a stochastic trajectory, which exhibits roughly
rectangular random pulses corresponding to rapid switch-
ings between the two states Y1 ∼ 0, 1. The time spent in
the open state, t0, divided by the total time tt gives the
open probability for this potential, Po(∆V ) = t0/tt. In
Fig. 2-top (black dots) we see the results. The empty dots



4 L. Ramı́rez–Piscina, J.M. Sancho: Physical properties of voltage gated pores

γ V0 Vd Q φref a b xc
kBT kBT e mV nm

Y1 1000 7 8 +12 -35 0.2 7 1.0
Y2 4000 7 10 -8 -35 0.2 9 3.0
Y3 4000 7 8 +10 -35 0.2 7 3.0

Table 2. Parameters of the Y1, Y2, Y3 pore gates used in sim-
ulations. Units for γ are µs meV/nm2 and σ = 0.283 nm.

-50 -45 -40 -35 -30 -25
∆V  (mV)

1

10

100

T
 (

m
s)

T
closed

T
open

Fig. 3. Dynamic characterization of gating for the B model.
Blue circles: mean time in the closed state. Black squares: mean
time in the open state. Empty symbols: simulations of only
gates, i.e. without ions. Full symbols: simulations with ion con-
centrations as in Table 1.

correspond to the case without ions (zero concentrations)
and the full dots to the presence of concentrations.

Gate Y2. This gate is simulated by the same proce-
dure, but this time it is the Y1 gate which is forced to
remain in its open state. Numerical simulation results are
plotted in Fig. 2-top (red dots). Empty dots correspond to
the gate with no ions and the full dots with Na concentra-
tions. The Po(∆V ) of this gate has the same qualitative
S–like plot than that of Y1 but with the steady states in-
terchanged because effective charge has a different sign.

Pore B: Y3 gate. We proceed with the model B fol-
lowing the same procedures as in the previous case. This
time Y3 is the only gate present in the pore. Numerical
results are seen in Fig. 2-bottom (black squares). Empty
symbols correspond to the simulations without ions and
full symbols to simulations in the presence of ionic concen-
trations. We see that Y3 behaves as Y1 but with different
parameters. As in the former pore we observe important
differences due to the presence of ionic concentrations, and
the direction of this effect is the same as in the Y1 case.

We then see in all gates a clear effect of the presence of
ions to favor the open state. This result is a consequence of
the physical consistency of the approach, in particular of
the fact of using a single energy functional for the mutual
interaction between ions and gates. Gates exert forces on
the ions which implies that they will also have an effect on
the gates. As a result the S–like P0 plot moves to smaller
potentials for activation gates, and to larger potentials for
inactivation gates.

Moreover, in the case of model B we observe that this
effect mainly acts by making the closing slower. This can

-80 -60 -40 -20 0 20 40 60 80
∆V (mV)

-1

-0.8

-0.6

-0.4

-0.2

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

I 
 (

pA
)

B

A

Fig. 4. Current peak for A pore (red) and mean current for B
pore (blue) versus the applied voltage ∆V . Lines correspond
to the analytical expression 7.

be seen in Fig. 3, where the average of the staying times in
each state are shown in the same cases as in Fig. 2b. We
see that the effect of ions on the closed gate is rather small,
since there is only a marginal reduction of the stay time for
the smaller polarizations. However there is an important
increasing of the stay times for the open state with con-
centration. In other words the channel closes more slowly
in the presence of ions. This effect, well known experimen-
tally [17], is often attributed to a ’foot-in-the-door’ mech-
anism. Note that no specific mechanism has been added
to the model to provide such effect. On the contrary it has
naturally emerged from the physical approach used here.

We return now to the open probability obtained in
Fig. 2. The function Po(∆V ) is known from well controlled
experiments on both single and ensemble of channels. The
standard explanation for the shape of this function [1,3,
16] is that a voltage gating gate has two steady states,
open and close, which have different energies UO(∆V )
and UC(∆V ) respectively. Then the characteristic times
are weighted by the corresponding Kramers factor for the
crossing of a barrier tU ∼ exp−U/kBT . The relative tem-
poral fraction of an open state, i.e. the probability Po is
then,

Po(∆V ) =
e−UO/kBT

e−UO/kBT + e−UC/kBT

=
1

1 + e
−

∆U
kBT

=
1

2

(

1 + tanh
∆U

2kBT

)

, (6)

where ∆U = UC − UO = Qeff (∆V − φeff).
This expression fits very well with the experimental

data and accordingly it permits to fix the model internal
parameters Q and φref. Nevertheless comparing the val-
ues used in our simulations with those obtained by the
fitting of the simulation results (Qeff and φeff in Table
3), we observe important differences. The origin of these
discrepancies is due first to the Kramers mathematical



L. Ramı́rez–Piscina, J.M. Sancho: Physical properties of voltage gated pores 5

0 10 20 30 40 50
t  (ms)

-0.5

0

   
  I

  (
pA

) 
   

   
   

   
   

   
   

   
   

   
   

   
   

   
   

   
   

   
   

   
∆

V
  (

m
V

)

-90

-10

Fig. 5. Pulses on the single A model. From top to bottom.
A depolarizing step from −90mV to −10mV applied to the
potential membrane during 40ms. Fluxes of four pulses under
this step, and the average of 200 events. Intensity signals are
filtered by an averaging window of 0.125 ms.

approximation and second to the presence of concentra-
tions. In our simulations these three gates have the same
φref = −35mV, but different gating charges. The fit of
Eq. 6 gives different effective values for Qeff and φeff de-
pending on whether ions are present (c) or not (o). It is
manifest that the Kramers approximation mainly affects
the effective charges and the concentrations change the
effective potential.

Q φref Q
o
eff φ

o
eff Q

c
eff φ

c
eff

e mV e mV e mV
Y1 +12 -35 +10.72 -35.01 +10.28 -37.86
Y2 - 8 -35 -6.88 -34.56 -6.94 -30.94
Y3 +10 -35 +7.89 -35.08 +8.88 -37.86

Table 3. Gate physical parameters. Second and third columns
are the parameter values used in the simulations, shown for
comparison (see Table 2). The next two columns (o) are their
effective values without ion effects, and the last two columns
(c) are the effective values when ion concentrations are present.
All these effective values have been obtained from simulation
results.

3.2 Mean ionic fluxes

By using the effective parameter values of Table 3 one
can calculate the flux of our models from the Goldman–
Hodgkin–Katz (GHK) equation A-13 for a pore but mod-

0 10 20 30 40 50

t (ms)
0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

Y
1

Y
2

a b c d a

Fig. 6. Dynamical evolution of Y1 and Y2 variables (gates)
during the second pulse of Fig. 5.

ulated by the expression for Po in Eq. 6,

I(∆V ) = P0(∆V )
∆V ρin
γxL

e(VNernst−∆V )/kBT − 1

e−∆V/kBT − 1
CIJ ,

(7)
where CIJ = 0.1602 pAµs/n is a conversion factor from
particle flux J to intensity I. In Fig. 4 we see simula-
tion results (symbols) from the whole model together with
theoretical predictions (lines) from Eq. 7. For the B pore
(red symbols) we plot the numerical steady flux, and for
A pores (blue symbols) we represent the current peak.
These results are strongly equivalent to the experiments
of Ref. [18] for Na (model A in our model) and K (model
B) molecular channels. One can conclude that GHK equa-
tion together with our approach constitute an appropriate
physical scenario to explain experimental results.

3.3 Dynamics of single pores

We progress further with the study of the behavior of a
single pore, for both A and B cases, under a depolarizing
potential step. Analogous experiments have been key for
the understanding of the internal structure and conforma-
tions of the channel, and therefore it is worth to compare
the simulations of the model to the available experimental
results.

We start with the numerical simulations of the dynam-
ics of a single A pore under the perturbation of depolariz-
ing voltage steps from −90mV to −10mV. We expect our
A model will mimic the experimental results for Na chan-
nels [19,2]. Four square pulses are seen in Fig. 5 during
depolarization steps. After the depolarization the gate–1
opens randomly in a short time scale, then after a larger
random time interval gate–2 is closed. Within this interval
ions are able to cross the membrane and a larger intensity
is observed. The mean average of 200 pulses is a spike–like
pulse with fast growing and slow decay. This is the behav-
ior observed in Na single channel experiments (See Fig. 2
in Ref. [19]).

In the literature these results are explained by assum-
ing that the Na channel has three possible states: open,
close and inactive [2]. In our channel A we have four pos-
sible states: (Y1, Y2) ≃ (0, 1), (1, 1), (1, 0), (0, 0), shown as



6 L. Ramı́rez–Piscina, J.M. Sancho: Physical properties of voltage gated pores

a, b, c, d in Fig. 6. These states can be classified as: close
but ready (standby) a = (0, 1), open b = (1, 1), and the
last two, with Y2 ≃ 0, correspond to inactive refractory
states c = (1, 0) and d = (0, 0). In this figure we see how
the duration of the open state, b, is quite random and that
the last one, d, is very short in time. The temporal evolu-
tion of these variables, going through these states in one
depolarizing event is seen in this figure, which corresponds
to the second pulse in Fig. 5. The three close states could
be experimentally discriminated by a finer analysis of the
different intensities of the leak flux. This constitutes an
additional prediction of the model.

The same procedure is next applied to a single B pore
with depolarizing voltage steps from −90mV to −30mV,
as it is seen in Fig. 7. This last voltage corresponds to
a high probability for the open state. Numerical results
show that the gate opens quite randomly but it remains
open almost all the time until the end of the perturbation.
This behavior is similar to that observed in experiments of
K single molecular channels (see Fig. 4-A from Ref. [20]).

4 Concluding remarks

We have applied a semi-microscopic Langevin approach to
study the gating dynamics of single ionic channels mod-
eled as active pores. The approach is characterized by
the use of a few simple physical mechanisms, variables,
and physical laws in a consistent way. This is enough to
explain the experimental information concerning gating
dynamics, ion fluxes, membrane potential and ionic con-
centrations. Thus we do not need to consider further bio-
logical complexities that would be necessary for more spe-
cific observations, such as for example ionic selectivity.

It has been assumed here that ions are charged Brow-
nian particles which follows Langevin equations follow-
ing standard statistical physics. These pores have gates
exhibiting two steady states (open and close) whose dy-
namics are controlled by nonlinear elastic potentials and
Langevin equations. Ions and gates are treated as mechan-
ical objects interchanging energy and momentum by mu-
tual collisions, which is accomplished in the model by us-
ing a single energy functional. The number of degrees
of freedom used is thus maintained to a minimum. This
permits to isolate the relevant mechanisms for the studied
phenomenology and to obtain results comparable to ex-
periments without the need of additional detailed channel
structure. Moreover the physical nature of the approach
permits, in a straightforward way, its extension for a more
quantitatively detailed study and for taking into account
additional mechanisms in other channels or alternative
gating modelings.

We have presented two pore models representing Na
and K molecular channels. Their gating dynamics, as rep-
resented by the open probability of the pores and by the
steady and peak ionic currents as functions of membrane
potential, exhibit the main characteristics observed in ex-
periments on single channels [1,2].

Additionally, we have obtained the effect that concen-
tration has on channel gating. Namely, the increasing of

0 5 10 15 20 25 30
t  (ms)

0

0.025

0.05

I 
 (

pA
) 

   
   

   
   

   
   

   
   

   
   

   
   

   
   

   
   

   
   

   
 ∆

V
  (

m
V

)

-90

-30

Fig. 7. Pulses on the single B channel. From top to bottom.
A depolarizing step from −90 mV to −30mV applied to the
potential membrane during 40ms. Fluxes of four pulses under
this step, and the average over of 200 pulses. Intensity signals
are filtered by an averaging window of 0.125 ms.

ion concentration enhances the probability of the open
state. Thus the open-probability curves move to smaller
values of the membrane potential for activation gates, and
to higher values for inactivation ones. Very similar effects,
associated to the so called “foot-in-the-door mechanism”,
have extensively been studied experimentally, mainly in K
channels [17] but also in other channels [21,22]. This is
a most relevant result of our model, and it is particularly
interesting the fact that it is a direct consequence of hav-
ing a single energy functional for the mutual interaction
between gates and ions, which constitutes a necessity of
physical consistency. Therefore this effect should have a
general validity for permeant ions, not depending on the
specific structure of the channel.

This approach opens interesting perspectives. Since all
the model parts are described by standard and well con-
trolled physical laws one can address particular aspects for
single channels or single gating events. Moreover model A
implies the existence of three closed gate states for the
Na channel, which could be discriminated by measuring
leak charge intensities through the channel. This predic-
tion calls for experimental verification.

Channel parameters are obtained from experimental
data and can be different for channels of the same fam-
ily. These differences can enlighten a variety of internal
channel structures which can help to refine molecular de-
scriptions. In other situations different mechanical types
are possible. Also, we have shown the specific effect of
the ionic cell concentrations on the gating process of each
gate. Our results show the interest in exploring further
this effect.

Further numerical refining could consist of including
ion-ion interactions, which were omitted for simplicity,
and due to the fact that it was not necessary to reproduce
the basic phenomenology. Also several additional activa-



L. Ramı́rez–Piscina, J.M. Sancho: Physical properties of voltage gated pores 7

tion gate variables could be implemented for each chan-
nel, to account for the tetrameric structure of four volt-
age sensing domains in the Na and K channels [2]. These
and other possible details, such as more complex potential
landscapes for both ions and gates [13], are straightfor-
ward in this framework and could be important in order
to use it for a more quantitative modeling.

Finally our approach can be extended to other possi-
ble channel configurations, such as to other channels from
the Na+ and K+ families, and also to model Ca2+ or Cl−

channels. Also, by using this approach, it would be inter-
esting to introduce ionic diffusion out of the membrane,
in order to study the coupling among regions of the mem-
brane [23] or with cell vesicles [24].

Acknowledgements:This work was supported by the
Ministerio de Economia y Competitividad (Spain) and
FEDER (European Union), under projects FIS2015-66503-
C3-2P/3P and by the Generalitat de Catalunya Projects
2014SGR1093 and 2014SGR878.

Appendix A: Semi-microscopic approach

A.1 The electrostatic potential Vi(xi, ∆V )

The theoretical framework for the ion dynamics is the
known Goldman–Hodgkin–Katz (GHK) equation [12], for
the flux through a pore, that we summarize here. Free
ions inside the pore are described by point–like particles
of charge q moving in a one dimensional space at position
xi(t) under the effective electrostatic membrane potential

Vi(xi, ∆V ) =
q∆V

L
(xi − L), 0 < xi < L, (A-8)

where ∆V is the potential difference between both sides
of the membrane, and L is the length of the pore.

A.2 The gate potential Vj(Yj , ∆V )

The evolution of this variable is controlled by the nonlin-
ear elastic potential,

V (Y,∆V ) = V0
[

−a ln(Y (1− Y ))− b(Y − 0.5)2
]

+ Q(∆V − φref)Y. (A-9)

The first part has the form of a double well potential,
and refers to the internal structure of the pore responsible
for the gate bistability. The parameter values V0, a, b have
to be chosen to enter into the experimental scale. Note
that by choosing a ≪ b the well minima are very close
to 0, 1, specifically at Y ≃ a

b
, 1 − a

b
. A similar approach

was used in [21,25] for the gate in a Cl channel. Other
expressions for the potential can be used, since the specific
form is not really important, provided it has two minima,
corresponding to open and close states, separated by an
energy barrier. Other forms for this double well potential
have been explored, giving essentially similar results. Note

that the only relevant physical parameter of the bistable
potential is the height of the barrier.

The last term is the interaction with the membrane po-
tential where Q is the charge of the gate sensor and φref is
the reference potential that determines the ∆V value at
which both states are equally probable. These last two pa-
rameters are characteristic of a specific channel and their
values have to be obtained from experimental data (see
for example experiments in Ref. [16]).

A.3 The ion-gate interaction potential VI(Y, xi)

The interaction between ions and gate is modeled by a
potential energy, which represents a physical barrier for
the ions. This barrier has a specified position inside the
channel and a prescribed width. Its height is variable and
controlled by the state of the gate represented by the Y
value. The proposed potential is

VI(Y, xi) = Vdf(Y ) exp

(

−
(xi − xc)

2

2σ2

)

. (A-10)

Here, xi is the ion position, xc is the the center of the
gate potential inside the channel, and σ is its width. Note
that, in view of Eqs. 2,3, this potential will produce mutual
forces on both ions and gate.

The height of the barrier is modulated by the func-
tion f(Y ), which defines a correspondence between the
state of the gate (the Y value) and the height of the bar-
rier Vdf(Y ) seen by the ions. Thus the necessary condi-
tions for the function f(Y ) are: f(0) = 1 for the close
gate (maximum barrier height), f(1) = 0 for the open
gate (minimum barrier height). Additionally, since Y is
a fluctuating variable, we construct f(Y) as having zero
slopes at these values so the barrier height does not present
large fluctuations while the gate remains in the same state.
For the modulating function f(Y ) the envelope function
f(Y ) = (1 + cosπY )/2 is used. Other expressions for this
function have been tested, leading to very similar results.

A.4 Numerical methods

Our whole system is composed of three physical domains
or volumes: the channel, along which the ions move and
where the gates are placed, and two reservoirs at both
channel ends, corresponding to the regions inside and out-
side the cell respectively.

The dynamics inside the channel are driven by Langevin
equations 2 and 3. The numerical integration of these
equations is performed with a standard explicit (first order
Euler) algorithm. The employed time step has been ∆t =
1.25 × 10−4 µs for the complete system (gates and ions)
and ∆t = 10−2 µs when we had only gates (zero exter-
nal ion concentrations). In particular ions move through
a pore of length L, and they disappear from simulation
whenever the position xi escapes from the interval (0, L).

The reservoirs are implemented as boundary condi-
tions at both ends of the pore for the Langevin dynamics



8 L. Ramı́rez–Piscina, J.M. Sancho: Physical properties of voltage gated pores

of ions. That means that the ionic concentration values at
the reservoirs determine the rate at which ions enter into
the pore.

The numerical simulation of these equations allows to
record the evolution of the state of the gates and the num-
ber of particles crossing the boundaries. In those cases
where the membrane potential is not externally fixed the
membrane potential ∆V is updated by using the numer-
ical integration of the capacitor equation (Eq. 5) in the
form

∆V (t+∆t) = ∆V (t)−
∆Q1 +∆Q2 +∆Qext

2CM
, (A-11)

where ∆Q1 and ∆Q2 are the total charge crossing each of
the two boundaries in the time interval∆t. The additional
term ∆Qext accounts for external inputs to the membrane
charge. The divisor “2” takes into account that charges
which cross both boundaries are being counted twice. The
final output are the values of the membrane potential ∆V
and of the ionic fluxes J = ∆Q/∆t, which will be com-
pared with known experimental results.

A.5 Validation of the stochastic approach

A necessary test of the model is the dynamical relaxation
of the open channel to its steady state in the presence of
fixed ion concentrations at the boundaries. This is done
for both models. The evolution of the membrane potential
to the Nernst value corresponding to the concentrations
at both sides of the membrane (without any parameter
fitting) supports the consistence of the dynamical model,
and also the correctness of the used algorithms.

From the theoretical point of view ions obey the over-
damped Langevin equation,

γxẋi = −∂xiVi(xi) + ξi(t), (A-12)

where γx is the effective friction and ξi(t) is a thermal noise
of zero mean and correlation 〈ξi(t) ξi(t

′)〉 = 2γxkBTδ(t−
t′). One can consider here the Fokker–Plank equation for
the density of ions inside the channel. Assuming steady
state with constant flux, J(x, t) = J , and the bound-
ary conditions for the one-dimensional ionic densities at
both sides, ρin and ρout, we get the well known Goldman–
Hodgkin–Katz equation,

J(∆V ) =
q∆V ρin
γxL

eq(VNernst−∆V )/kBT − 1

e−q∆V/kBT − 1
, (A-13)

where VNernst = (kBT/q) ln cin/cout is the Nernst poten-
tial corresponding to these concentrations, and q is the
ion charge. Note that the one-dimensional densities ρin/out
are related to the bulk concentrations cin/out as ρin/out =
A cin/out, where A is the effective section of the channel.
This equation is a relevant analytical reference when the
channel is in the open state.

In the simulations we initially populate the pore letting
ions evolve with a fixed ∆V = 0 (this would correspond
in experiments to electrically connecting both membrane

0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
t  (ms)

-60

-40

-20

0

20

40

60

∆
V

  (
m

V
)

A

B

Fig. A-1. Time evolutions (colored curves) of the membrane
potential induced by the ions of models A (upper curves) and
B (lower curves) obtained from stochastic simulations. The po-
tential membrane evolves to the corresponding Nernst poten-
tials VA ≃ 42.41mV and VB ≃ −49.43mV. Full black lines
correspond to the numerical integration of Eq. A-14 and bro-
ken lines indicate the asymptotic Nernst values (See text).

sides). At t = 125 µs the voltage is then left free to evolve.
From the stochastic evolution of the charges we record the
balance ∆Q crossing each of the channel boundaries dur-
ing the time step ∆t. That includes particles hopping out
of the system and particles entering into it through that
boundary. Then from Eq. 5 the change in the membrane
potential is evaluated and recorded. Two realizations of
each channel model are shown in Fig. A-1.

This simulation result is complemented with the theo-
retical calculation of the membrane potential from capac-
itor equation 5 and the GHK equation A-13, which results
in the differential equation

d∆V

dt
= −

J(∆V )

Ceff
(A-14)

The numerical integration of this equation provides a pre-
diction for the deterministic evolution of∆V (t). The Nernst
potential is the final steady value. This results should be
compared to the stochastic evolution obtained from the
numerical simulation of the Langevin equations. This can
be seen in Fig. A-1, where two stochastic evolutions of
∆V (t) are shown for each model (A and B). It is worth to
remark that they are single trajectories without any sta-
tistical average. These evolutions behave as expected for
both channels. In view of Eq. A-14 the difference in the
times scales for both ions correspond to the difference in
the friction coefficients γx and in the ion concentrations
present in each channel.

References

1. B. Hille, Ion Channels of Excitable Membranes, 3rd edn.
(Sinauer, 2001)



L. Ramı́rez–Piscina, J.M. Sancho: Physical properties of voltage gated pores 9

2. C. Hammond, Cellular and Molecular Neurophysiology,
4th edn. (Academic Press, 2015)

3. R. Phillips, J. Kondev, J. Theriot, Physical Biology of the
Cell (Garland Science, 2009)

4. A.L. Hodgkin, A.F. Huxley, The Journal of Physiology
117, 500 (1952)

5. P. Jung, J. Shuai, EPL (Europhysics Letters) 56, 29 (2001)
6. G. Schmid, I. Goychuk, P. Hänggi, EPL (Europhysics Let-

ters) 56, 22 (2001)
7. M. Ozer, M. Perc, M. Uzuntarla, EPL (Europhysics Let-

ters) 86, 40008 (2009)
8. J.R. Groff, H. DeRemigio, G.D. Smith, in Stochastic meth-

ods in neuroscience, edited by C. Laing, G.J. Lord (Oxford
University Press, 2009), pp. 29–64

9. Y. Huang, S. Rüdiger, J. Shuai, The European Physical
Journal B 83, 401 (2011)

10. L. Ramı́rez-Piscina, J.M. Sancho, EPL (Europhysics Let-
ters) 108, 50008 (2014)

11. L. Ramı́rez-Piscina, J.M. Sancho, Preprint (2017)
12. D.E. Goldman, The Journal of General Physiology 27, 37

(1943)
13. D. Sigg, F. Bezanilla, E. Stefani, Proceedings of the Na-

tional Academy of Sciences 100, 7611 (2003)
14. R.D. Coalson, Journal of Physics A: Mathematical and

Theoretical 41, 115001 (2008)
15. E.M. Izhikevich., Dynamical Systems in Neuroscience

(The MIT press, Cambridge, 2010)
16. R. Roux, F. Bezanilla, in Molecular Machines, edited by

B. Roux (World Scientific, 2011), pp. 231–248
17. R. Swenson, C. Armstrong, Nature 291, 427 (1981)
18. K.S. Cole, J.W. Moore, The Journal of General Physiology

44, 123 (1960)
19. F. Sigworth, E. Neher, Nature 287, 447 (1980)
20. W. Stühmer, M. Stocker, B. Sakmann, P. Seeburg, A. Bau-

mann, A. Grupe, O. Pongs, FEBS Letters 242, 199 (1988)
21. M.H. Cheng, A.B. Mamonov, J.W. Dukes, R.D. Coalson,

The Journal of Physical Chemistry B 111, 5956 (2007)
22. O. Teijido, S.M. Rappaport, A. Chamberlin, S.Y. Noskov,

V.M. Aguilella, T.K. Rostovtseva, S.M. Bezrukov, Journal
of Biological Chemistry 289, 23670 (2014)

23. X. Jianxue, G. Yunfan, R. Wei, H. Sanjue, W. Fuzhou,
Physica D: Nonlinear Phenomena 100, 212 (1997)

24. S.P. Dawson, O.D. Uchitel, Physica D: Nonlinear Phenom-
ena 168, 356 (2002)

25. Y.W. Parc, D.S. Koh, W. Sung, The European Physical
Journal B-Condensed Matter and Complex Systems 69,
127 (2009)


