












































Microsoft Word - TAHC-Enviat


 
 

 

UPCommons 
Portal del coneixement obert de la UPC 

http://upcommons.upc.edu/e-prints 

 

 

Múgica, F.J. [et al.] (2016) A model for continuous monitoring of 
patients with major depression in short and long term periods. 
Technology and Health Care, vol. Preprint, no. Preprint, pp. 1-25. 

 

La publicació final està disponible a IOS Press a través de 
http://dx.doi.org/10.3233/THC-161289 

 

 

Múgica, F.J. [et al.] (2016) A model for continuous monitoring of 
patients with major depression in short and long term periods. 
Technology and Health Care, vol. Preprint, no. Preprint, pp. 1-25. 

 

The final publication is available at IOS Press through 
http://dx.doi.org/10.3233/THC-161289 

http://upcommonsdev.upc.edu/
http://upcommonsdev.upc.edu/
http://upcommons.upc.edu/e-prints
http://dx.doi.org/10.3233/THC-161289
http://dx.doi.org/10.3233/THC-161289


*Corresponding author: Tel. (34) 93-4137783; angela@cs.upc.edu 
 

A model for continuous monitoring of patients with major 
depression in short and long term periods  

 

Francisco Mugicaᵃ, Àngela Nebotᵃ*, Solmaz Bagherpourᵃ, Luisa Baladónᵇ and Antonio Serrano-Blancoᵇ 

ᵃ Computer Science Dept., Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya, Jordi Girona 1-3, 08034-Barcelona, Spain; ᵇ Parc 

Sanitari Sant Joan de Déu, Sant Boi del Llobregat, Spain 

Abstract 

Background and objective: Major depressive disorder causes more human suffering than any other 
disease affecting humankind. It has a high prevalence and it is predicted that it will be among the three 
leading causes of disease burden by 2030. The prevalence of depression, all of its social and personal 
costs, and its recurrent characteristics, put heavy constraints on the ability of the public healthcare system 
to provide sufficient support for patients with depression. In this research, a model for continuous 
monitoring and tracking of depression in both short-term and long-term periods is presented. This model 
is based on a new qualitative reasoning approach. 

Method: This paper describes the patient assessment unit of a major depression monitoring system that 
has three modules: a patient progress module, based on a qualitative reasoning model; an analysis 
module, based on expert knowledge and a rules-based system; and the communication module. These 
modules base their reasoning mainly on data of the patient’s mood and life events that are obtained from 
the patient’s responses to specific questionnaires (PHQ-9, M.I.N.I. and Brugha). The patient assessment 
unit provides synthetic and useful information for both patients and physicians, keeps them informed of 
the progress of patients, and alerts them in the case of necessity. 

Results: A set of hypothetical patients has been defined based on clinically possible cases in order to 
perform a complete scenario evaluation. The results that have been verified by psychiatrists suggest the 
utility of the platform.  

Conclusion:  The proposed major depression monitoring system takes advantage of current technologies 
and facilitates more frequent follow-up of the progress of patients during their home stay after being 
diagnosed with depression by a psychiatrist. 

 
Keywords: Major depressive disorder, Remote monitoring system, Rule-base system, Qualitative reasoning 

1. Introduction 

Major depression is one of the most common psychiatric disorders present in the general 
population, with a lifetime prevalence of 12.8%, and 12-month prevalence range between 3.6% 
and 9.1% in Europe. The Global burden of disease study has identified depression as one of the 
leading causes of Years Lived with Disability (YLD) and Disability Adjusted Life Years 
(DALYs), emphasizing the importance of non-fatal health outcomes in the quantification of 
disease burden [1].  

The cost of depression presents a growing economic burden on European society. It has 
become a major concern for European economic welfare that has consequences for healthcare 
providers and policy makers. In 2004, the total annual cost of depression in Europe was 
estimated at 118 billion Euros, making it the most costly brain disorder in Europe [2]. The cost 
of depression in Asia is also a huge economic burden. The mean annual total cost per depressed 
patient in 2008 was 7638 US dollars in Singapore, a developed country in Asia [3]. 



 2

Depression is treatable. The current response rate to antidepressants is between 62% to 67% 
[4], and patients show improvement in depressive symptoms by the end of the first week of use 
[5]. However 60% of people with depressive disorder do not receive any kind of healthcare for 
this condition [6], and most of those who manifest a need for care are treated by a general 
practitioner (GP) [7, 8]. According to most of the clinical practice guidelines, the monitoring of 
patients should be close, at least during the first 4 weeks, then monthly or every 2 months. 
Many GPs work under extreme pressure and limited time for patients has been identified in the 
literature as a barrier to good assessments and treatment [9-11].  

Half of people experiencing a first episode of depression will develop chronic or recurrent 
depressive disorder and will spend more than 20% of their life in the depressive condition [12]. 
Most patients will eventually experience either a relapse (another depressive episode within 6 
months after response) or recurrence (another depressive episode 6 months or more after 
recovery), if followed over a long enough period without sustained treatment. If followed over a 
15-year period, almost 90% of patients could be expected to become depressed again after 
experiencing an acute depressive episode [13].  

As stated above, depression is the most prevalent mental disorder. It has a high tendency for 
relapse and recurrence, is one of the leading causes of YLD, and creates a growing economic 
burden on healthcare systems. For all this, depression has become a global public health 
concern and strategic efforts are needed to manage this challenge and provide the best care to 
meet the needs of patients suffering from depression. 

Advances in communication and information technologies have raised expectations for 
healthcare. As stated by Zhang and Ho, Electronic health (E-health) is an efficient way to 
deliver healthcare services which allow interaction with patients via internet, smartphone and 
text message technology [14].  

Beating the Blues, in the UK [15], and MoodGym, in Australia [16], are two examples of 
evidence-based treatment programs already in place for mild to moderate depression. As far as 
we know, there is no tool currently being used to track the changes of short-term and long-term 
progress in patients with depression, even though the widespread use of mobile phones and 
computers make continuous remote follow-up of the patient completely feasible.  
The goal of this paper is to present a model for continuous monitoring and tracking of 
depression in patients, throughout the short-term and long-term treatment process. The proposed 
major depression monitoring system facilitates a more frequent follow-up of patient progress 
during their home stay after being diagnosed with depression by a psychiatrist. It is important to 
make clear that this model does not intend to substitute the physician or the psychiatrist, but 
rather it gives extended information about the changes suffered in patients, which doctors do not 
usually have access to due to the infrequency of visits they are able to make with each patient in 
relation to clinical assistance pressure that Public Health Systems often suffer. 

2. Computer Methods and Major Depression  

Different computer methods are applied to different types of depression problems with diverse 
goals.  In this section we try to summarize some of these studies focusing mainly on major 
depression. 

The first group of studies is mostly concerned with the problem of diagnosis of depression 
type and severity, trying to provide different automatic diagnosis tools or classification 
techniques for these diagnoses [17-22]. There are also some studies in this group focused on 
evaluating and improving the diagnostic and therapeutic reasoning of primary care physicians 
[23]. The second group of studies tries to solve the problem of monitoring treatment efficiency 
in different treatment types, such as pharmacological or Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT) 
and individualized therapy [24-26]. The third and smaller group of studies focuses on the 
recurrent nature of depression, either predicting relapse or providing support to prevent relapse 
and recurrence of depression symptoms.  

Aziz et al. designed and developed an ambient agent system to support relapse prevention 
and early alerting of recurrence of unipolar depression based on the collected data from sensors 
and questionnaires [27]. The domain model is based on several personal characteristics and a 



 3

representation of events (i.e., life events or daily hassles). The proposed model has been tested 
by several simulation experiments, but there is still a lack of experimentation in real world 
conditions. 

Empath is a comprehensive real-time home depression monitoring system that aimed to 
provide caregivers with more accurate and thorough information about the client's current 
functioning, thus helping in their diagnostic assessment and therapeutic treatment planning [28]. 
It also helps patients in the management and tracking of their symptoms. Empath incorporates 
factors such as speech, sleep, weight, and movement and is designed for home monitoring of 
people who live alone. It has been tested by way of a case study, but further investigations are 
needed.  

A project related to depression monitoring and similar to Empath was set up by MIT and 
Mass General Hospital using their LiveNet system [29]. LiveNet is able to collect similar 
behavioral features as Empath, however it requires costly mobile physiologic sensing 
technology and is not designed for daily home monitoring since it monitors patient response to 
electroconvulsive therapy in a hospital setting. Optimisim App is another application that is 
designed for bipolar patients but is customizable for other mental disorders as well [30]. 
Optimisim’s main goal is to actively involve patients in their treatment by providing an 
environment for self-reporting many factors as well as follow-up charts and reports. 

However, it does not provide reasoning or diagnosis based on the collected information; 
instead it mainly focuses on representation of collected information in synthetic and 
interpretable form.  

ICT4 Depression is a European project that has already been completed in which a mobile 
solution for the treatment of depression, called Moodbuster, has been developed [31]. The 
research done in this project is closely related to our work. Moodbuster integrates different data 
from mobile phone apps, physiological sensors, the adherence monitor which is accelerated 
every time a patient opens and closes the drug container, and a website with different tools and 
self-management modules that have been shown to be effective in face-to-face and internet-
based treatments. It has a reasoning module that translates sensor information and patient 
provided information together into therapy information. However, the cost would not be 
negligible if the proposed approach is to be available to and used by a large number of patients, 
that is any patient who suffers major depression. 

In summary, despite the recognized magnitude of the problem of recurrence and relapse in 
depression patients, little attention has been focused on applying low cost technologies to find 
patterns in patients’ progress in order to provide the necessary support in the early stages and 
prevent further development of depressive symptoms. Accordingly, one major possible effort 
towards reducing the disabling effects of depression could be a shift toward preventing the 
recurrence of it, especially in patients with a high risk of recurrence. 

3. Methods 

As mentioned before, little work exists on the development of monitoring systems that goes 
beyond the compilation of data streaming from sensors, questionnaires, and clinical registers, 
and that give basic medical feedback to patients and doctors based on the collected data. Our 
research is centered on the design and development of a major depression remote monitoring 
system that performs an automatic assessment on the progress of the patient on a short-term. 
The architecture of the proposed approach is presented in Figure 1. It is composed of the Patient 
Assessment Unit (PAU) and the Communication Module (CM).  

The goal of the PAU is to follow the progress of the patient in the short-term, during their 
recovery, in order to understand their behavior and give advice to patients, psychiatrists, and 
primary care physicians. The Communication Module (CM), communicates between the 
monitoring system and the actors involved by means of mobile phones, computers, and/or 
tablets.  

 



 4

  
Fig. 1 Architecture of the major depression monitoring system  

 

This paper is focused mainly on the PAU, which is a key element of the major depression 
monitoring system and that is based on a new qualitative reasoning approach. The qualitative 
reasoning process proposed in this research can be applied to other systems, not necessarily in 
the field of medicine, which have similar behaviour characteristics to the system discussed in 
this article. Before going through the description of the PAU it is necessary to briefly describe 
major depression characteristics. It is now generally recognized that depression is a multifactor 
disorder characterized by phenotypic heterogeneity and having complex genetic, experiential, 
and developmental causes [32]. 

Major depressive disorder is a medical condition characterised by depressed mood and/or 
loss of pleasure in most activities [33]. Five of the nine following symptoms have to be 
experienced by the patient in order to be diagnosed as MDD: significant weight change (5%) or 
change in appetite, change in sleep patterns (insomnia or hypersomnia), change in activity 
(psychomotor agitation or retardation), fatigue or loss of energy, cognition abnormalities (such 
as inappropriate guilt and feelings of worthlessness), diminished ability to think or concentrate, 
more indecisiveness, and/or suicide thoughts or plans. Symptoms must persist throughout most 
of the day, be present nearly every day for at least two consecutive weeks, and produce a 
significant impairment to the patient's daily life. To count toward a major depressive disorder, 
symptoms must be newly present or must have clearly worsened compared with the patient's 
pre-episode status.  

As described in Figure 2, PAU receives the following information (input data): the clinical 
data of the patient (personal information and clinical history); the patient’s mood and life events 
that are obtained from the patient’s responses to specific questionnaires (PHQ-9, M.I.N.I. and 
Brugha); and physiological data obtained from weight, sleep, and movement changes. The CM 
is responsible for scheduling patients’ measurements and transmitting the results of PAU to the 
actors involved.    

The PHQ-9 is a depression assessment measure, which scores each of the 9 diagnosis criteria 
of this mental disorder. The questionnaire is designed to assess the patient's mood over the last 2 
weeks [34]. It has been suggested that scores between 0 and 4 reveal minimal depressive 
symptoms; scores between 5 and 9 reveal mild symptoms; scores between 10 and 14 reveal 
moderate symptoms; scores between 15 and 19 reveal moderately severe symptoms; and scores 
between 20 and 27 reveal severe depressive symptoms. Several studies support its validity, 
feasibility, and its capacity to detect changes of depressive symptoms over time [35-36]. It has 
also been proven that reliable results can be obtained even when this questionnaire is conducted 
over the telephone [37].  

The Brugha questionnaire is a self-reporting questionnaire that examines the incidence of 12 
categories of negative life events over the last 6 months [38]. The questionnaire assesses life 

	  	  	  						        	            
MAJOR	DEPRESSION	REMOTE	

MONITORING	SYSTEM		        

 
 

CM:		Communication		
									Mo dule

PAU:	  P atie n t 

	

Asse s sm e n t	  Unit
 

Pa ents’ 
progress: 
semaphores, 
alarms, alerts, 
reports 

Pa tien t	  

 
 
 
 
 

Ps ych iatr ic a n d    liv e   e ven ts   q u e s o n n air es  
Ph y sio lo gic al me as u rem en ts  
   

Ps ychiatrist	

 
 
 
 
 

 Primary	
ca re	

Phys ician

WWW

WWW



 5

stressors which pose medium or long-term threats such as illness or injury, the death of a close 
friend or relative, unemployment, financial loss, and loss of important relationships. The use of 
this questionnaire in our system is to help understand certain variations in patient progress that 
would be inexplicable without such information.  

The Mini-International Neuropsychiatric Interview (M.I.N.I.) is a short structured diagnostic 
interview, developed jointly by psychiatrists and clinicians in the United States and Europe. The 
M.I.N.I. has two goals: first, to meet the need for a short but accurate structured psychiatric 
interview for multi-center clinical trials and epidemiology studies, and second, as a first step in 
outcome tracking in non-research clinical settings [39]. In this research we only use the M.I.N.I. 
suicide risk questionnaire in order to detect suicidal intentions when a patient gives the highest 
value to question 9 of PHQ-9 (i.e., thoughts that you would be better off dead or of hurting 
yourself in some way). 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Fig. 2 Patient assessment unit (PAU), composed of the Patient Progress Module (PPM) and the Analysis Module 
(AM). The Communication Module (CM) is also included to show the transmission of the information from the PAU 

to the actors involved and vice versa 
 
It is important to note that this research strictly follows the established mental health guidelines 
of the Institute for Clinical System Improvement (ICIS) [40] and tries to follow the standardized 
interface terminology, the Omaha system, developed for these guidelines [41].   

PAU processes these inputs by using two modules: the Patient Progress Module (PPM), 
based on a qualitative reasoning model and the Analysis Module (AM), based on expert 
knowledge and a rules-based system. Outside the PAU, the Communication Module (CM) 
provides the required information to patients, primary care physicians, and psychiatrists, as 
shown in Figure 2. 

PPM allows for tracking the progress of patients during a short-term basis (15 days) in order 
to characterize their reestablishment to the mental health pattern. PPM is centered on the overall 
rate of the PHQ-9 questionnaire. AM defines a framework for assessing both the process of 
healing and the patient's risk/hazard level for each stage of treatment, starting from the input 
data described before and the short-term patient progress status, which is the output of PPM (see 
Figure 2). The use of the word “risk” here refers to the possibility of the patients to get worse 
clinically, and has nothing to do with the risk of not taking the medication. CM has two 
responsibilities. The first responsibility is to schedule the registration of the patient’s data every 
2 weeks and make it available to the rest of the PAU modules; second it is responsible for 
sorting the risk data derived from AM and providing adequate information to the different 
actors involved in the treatment process, which are the patient, primary care physicians, and 
psychiatrists. 

PAU’s dynamic works as follows, every 2 weeks the PHQ-9 is administrated to the patient 
and he/she is asked about possible negative life events that have occurred during this time 
period. If needed, patients are assessed using the Brugha and/or the M.I.N.I. questionnaires to 
obtain extra information related to life events and the risk of suicide, as explained before. Then 

Schedule 
patients’ 
measurements  

Results 
transmission   

Actors 
AM:  
Analysis Module PPM: 

Patient Progress Module 

 Clinical data 
 Live events questionnaire: e.g. BRUGHA  
 Patient’s mood: Psych. questionnaires   

individual scores, e.g. PHQ-9, M.I.N.I. 
 Physiological data: e.g. weight, sleep, and 

movement  

 Psych. questionnaires 
(whole score),  
e.g. PHQ9 

CM: 
Communication Module 

PAU 



 6

the patient responds few questions related to weight, sleep, and movement general changes; 
with respect to the last time the patient was questioned.  

The PHQ-9 data are given to the PPM, which produces information of the patient’s progress 
as an output. This information, together with the rest of the data gathered from the patient, is 
used by the AM to perform the reasoning and give feedback to the actors involved in the healing 
process. The details of the PPM, AM, and CM are given below.         

3.1. Patient Progress Module 

The challenge of developing a model that would be capable of capturing all of the possible 
patient’s progress patterns is of major concern. PPM is based solely on the overall rate of the 
PHQ-9 questionnaire. A PPM model based on each individual question of the PHQ-9 does not 
make sense at this point, because only the PHQ-9 as a whole is an instrument for clinically 
measuring the depression level. This statement is based on the guidelines established for 
depression management by the Macarthur Foundation Initiative on Depression and Primary 
Care [42].  

In order to have as much information as possible, patients should be asked to answer the 
questionnaire every 2 weeks. A set of three PHQ-9 measures is used, corresponding to a period 
of 1 month, in order to omit normal mood fluctuations. The qualitative model is designed in a 
way that omitting these normal fluctuations does not lead to a loss of important information in 
providing alarms. This idea is shown in Figure 3. 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Fig. 3 Period used by the PPM to evaluate short-term progress of the patient. Three PHQ-9 measures: at present 

time (t), 15 days ago (t-1), and 1 month ago (t-2), are taken into account in the model. 
 
There are two situations where it is mandatory to use only two measures. The first one 
corresponds to the initial period, when the patient has answered the questionnaire only two 
times since the follow-up began. In this case, the PPM gives feedback to the actors involved in 
the treatment process using the information registered during these two weeks. The second 
situation occurs when the patient does not answer the questionnaire at the time required. Under 
these circumstances, the time period between one measure and the next, that is when the patient 
answers the questionnaire again, might be very long. In this case, the measures are not 
symmetric from the time point of view and the ante-penultimate measure loses its relevance. 
Therefore, the best strategy is to use only the last two measures and take into account the time 
elapsed between them.  

To characterize patients’ dynamic responses to treatment, three main variables are used to 
define each state of change in status. These three variables are direction, velocity, and quality of 
change. The direction describes the tendency of the patient’s changes in the PHQ-9 measures 
and it is discretized into three classes: worsening, improvement, and without changes (stuck). 
The velocity describes the speed of the patient’s PHQ-9 changes and is also discretized into 
three classes: quick, slow, and normal. Finally, the quality of change describes the shape and 
has three possible representations: maintained, intuited, and oscillated. Figure 4 describes the 
meaning of the three classes of both direction and quality of change variables. 

As is shown in Figure 4: maintained means the direction (without changes, worsening, or 
improvement) is continuous during the period analyzed, that is the direction is the same in 
consecutive PHQ-9 measurements pairs; intuited means there is an overall worsening or 
improvement but the direction is not kept in consecutive measurements pairs; and oscillated 
means that the direction of the first measurement pair is the opposite of the direction of the 
second pair. 



 7

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Fig. 4 Possible patient progress patterns for direction and quality of change variables. 
 
The velocity is defined by means of five constants (k1 to k5), that represent the change of PHQ-9 
values between times (t) and (t-2) (see Figure 3), which are quantified based on expert 
knowledge from psychiatrists. The minimal change value considered clinically significant in 
terms of PHQ-9 is k1. A patient responding the questionnaire twice in the same day could have a 
slightly different overall rate of PHQ-9 each time. These small variations in PHQ-9 answers are 
filtered by k1. Constants k2 and k3 represent an improvement in the depression level and 
correspond to a normal and fast improvement from a psychiatric perspective, respectively. 
Constants k4 and k5 represent a worsening in the depression level and correspond to a normal and 
fast worsening, respectively. If we define Δ= PHQ-9(t-2) - PHQ-9(t), then the slow class is 
characterized by the equations k1 <|Δ|≤ k2 for improvement and k1 <|Δ|≤ k4 for worsening; the 
normal class by k2 <|Δ|≤ k3 for improvement and k4 <|Δ|≤ k5 for worsening; and the quick class 
by |Δ|> k3 for improvement and |Δ|> k5 for worsening. These constants represent monthly rates. 
In cases, as mentioned earlier, where only two measures are taken into account, these constants 
are proportionally adjusted.  

The different progress patterns shown in Figure 4, combined with the velocity variable, form 
the short term PPM composed of 20 rules. Table 1 presents an example of 2 of these rules that 
conform to the PPM. The terms Δ1 and Δ2 are defined as Δ1= PHQ-9(t-1) - PHQ-9(t) and Δ2= 
PHQ-9(t-2) - PHQ-9(t-1).  

 
TABLE 1 AN EXAMPLE OF TWO RULES THAT COMPOSE THE PPM 

IF (Δ > k1) AND (|Δ| > k3) AND (Δ1Δ2 < 0) THEN patient’s progress is: improving quickly in an 
oscillation manner 
IF (-k1 ≤Δ≤ k1 ) AND (Δ1.Δ2>0 ˅ (|Δ1|≤k1 ˄ |Δ2|≤k1)) THEN patient’s progress is: no changes in a 
maintained form 

 
Therefore, the output of the PPM is a description of the patient’s progress in terms of the values 
of each previous variable: direction, velocity, and quality of change. An important feature of 
this module is its ability to dynamically self-adjust the interpretation of the patient’s progress 
depending on the different stages of treatment. 

According to medical literature related to MDD’s response to medication [43], there are four 
treatment stages: initial, partial response, response, and remission, which are defined by the 
patient’s progress behavior. The initial stage is the period of time in which there is no evidence 
that the treatment is acting. In the partial response stage the antidepressant starts functioning, 
but a reduction of 50% of the severity of symptoms’ on the depression scale (i.e. PHQ-9) is not 
yet reached. The response stage is reached when there is a reduction of 50%, suggesting that 
there is a response to medication. Finally, the remission phase starts when the patient is 
asymptomatic (i.e. no longer meets syndromal criteria for MDD and has no more than minimal 
symptoms). When reaching this phase the patients should continue taking the antidepressant for 
6 months to 1 year. In this study, in order to capture patients’ progress behaviors more precisely, 
we have extended the number of treatment stages to eight, in such a way that the new stages are 



 8

based on the original four. The eight stages used in this research are called:  IN for INitial, PR 
for Partial Response, CR for Consolidated Response, RC for Remission Continuation, RP for 
RelaPse, RM for Remission Maintenance, and RV for RecoVery.  

IN corresponds to the original initial stage, PR to the partial response stage, CR to the 
response stage, and RC and RM to the remission stage. RP represents the stage when the patient 
gets significantly worse after the response stage. This might indicate the initiation of a relapse. 
Therefore, the stage will not change until the patient starts improving. Finally, RV stage is 
reached when, over more than 43 weeks, a patient's PHQ-9 overall rate is less than kn (kn is a 
constant, set by experts, that defines the normal range of PHQ-9).  

PPM is able to characterize these stages using the patient progress rules described before and 
interpreting the rules appropriately in each phase. For example, the second rule described in 
Table 1 has two different interpretations in the IN (initial) and CR (consolidated response) 
stages. If the patient is in the IN stage a “no changes in a maintained form” behavior might be 
reasonable since it might take some time for the treatment to start functioning. Therefore, a 
green light is set. However, “no changes in a maintained form” is not a desirable behavior 
when the patient is in the CR stage. In this case, a yellow light is chosen to alert primary care 
physicians and psychiatrists of this fact. Each rule used by the PPM has been discussed and 
evaluated with the psychiatrists of Parc Sanitari Sant Joan de Déu and each constant value has 
been defined following their advice. 

3.2. Analysis Module 

The AM is a rule-based model that processes a set of heterogeneous information related to the 
patient with the goal of monitoring and assessing the process of the patient’s healing. It should 
present the information to the actors involved in an intuitive way that does not require too much 
interpretation time. To meet these requirements, the output of the AM is designed to provide 
synthesized visual information, and relevant and detailed information of the reasoning or 
analysis process. Such information will not only be very helpful for both doctor and patient, it 
will also be essential to facilitate the psychiatrist’s decision making. The set of heterogeneous 
information that the AM requires during the reasoning process is the following:  
 
 Progress of the patient state (i.e. the inferred rules obtained by PPM), 
 Incidence of new major stressful life events (i.e. Brugha questionnaire), 
 Significant variations in the physiological data (i.e. sleep, weight, and movement 

sensors), 
 Preexistence of alarms in the past weeks, 
 Number of weeks passed from the beginning of the medication, 
 Clinical history of patients regarding to prior suicide attempt or prior recurrence or 

relapse, 
 Continuous high risk response to persistent suicidal thoughts (i.e. question 9 of PHQ-9 

questionnaire and MINI’s suicide section). 
 

The AM’s rules system processes this set of inputs in order to establish the effectiveness of 
the patient’s treatment. AM produces two levels of conclusions: first it provides a classification 
that, in a very synthetic way, warns if the treatment progresses successfully, if the progress is 
non-satisfactory, or if the treatment is failing or has a high risk of failure; second it stores 
information about the rules that have been shot in the reasoning process and that allow an 
explanation of the above classification. This information allows the CM to provide feedback to 
stakeholders. 

Table 2 shows examples of three rules used in the AM reasoning’s processes based on a 
combination of the heterogeneous information sources available. The concepts of Semaphore, 
AM_Assessment, and Message that appear in the consequent rules are explained in the CM 
section in detail. 

 
TABLE 2 AN EXAMPLE OF THREE RULES THAT COMPOSE THE AM 



 9

IF (PPM is no changes in a maintained form) AND (PHASE is initial) AND 
(MEDICATION_WEEK < 4) AND not (Brugha_change) AND (suicide_thaught is low) AND 
not (physiological_data_variation) AND not (prior_recurrence) AND not (prior_relapse) 
THEN Semaphore is green AND AM_Assessment is alert AND Message is waiting for 
medication to be effective  

 

IF  (PPM is no changes in a maintained form) AND (PHASE is initial) AND 
(MEDICATION_WEEK > 4) AND not (Brugha_change) AND (suicide_thaught is low) AND 
not (physiological_data_variation) AND not (prior_recurrence) AND not (prior_relapse) 
THEN Semaphore is yellow AND AM_Assessment is alert AND Message is medication most 
probably is not effective 

IF (PPM is no changes in a maintained form) AND (PHASE is response) AND  
(MEDICATION_WEEK < 54) AND not (Brugha_change) AND (suicide_thaught is low) AND 
not (physiological_data_variation) AND not (prior_recurrence) AND not (prior_relapse) 
THEN Semaphore is green AND AM_Assessment is alert AND Message is no change 

 
Every 2 weeks patient’s information is updated (scheduled by the CM) and a short-term analysis 
of the patient’s state is performed by the PPM and AM. The results of the analysis are sent to 
the CM (communication module) which prepares and sends the appropriate messages and 
alarms to the involved actors (see Figure 2). The system is robust in order to deal with those 
situations where no data are registered on time, such as the patient not answering the 
questionnaires when required or the system being unable to save the data that were generated, 
etc. In these cases, the PPM is able to perform a 2-point reasoning as described before, and the 
AM sends an alarm to the physicians indicating that the patient is not being assessed by the 
major depression monitoring system.  

3.3. Communication Module 

The CM is responsible for scheduling the registration of patient’s data every 2 weeks, making 
the data available to the rest of the PAU modules, and transmitting the results of the monitoring 
process to those actors who are involved in the healing process, that is physicians, psychiatrists, 
and patients. As shown in Figure 5, this module provides four hierarchies of communication: 
semaphore, alerts, reports, and alarms. The highest level of the hierarchy, the semaphore, is 
visible for all actors involved in the system. A green light means that the patient is progressing 
adequately, indicating to the physicians that no further action is needed. A yellow light means 
that the patient is doing well but there is the possibility in the near future that the progress of the 
patient suffers a recess. In this case the primary care physician should closely observe the 
patient. An example of a yellow light could be when the PPM gives as output that the patient is 
improving quickly but a terrible life event, captured by the Brugha questionnaire, occurred 
recently. In this case the AM concludes that a yellow light is the adequate alert level and sends 
this information, plus the reasoning performed by the model, to the CM. A red light represents 
an alarm meaning that the patient is not doing well and that physicians need to take actions, 
such as to have a personal interview with the patient to asses him/her more deeply, change the 
patient's medication, increase the dosage of a medication, etc.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Fig. 5 Diagram of the CM: communication between the PAU and the actors involved in the healing process 
 

 Patient progressing adequately (green light) 
 Patient doing well but with possibility of a recess (yellow light) 
 Patient is not doing well; physicians need to take actions (red light) 

Semaphore 

Alerts

Alarms 

Reports 

Patients 

Physicians

Psychiatrists
           Each PHQ-9 measure  
           When needed (an alarm is produced) 
           Upon request 



 10

The format of the hierarchical levels, alerts, reports, and alarms, are presented as a set of text 
messages that explain the reasoning process carried out by the AM but with different language, 
priority, and detail depending on the level and type of the actor to whom the information is sent. 
The different messages to a particular actor can be inhibited or activated depending on the 
system requirements specified by psychiatrists and primary care physicians.  

Alerts are activated each time the patient is responding to the questionnaires. In accordance 
with the light’s color, the alert shows important information needed to interpret the light 
properly, and is specific to each actor. In order to satisfy efficiency of information delivery, 
alerts are produced dynamically through a defined structure to prepare the most suitable 
sentences that are rich in content without being repetitive. Reports explain in an extensive and 
detailed way the inference performed by the rule-based system defined in the AM, adapting the 
set of messages to each recipient. The reports are available upon request. Alarms inform 
psychiatrists and physicians about critical states that require taking specific actions and are 
transmitted rapidly by means of SMS, e-mail, etc. 

4. Results and discussion 

In this section, six hypothetical and clinically approved patient scenarios are described and the 
results of the PAU model for these cases are presented. All of these scenarios are inspired by 
experiences of psychiatrists collaborating in this study. This set of hypothetical patients has 
been defined in order to perform a rich and complete scenario evaluation. Each of these patients 
is monitored with the PAU and the four hierarchical levels that the CM offers, meaning that 
semaphore, alerts, reports, and alarms have been analyzed by the psychiatrists of Parc Sanitari 
Sant Joan de Déu. Based on this test, they have agreed that the proposed major depression 
remote monitoring system model promises to be a useful tool for monitoring patients and 
following their healing process.  
 
5.1 Scenario #1: A patient who responds to medication in the first weeks. 
 
Antidepressant therapy as a treatment has different effects on different people. Usually, if 
patients respond to a specific type of antidepressant, which means showing a reduction of 5 
points in their overall rate of the PHQ-9, it would occur between weeks 4 and 8 from the time 
they started treatment. Although some factors might influence the duration of this period, in the 
best-case scenario the patient responds to the prescribed antidepressant sooner. Case #1 is 
considered a best-case scenario patient that heals continuously, except for a worsening in week 
14. The semaphores provided by the monitoring system every 2 weeks are shown in Figure 6, 
representing the progress path of the patient during the 48 weeks of treatment.  
 

 
Fig. 6 Visual progress of Patient #1 during treatment at home. The patient responds well to the prescribed 

medication. The symbols represent the different lights of the semaphore: round = green; square = yellow; triangle = 



 11

red. The abscissa corresponds to the accumulated weeks of treatment and the ordinate stands for the overall rate of 
the PHQ-9 

 
Table 3 presents the set of messages associated to the progress of patient #1. The first column 
shows the number of weeks from the start of treatment and follow-up. The second column lists 
the overall rate of the PHQ-9. The third column describes the treatment stages the patient goes 
through. The last two columns show the outputs of the monitoring system, first the semaphore 
light, and second the messages to the patient. In this scenario only the messages to the patient 
are shown in order to keep the table to a manageable size. In the rest of the scenarios proposed, 
messages for psychiatrists will also be displayed. In this case, the messages for the patient are 
messages of encouragement. The patient is taking the medication adequately and the treatment 
is working well. Therefore, no red lights show up and no alarms are sent to the psychiatric unit.  

 
TABLE 3 SET OF MESSAGES ASSOCIATED TO THE PROGRESS OF PATIENT #1. THE PHASE COLUMN REPRESENTS THE STAGE 
ASSOCIATED TO THE PROGRESS OF THE PATIENT. THE MEANING IS: IN: INITIAL; PR: PARTIAL RESPONSE; CR: 
CONSOLIDATED RESPONSE; RC: REMISSION CONTINUATION; RP: RELAPSE; RM: REMISSION MAINTENANCE; RV: 
RECOVERY 

Week PHQ9 Phase Semaphore 
Message to Patient 

Alert 

0 25 
  

Welcome to the major depression remote monitoring system. Thank you for 
completing your first assessment.  Please complete your next assessment in 2 
weeks. 

2 23 IN G 
Good news, your treatment is proving effective! Please continue with your 
treatment as advised. 

4 20 PR G 
Very good, you are doing well and taking all necessary steps to ensure your 
improvement.  Your treatment is proving effective.  Please remember that 
compliance is important. 

6 20 PR G 
Good, you are continuing to improve.  Please continue with your treatment 
as advised. 

8 18 PR G 

Very good, you are doing well and taking all necessary steps to ensure your 
improvement.  Remember it is important that you continue with your 
treatment as advised.  We look forward to your newly completed assessment 
in 2 weeks. 

10 14 PR G 
Very good, you are continuing to improve. Even though you may feel better, 
it is important that you continue your treatment as advised. 

12 13 PR G 
Very good, you are continuing to improve.  Please continue with your 
treatment as advised. We look forward to your newly completed assessment 
in 2 weeks. 

14 15 PR Y 

Your assessment results are not showing any changes during the last weeks. 
Do not worry, as this is normal. Be sure to continue with your treatment as 
advised by your physician. We look forward to receiving your newly 
completed assessment in 2 weeks. 

16 12 CR Y 
Your assessment results are not still showing any changes during the last 
weeks. Please contact your physician to discuss your progress. 

18 8 CR G 
Excellent! It seems you are improving rapidly. Please remember it is 
important to continue with your treatment as advised. 

20 6 CR G 
Very good, you are continuing to improve. Make sure to continue taking 
your prescriptions as advised. We look forward to receiving your newly 
completed assessment in 2 weeks. 

22 4 RC G 
Very good, you improvement is going great. Congratulations, you have 
defeated depression! Please remember that even though you feel fine, it is 
very important that you continue your treatment as advised. 

24 3 RC G 
Great, you are doing well. Please remember that even though you feel fine, it 
is very important that you continue your treatment as advised to avoid any 
relapses. 

26 3 RC G 
Excellent, everything is going great. As you know, it is very important that 
you continue your treatment even though you feel fine. We look forward to 
receiving your newly completed assessment in 2 weeks. 

28 3 RC G 
Great, you are doing well. Please remember that even though you feel fine, it 
is very important that you continue your treatment as advised to avoid any 
relapses. 

30 2 RC G 
Excellent, everything is going great. As you know, it is very important that 
you continue your treatment even though you feel fine. 

32 3 RC G 

Great, you are doing well. Please remember that even though you feel fine, it 
is very important that you continue your treatment as advised to avoid any 
relapses. We look forward to receiving your newly completed assessment in 
2 weeks. 

34 3 RC G 
Excellent, everything is going great. As you know, it is very important that 
you continue your treatment even though you feel fine. 



 12

36 2 RC G 
Great, you are doing well. Please remember that even though you feel fine, it 
is very important that you continue your treatment as advised to avoid any 
relapses. 

38 3 RC G 
Excellent, everything is going great. As you know, it is very important that 
you continue your treatment even though you feel fine. We look forward to 
receiving your newly completed assessment in 2 weeks. 

40 3 RC G 
Great, you are doing well. Please remember that even though you feel fine, it 
is very important that you continue your treatment as advised to avoid any 
relapses.  

42 3 RC G 
Excellent, everything is going great. As you know, it is very important that 
you continue your treatment even though you feel fine. 

44 3 RC G 

Great, you are doing well. Please remember that even though you feel fine, it 
is very important that you continue your treatment as advised to avoid any 
relapses. We look forward to receiving your newly completed assessment in 
2 weeks. 

46 3 RV G 
Excellent, everything is going great. As you know, it is very important that 
you continue your treatment even though you feel fine. 

48 3 RV G 
Congratulations! You have completely recovered from your depression. 
Monitoring ends here. Please continue following the instructions of your 
physician. Good-bye. 

 
 
5.2 Scenario #2: A patient who does not respond to medication in the first weeks 
 
This scenario shows a patient that does not respond to the antidepressant medication prescribed 
by his/her physician during the first 8-week period. This scenario represents a typical case of a 
woman in her post-menopause stage of life. According to clinical literature, menopausal status 
and old age are predictors of a poor response to antidepressant treatments [44]. Psychiatrists 
take action by changing the type of antidepressant and immediately the patient shows a positive 
response to the new medication. Figure 7 shows the progress of the patient through the 
visualization of the semaphore lights involved in the healing process.  

Table 4 presents the set of messages associated to the progress of patient #2. The 
organization of the table is exactly the same as Table 3 (patient #1). The messages shown are 
intended for the patient. As in the previous patient, the messages offer continuing 
encouragement, however, in this case at week 8 a warning message is sent to the patient asking 
that the doctor be contacted. Although it is not shown here, due to space limitations, the 
physicians receive an alarm through SMS or e-mail indicating the updated status of the patient. 
The doctor decides to change the medication and use a different antidepressant for this patient 
after receiving the results from the 8-week assessment. The new medication works well and the 
depression is overcome at week 22.  
 
 

 
Fig. 7 Visual progress of Patient #2 during treatment at home. The patient does not respond to the first prescribed 
medication, but does respond when the medication is changed. The symbols represent the different lights of the 

semaphore,round = green; square = yellow; triangle = red. The abscissa corresponds to the accumulated weeks of 
treatment and the ordinate stands for the overall rate of the PHQ-9  



 13

 
 

TABLE 4 SET OF MESSAGES ASSOCIATED TO THE PROGRESS OF PATIENT #2. THE PHASE COLUMN REPRESENTS THE STAGE 
ASSOCIATED TO THE PROGRESS OF THE PATIENT.  THE MEANING IS: IN: INITIAL; PR: PARTIAL RESPONSE; CR: 
CONSOLIDATED RESPONSE; RC: REMISSION CONTINUATION; RP: RELAPSE; RM: REMISSION MAINTENANCE; RV: 
RECOVERY 

Week PHQ9 Phase Semaphore 
Messages to Patient 

Alert 

0 25 
  

Welcome to the major depression remote monitoring system. Thank you for 
completing your first assessment.  Please complete your next assessment in 2 
weeks. 

2 25 IN G 
Your assessment results are not showing any changes during the last weeks. 
Do not worry; the treatment takes time to be effective.  Please be patient and 
continue with your treatment as advised by your physician. 

4 24 IN Y 
Your assessment results are not still showing any changes during the last 
weeks.  Treatment takes time to be effective, please continue to be patient and 
continue with your treatment as advised. 

6 23 IN Y 
Your assessment results are not still showing any changes during the last 
weeks.  Please contact your physician to discuss your progress. 

8 22 IN R 
Your depression is not responding to your medication yet.  Please contact 
your physician as soon as possible for a possible adjustment to your treatment. 

10 14 PR Y 
Good, your treatment is now proving effective.  Please continue with your 
treatment as advised. 

12 13 PR G 
Excellent! It seems you are improving rapidly. Please remember it is 
important to continue with your treatment as advised. We look forward to 
receiving your newly completed assessment in 2 weeks. 

14 15 PR Y 
Your assessment results are not showing any changes during the last weeks. 
Please make sure you continue taking your medication as advised. 

16 12 CR Y 
Your assessment results are not still showing any changes during the last 
weeks.  Please contact your physician to discuss your progress. 

18 8 CR G 
Excellent! It seems you are improving again rapidly. Please remember it is 
important to continue with your treatment as advised. 

20 6 CR G 
Very good, you are continuing to improve.  Please continue with your 
treatment as advised. We look forward to your newly completed assessment in 
2 weeks. 

22 4 RC G 
Very good, you improvement is going great. Congratulations, you have 
defeated depression! Please remember that even though you feel fine, it is 
very important that you continue your treatment as advised. 

24 3 RC G 
Great, you are doing well. Please remember that even though you feel fine, it 
is very important that you continue your treatment as advised to avoid any 
relapses.

26 3 RC G 
Excellent, everything is going great. As you know, it is very important that 
you continue your treatment even though you feel fine. We look forward to 
receiving your newly completed assessment in 2 weeks.

28 3 RC G 
Great, you are doing well. Please remember that even though you feel fine, it 
is very important that you continue your treatment as advised to avoid any 
relapses.

30 2 RC G 
Excellent, everything is going great. As you know, it is very important that 
you continue your treatment even though you feel fine.

32 3 RC G 

Great, you are doing well. Please remember that even though you feel fine, it 
is very important that you continue your treatment as advised to avoid any 
relapses. We look forward to receiving your newly completed assessment in 
2 weeks.

34 3 RC G 
Excellent, everything is going great. As you know, it is very important that 
you continue your treatment even though you feel fine.

36 2 RC G 
Great, you are doing well. Please remember that even though you feel fine, it 
is very important that you continue your treatment as advised to avoid any 
relapses.

38 3 RC G 
Excellent, everything is going great. As you know, it is very important that 
you continue your treatment even though you feel fine. We look forward to 
receiving your newly completed assessment in 2 weeks.

40 3 RC G 
Great, you are doing well. Please remember that even though you feel fine, it 
is very important that you continue your treatment as advised to avoid any 
relapses.

42 3 RC G 
Excellent, everything is going great. As you know, it is very important that 
you continue your treatment even though you feel fine.

44 3 RC G 

Great, you are doing well. Please remember that even though you feel fine, it 
is very important that you continue your treatment as advised to avoid any 
relapses. We look forward to receiving your newly completed assessment in 
2 weeks.

46 3 RV G 
Excellent, everything is going great. As you know, it is very important that 
you continue your treatment even though you feel fine.



 14

48 3 RV G 

Congratulations! You have completely recovered from your depression. 
Monitoring ends here. Please continue following the instructions of your 
physician. Good-bye. 

  
5.3 Scenario #3: A patient with one overcome relapse risk  
 
This scenario represents a patient who is initially responding to antidepressant treatment, but 
suddenly stops taking medications; the sudden stop could be for any number of reasons. As a 
result, the patient faces a relapse condition. Due to the close monitoring provided, GPs and/or 
psychiatrists would be able to quickly detect the change and make an informed decision about 
the medication, for example should they prescribe a different antidepressant that does not have 
the same side-effect profile as the first medication. Figure 8 shows the visual progress of the 
patient's healing process through the semaphore lights.  

Table 5 presents the set of messages associated with the progress of patient #3. The structure 
of the table is the same as those of the previous patients'. In this case, the messages shown are 
those established for psychiatrists. The alerts are continuously indicating to the psychiatrists the 
situation of the patient, such as improving adequately, improving rapidly, worsening rapidly, 
risk of relapse, etc. This information is given to the doctors every 2 weeks. From week 22 to 
week 32 the monitoring system sends alarms to the doctors that warn them of the possibility and 
risk of a relapse. Psychologists take action and decide to change the antidepressant. The new 
treatment is effective and from week 28 the patient starts improving. However, as can be seen in 
Figure 8, in week 30 the semaphore is still red although the patient is improving. The red 
semaphore is due to the fact that although the patient had an improvement in week 30 compared 
to week 28, when that improvement is compared to week 26 there is very little overall 
improvement. Therefore, the situation is still not stable. The yellow light in week 32 is due to 
the past week's red alerts. This information is crucial to the physician's ability to make the 
appropriate decision at the appropriate time.   

 
 

 
Fig. 8 Visual progress of Patient #3 during treatment at home. The patient leaves the medication and faces a 

relapse that he/she is able to overcome. The symbols represent the different lights of the semaphore, round 
= green; square = yellow; triangle = red. The abscissa corresponds to the accumulated weeks of treatment 

and the ordinate stands for the overall rate of the PHQ-9 
 
 

TABLE 5 SET OF MESSAGES ASSOCIATED TO THE PROGRESS OF PATIENT #3. THE PHASE COLUMN REPRESENTS THE STAGE 
ASSOCIATED TO THE PROGRESS OF THE PATIENT. THE MEANING IS: IN: INITIAL; PR: PARTIAL RESPONSE; CR: 
CONSOLIDATED RESPONSE; RC: REMISSION CONTINUATION; RP: RELAPSE; RM: REMISSION MAINTENANCE; RV: 
RECOVERY 

Week PHQ9 Phase Semaphore Messages to the Psychiatric Unit 



 15

Alert Alarm 

0 25 
  The major depression remote monitoring starts.    

2 23 IN G The patient is improving adequately.   
4 20 PR G The patient is improving adequately. Responding to medication.   
6 20 PR G The patient is improving adequately.   
8 18 PR G The patient is improving adequately.   
10 14 PR G The patient is improving adequately.   
12 13 PR G The patient is improving adequately.   
14 12 CR G The patient is improving adequately.   
16 8 CR G The patient is improving adequately.   
18 5 RM G The patient is improving adequately.   
20 5 RM G The patient is improving adequately.   
22 
 

10 
 

RP 
 

R 
 

The patient is worsening rapidly. Risk of relapse. 
 

Relapse might have 
started. 

24 12 RP R The patient is worsening rapidly. Risk of relapse for 2 weeks. Relapse continues. 
26 15 RP R The patient is worsening rapidly. Risk of relapse for 4 weeks. Relapse continues. 
28 19 RP R The patient is worsening rapidly. Risk of relapse for 8 weeks. Relapse continues. 
30 14 RP R Risk of relapse reduces. Relapse stops. 
32 10 CR Y The patient is improving rapidly. Previous red alarm. 
34 9 CR G The patient is improving adequately.   
36 6 CR G The patient is improving adequately.   
38 5 RM G The patient is improving.   
40 4 RM G The patient is improving.   
42 3 RM G The patient is improving.   
44 3 RM G The patient is recovered.   
46 3 RM G The patient is recovered.   
48 3 RV G The patient is recovered. Monitoring ends here.    

 
5.4 Scenario #4: A patient with residual depressive symptoms 
 
This scenario shows a patient who is improving until week 20, then, due to a serious life-
threatening event in week 12, the loss of a loved-one, the patient is not cured completely and 
ends up with residual depressive symptoms after 48 weeks despite continued use of medication. 
In this scenario, the patient experiences a serious relapse from week 22 as an effect of the recent 
loss of a loved-one. Since the patient’s PHQ-9 level is still in the range of consolidated response 
(CR) to medication and the patient does not get worse, the semaphores are yellow.  In spite of 
the fact that the physician augments the doses of the antidepressant and prescribes 
psychotherapy treatment as a complementary method, the patient remains in a state of 
depression with residual symptoms until the end of the monitoring. Figure 9 describes visually 
the progress of the patient using the semaphore lights that are the output of the monitoring 
system.  

 
Fig. 9 Visual progress of Patient #4 during treatment at home. The patient remains in a state of depression with 

residual symptoms. The symbols represent the different lights of the semaphore, round = green; square = yellow; 
triangle = red. The abscissa corresponds to the accumulated weeks of treatment and the ordinate stands for the overall 

rate of the PHQ-9 
 



 16

Table 6 presents the messages to the patient related to his/her situation indicating that in the last months 
there is no change while the patient is in the possible relapse state.   
 
TABLE 6 SET OF MESSAGES ASSOCIATED TO THE PROGRESS OF PATIENT #4. THE PHASE COLUMN REPRESENTS THE STAGE 
ASSOCIATED TO THE PROGRESS OF THE PATIENT. THE MEANING IS: IN: INITIAL; PR: PARTIAL RESPONSE; CR: 
CONSOLIDATED RESPONSE; RC: REMISSION CONTINUATION; RP: RELAPSE; RM: REMISSION MAINTENANCE; RV: 
RECOVERY 

Week PHQ9 Phase Semaphore 
Messages to Patient 

Alert 

0 25 
  

Welcome to the major depression remote monitoring system. Thank 
you for completing your first assessment. Please complete your next 
assessment in 2 weeks. 

2 23 IN G 
Good news, your treatment is proving effective! Please continue with 
your treatment as advised. 

4 20 PR G 
Very good, you are doing well and taking all necessary steps to ensure 
your improvement. Your treatment is proving effective.  Please 
remember that compliance is important. 

6 20 PR G 
Good, you are continuing to improve.  Please continue with your 
treatment as advised. 

8 18 PR G 

Very good, you are doing well and taking all necessary steps to ensure your 
improvement.  Remember it is important that you continue with your 
treatment as advised. We look forward to your newly completed assessment 
in 2 weeks. 

10 14 PR G 
Very good, you are continuing to improve. Even though you may feel better, 
it is important that you continue your treatment as advised. 

12 13 PR Y 

It seems you’ve been through a very difficult situation recently. It is 
very important to continue with your treatment, and you should 
contact your physician. We look forward to your newly completed 
assessment in 2 weeks. 

14 12 CR G 
Good, it seems you are improving. Please remember it is important to 
continue with your treatment as advised. We look forward to receiving 
your newly completed assessment in 2 weeks. 

16 8 CR G 
Very good, you are continuing to improve. Make sure to continue 
taking your prescriptions as advised. 

18 5 RM G 
Excellent, you improvement is going great! Congratulations, you have 
defeated depression! Please remember that even though you feel fine, 
it is very important that you continue your treatment as advised. 

20 5 RM G 
Great, you are doing well. Please remember that even though you feel 
fine, it is very important that you continue your treatment as advised 
to avoid any relapses. 

22 10 CR R 
Caution! You are worsening rapidly. You are facing a risk of relapse. 
You should contact your physician as soon as possible to discuss your 
progress. 

24 12 CR R 
Caution! You are worsening rapidly. You have a high risk of relapse. 
If you have not already done so you should contact your physician as 
soon as possible to discuss your progress. 

26 13 CR R 
Caution! You are still worsening. You have a high risk of relapse. If 
you have not already done so you should contact your physician 
immediately. Make sure to continue taking your treatment as advised.  

28 11 CR Y 
Caution! You are still not showing any change. Please seek help from 
your physician if you need to do so. 

30 10 CR G 

Very good, you are doing well. Make sure to continue taking your 
treatment as advised. Please remember compliance is important. We 
look forward to receiving your newly completed assessment in 2 
weeks. 

32 8 CR G 
Very good, you are continuing to do well. Make sure to continue 
taking your treatment as advised. Please remember compliance is 
important.  

34 9 CR Y 
Caution! Your assessment results are not showing any changes during 
the last weeks. Please be sure to continue with your treatment as 
advised by your physician. 

36 9 CR Y 
Caution! Your assessment results are not showing any changes during 
the last weeks. Please be sure to continue with your treatment as 
advised. 

38 8 CR Y 

Caution! Your assessment results are not showing any changes during 
the last weeks. Please be sure to continue with your treatment as 
advised. Remember, compliance is important. We look forward to 
receiving your newly completed assessment in 2 weeks. 

40 8 CR Y 
Caution! Your assessment results are not showing any changes during 
the last weeks. Please be sure to continue with your treatment as 
advised. 



 17

42 8 CR Y 

Caution! Your assessment results are not showing any changes during 
the last weeks. Please be sure to continue with your treatment as 
advised. Remember, compliance is important. We look forward to 
receiving your newly completed assessment in 2 weeks. 

44 8 CR Y 
Caution! Your assessment results are not showing any changes during 
the last weeks. Please be sure to continue with your treatment as 
advised. Please seek help from your physician if you need to do so. 

46 7 CR Y 

Caution! Your assessment results are not showing any changes during 
the last weeks. Please remember it is important to continue with your 
treatment as advised. We look forward to receiving your newly 
completed assessment in 2 weeks. 

48 8 CR G 

Caution! Your assessment results are still not showing any changes 
during the last weeks. You are facing a risk of relapse. You should 
contact your physician immediately. Monitoring ends here. As you 
can’t be considered fully recovered from depression, please continue 
following the instructions of your physician. 

 
5.5 Scenario #5: A patient that has several changes in the different phases  
 
This scenario represents a patient who sometimes responds to medication and improves, and 
sometimes worsens and reverts to previous stages. The first worsening had no specific reason 
and since it did not continue it had no effect on the procedure other than alerting the physicians 
to be cautious concerning the patient. It was more of a mood change and does not have any 
major importance. The second worsening lasted longer than the first and grabbed the attention 
of the physicians.  A change in the medication dosage was made and the patient began to 
improve again. After improving for few weeks, around weeks 34 and 36 the patient stops taking 
the medication and as a consequence experiences a relapse.  The treatment period ends without 
patient recovery. Figure 10 offers a visual representation of the semaphore lights that described 
the progress of the patient #5. Table 7 presents the messages to the patient related to his/her 
situation indicating that it is very important that he/she continues taking the medication and 
when it is important that he/she gets in touch with the physicians.  

 

 
Fig. 10 Visual progress of Patient #5 during treatment at home. The patient has several changes in different 

phases. The symbols represent the different lights of the semaphore, round = green; square = yellow; triangle = red. 
The abscissa corresponds to the accumulated weeks of treatment and the ordinate stands for the overall rate of the 

PHQ-9 

 
TABLE 7 SET OF MESSAGES ASSOCIATED TO THE PROGRESS OF PATIENT #5. THE PHASE COLUMN REPRESENTS THE STAGE 
ASSOCIATED TO THE PROGRESS OF THE PATIENT. THE MEANING IS: IN: INITIAL; PR: PARTIAL RESPONSE; CR: 
CONSOLIDATED RESPONSE; RC: REMISSION CONTINUATION; RP: RELAPSE; RM: REMISSION MAINTENANCE; RV: 
RECOVERY 

Week PHQ9 Phase Semaphore 
Messages to Patient 

Alert 

0 25 IN 
 

Welcome to the major depression remote monitoring system. Thank you for 
completing your first assessment.  Please complete your next assessment in 2 weeks. 



 18

2 23 IN G 
Good news, your treatment is proving effective! Please continue with your treatment 
as advised. 

4 20 PR G 
Very good, you are doing well and taking all necessary steps to ensure your 
improvement.  Your treatment is proving effective.  Please remember that compliance 
is important. 

6 18 PR G Good, you are continuing to improve.  Please continue with your treatment as advised. 

8 22 IN R 
It seems you are doing slightly worse. You should contact your physician as soon as 
possible to discuss your progress. Please remember to continue with your treatment as 
advised. 

10 17 PR Y 
Your assessment results are not still showing any changes during the last weeks.  
Make sure to continue taking your prescriptions as advised. We look forward to 
receiving your newly completed assessment in 2 weeks. 

12 13 PR G 

Very good, you are doing well and taking all necessary steps to ensure your 
improvement.  Your treatment is proving effective.  Please remember that 
compliance is important. 

14 12 CR G 
Good, you are continuing to improve.  Please continue with your treatment 
as advised. 

16 10 CR G 

Very good, you are doing well and taking all necessary steps to ensure your 
improvement.  Please continue with your treatment as advised. We look 
forward to receiving your newly completed assessment in 2 weeks. 

18 11 CR Y Good, you are continuing to improve.  Please continue with your treatment as advised. 

20 13 RP R 
Caution! You are showing more symptoms than your last assessment. You are facing 
a slight risk of relapse. Please contact your physician to discuss your progress. 

22 13 RP R 
Caution! Your condition is worsening. You have a high risk of relapse. If you have 
not already done so you should contact your physician as soon as possible to discuss 
your progress. Please remember to continue with your treatment as advised. 

24 11 CR Y 

Very good, you are doing well and taking all necessary steps to ensure your 
improvement.  Your treatment is proving effective.  Please remember that compliance 
is important. We look forward to receiving your newly completed assessment in 2 
weeks. 

26 9 CR G 
Very good, you are continuing to improve.  Please continue with your treatment as 
advised. We look forward to your newly completed assessment in 2 weeks. 

28 7 CR G 
Very good, you are continuing to improve.  Please continue with your treatment as 
advised. 

30 8 CR Y 
Your assessment results are not showing any changes during the last weeks. Be sure to 
continue with your treatment as advised by your physician. 

32 5 RM G 
Very good, you improvement is going great. Congratulations, you have defeated 
depression! Please remember that even though you feel fine, it is very important that 
you continue your treatment as advised. 

34 4 RM G 
Very good, you are continuing to improve.  Please continue with your treatment as 
advised. We look forward to your newly completed assessment in 2 weeks. 

36 4 RM G 
Your assessment results are not showing any changes during the last weeks. Be sure to 
continue with your treatment as advised by your physician. 

38 6 CR R 
Your assessment results are showing slightly more symptoms than 2 weeks ago. If it 
continues worsening, you should contact your physician. 

40 7 CR R 

Caution! Your condition is worsening. You have a slight risk of relapse. If you have 
not already done so you should contact your physician as soon as possible to discuss 
your progress. Please remember to continue with your treatment as advised. We look 
forward to your newly completed assessment in 2 weeks. 

42 5 RM R 
Your assessment results are not showing any changes during the last weeks. Be sure to 
continue with your treatment as advised by your physician. 

44 3 RM Y 
Very good, you are continuing to improve.  Please continue with your treatment as 
advised. 

46 13 RP R 
Caution! Your condition is worsening rapidly. Your have a slight risk of relapse. You 
should contact your physician as soon as possible to discuss your progress. 

48 13 RP R 

Caution! Your condition is worsening rapidly. Your have a slight risk of relapse. If 
you haven't already, you should contact your physician as soon as possible to discuss 
your progress. Monitoring ends here. As you can’t be considered fully recovered from 
depression, please continue following the instructions of your physician. 

 
 
5.6 Scenario #6: A patient with three consecutive relapses  
 
This scenario represents a patient that experiences two relapses during his/her recovery process 
and eventually ends up not fully recovered and with medium symptoms. The first relapse is due 
to the occurrence of a life-threatening event in the patient’s life, job loss. In a few more weeks 
the patient falls into another full-blown depression and the physician prescribes him/her a higher 



 19

dosage of antidepressant. After a few intakes the effectiveness of the medication becomes clear, 
but the patient has problems with the side effects of the treatment and quits taking the 
medication. This is the reason why in week 46, patient #6 has a worsening condition and a risk 
of relapse.    

Figure 11 shows the output of the major depression monitoring system semaphore clarifying 
the progress of the patient during the entire treatment process.  

 
Fig. 11 Visual progress of Patient #6 during treatment at home. The patient has three consecutive relapses. The 

symbols represent the different lights of the semaphore, round = green; square = yellow; triangle = red. The abscissa 
corresponds to the accumulated weeks of treatment and the ordinate stands for the overall rate of the PHQ-9  

 

Table 8 presents the messages that he monitoring system offers to the psychiatric unit in order 
to facilitate the monitoring of the patient’s progress and to make decisions when necessary. In 
this case, the alerts inform the physicians when things are not going well, for example in week 
12 when there is a yellow light, a message indicating that the patient is responding to 
medication but is showing stagnant progress will be sent to the physician. The monitoring 
system also sends alarm messages to psychiatrists for this patient because several red-light 
situations occur. The alarms can indicate when the relapses start, grow, or stop. 
 
TABLE 8 SET OF MESSAGES ASSOCIATED TO THE PROGRESS OF PATIENT #6. THE PHASE COLUMN REPRESENTS THE STAGE 
ASSOCIATED TO THE PROGRESS OF THE PATIENT. THE MEANING IS: IN: INITIAL; PR: PARTIAL RESPONSE; CR: 
CONSOLIDATED RESPONSE; RC: REMISSION CONTINUATION; RP: RELAPSE; RM: REMISSION MAINTENANCE; RV: 
RECOVERY 

Week PHQ9 Phase Semaphore 
Messages to Psychiatric Unit 

Alert Alarm 

0 25     Monitoring starts.   
2 21 IN   G The patient improves adequately.   
4 16 PR G The patient is improving rapidly.    
6 12 CR G The patient is improving rapidly.    
8 8 CR G The patient is improving adequately.   
10 6 CR G The patient is improving adequately.   
12 9 CR Y The patient shows no change.   
14 11 RP R The patient is worsening rapidly. Risk of relapse. Relapse starts 
16 15 RP R The patient is worsening rapidly. Risk of relapse for 2 weeks. Relapse continues 
18 16 RP R The patient is worsening rapidly. Risk of relapse for 4 weeks. Relapse continues 
20 15 RP R The patient shows no change. Relapse stops 

22 10      CR    Y    The patient is improving adequately.                                           Previous red semaph. 
24 8 CR G The patient is improving adequately.   
26 5 RM G The patient is improving adequately.   
28 6 CR G The patient is improving adequately.   
30 8 RP R The patient is worsening rapidly. Risk of relapse. Relapse starts 
32 10 RP R The patient is worsening rapidly. Risk of relapse for 2 weeks. Relapse continues 
34 13 RP R The patient is worsening rapidly. Risk of relapse for 4 weeks. Relapse continues 
36 15 RP R The patient is worsening rapidly. Risk of relapse for 6 weeks. Relapse continues 
38 14 RP R The patient shows no change. Relapse stops 

40 12 CR Y The patient is improving adequately. Previous red semaph. 
42 9 CR G The patient is improving adequately.   



 20

44 5 RM G The patient is improving rapidly.   

46 13 RP R The patient is worsening rapidly. Risk of relapse. Relapse starts 
48 
 

13 
 

RP 
 

R 
 

The patient is worsening rapidly. Risk of relapse. Monitoring 
ends here. The patient is not recovered. 

Relapse continues 
 

 
The Patient Assessment Unit is implemented as prototype software with both web and mobile 
interfaces. PPM, AM, and CM, and the database of the system are all implemented using java, 
Mysql, RESTFUL, and Android technologies. The functionality of each prototype of each 
module has been separately tested and currently PAU is in its last stage of the integration 
process. 

As commented before, we think that the PAU model could be of high usefulness when 
applied to Public Health Systems, reducing medical costs and enhancing the follow-up of the 
progress of patients. However, we also think that the proposed PAU model can be developed by 
clinicians using low-cost methodologies as the ones describe by Zhang et al. [45]. In this sense, 
a single doctor could develop a PAU app and use it to their own patients in an easy and effective 
way. 
 
5.7 PAU Limitations 
 

In this section the main limitations of the proposed Patient assessment unit (PAU) model are 
reviewed.  

First, suicide is a major risk in patients suffering from depressive disorder. A single question 
from the PHQ-9, used in the Patient Progress Module (PPM), does not have adequate sensitivity 
and specificity. Although the Analysis Module (AM) uses as part of its reasoning the M.I.N.I. 
suicide risk questionnaire in order to detect suicidal intentions when a patient gives the highest 
value to question 9 of PHQ-9 (i.e., thoughts that you would be better off dead or of hurting 
yourself in some way), we think that it can be interesting that a future PPM includes a validated 
measure such as the six-item Suicidal Affect-Behavior-Cognition Scale (SABCS) to perform 
individual evaluation on affect, behavior and cognition related to suicide risk [46]. 

Second, the PPM lacks of therapeutic component. Therefore, it would be necessary that a 
future PPM should be able to incorporate the psychotherapeutic component. Evidence based 
psychotherapy such as cognitive behavior therapy can be delivered via internet for a long 
duration and such intervention is cost-effective [47]. 

5. Conclusions and Future work 

Major depressive disorder is a very common mental disorder worldwide which can seriously 
affect a person's health, wellbeing, and life. Depression is a long-term condition and it is widely 
known for its recurrent characteristic. More systematic and frequent follow-up approaches in 
public healthcare systems could reduce the risk, or help in the early detection, of relapse and 
recurrence in major depressive patients, therefore, contributing to public well-being. A major 
depression monitoring system that takes advantage of current technologies, facilitates a more 
comprehensive follow-up of the progress of patients during their home stay after being 
diagnosed with major depressive disorder by a medical specialist. It is important to note that the 
monitoring system does not intend to substitute the physician or the psychiatrist, but rather it 
gives extended information about the changes suffered in patients, which doctors do not usually 
have access to due to the infrequency of visits they are able to make with each patient in relation 
to clinical assistance pressure that Public Health Systems often suffer. 

The major depression monitoring system covers this necessity by taking advantage of its 
patient assessment unit that follows the progress of the patients in a short-term basis during their 
recovery in order to understand their common behaviors and provide advice to these patients, 
their psychiatrists, and their primary care physicians. In this paper, the Patient Assessment Unit 
(PAU) is presented and tested by means of a set of hypothetical patients that have been defined 
based on clinically possible cases in order to perform a complete scenario evaluation. The 
application of the PAU to this set of hypothetical patients suggests the utility of the platform 
that has been verified by the psychiatrists of Parc Sanitari Sant Joan de Déu involved in this 



 21

study. The next step is testing the model with real data collected from real patients. In this 
respect, PAU is now being implemented as a Mobile App and a website. This will allow the 
refinement of the PAU following the comments and suggestions of the patients, general 
practitioners, and psychiatrists.  
 
References 
 
[1] Hiteford HA, Degenhardt L, Rehm J, Baxter AJ, Ferrari AJ, Erskine HE, Charlson FJ, 

Norman RE, Flaxman AD, Johns N, Burstein R, Murray CJ, Vos T (2013)  Global burden of 
disease attributable to mental and substance use disorders: findings from the Global Burden 
of Disease Study 2010, Lancet. 382(9904): 1575-86.  

[2]  Sobocki P, Jönsson B, Angst J, Rehnberg C (2006) Cost of depression in Europe, The 
Journal of Mental Health Policy and Economics 9:87-98. 

[3] Ho RCM, Mak KM, Chua ANC, Ho CSH, Mak A (2013) The effect of severity of 
depressive disorder on economic burden in a university hospital in Singapore. Expert Rev. 
Pharmacoecon Outcomes Res.  13(4):549-59. PMID:23977979. 

[4] Papakostas GI, Homberger CH, Fava M (2008) A meta-analysis of clinical trials comparing 
mirtazapine with selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors for the treatment of major depressive 
disorder, Journal of Psychopharmacology. 22(8):843-8. PMID: 18308801. 

[5] Taylor MJ, Freemantle N, Geddes JR, Bhagwagar Z (2006) Early onset of selective 
serotonin reuptake inhibitor antidepressant action: systematic review and meta-analysis, 
Achieve of General Psychiatry. 63(11):1217-23. PMID: 17088502 

[3] Fernández A, Haro JM, Codony M (2006) Treatment adequacy of anxiety and depressive 
disorders: primary versus specialised care in Spain, J. Affect. Disord. 96: 9–20. 

[4] Lecrubier Y (2007) Widespread underrecognition and undertreatment of anxiety and mood 
disorders: results from 3 European Studies, J Clin Psychiatry 68(2):36–41.  

[8] Üstün TB, Sartorius N (1995) Mental Illness in General Health Care, Chichester: John 
Wiley. 

[9] Oöpik P,  Aluoja A,  Kalda R, Maaroos HI (2006)  Family doctors' problems and motivating 
factors in management of depression, BMC family practice 7: 64. 

[10] Fernández A, Pinto-Meza A, Bellón JA, Roura-Poch P, Haro JM, Autonell J, Palao DJ, 
Peñarrubia MT, Fernández R, Blanco E, Luciano JV, Serrano-Blanco A (2010) Is major 
depression adequately diagnosed and treated by primary care physicians? Results from the 
DASMAP study, Gen. Hosp. Psychiat. 32-2:201–209. 

[11] Pollock K, Grime J (2002) Patients' perceptions of entitlement to time in general practice 
consultations for depression: qualitative study, BMJ 325-687. 

[12] Fava M (2003) Diagnosis and definition of treatment-resistant depression, Biological 
Psychiatry 53:649–659. 

[13] Nierenberg AA, Petersen TJ, Alpert JE (2003)  Prevention of Relapse and Recurrence in 
Depression: The Role of Long-Term Pharmacotherapy and Psychotherapy, Journal of 
Clinical Psychiatry 64:13-17. 

[14] Zhang MWB, Ho RCM (2015)  Enabling Psychiatrists to Explore the Full Potential of E-
Health. Front Psychiatry. 15; 6:177. PMID: 26696912. 

[15] http://www.beatingtheblues.co.uk/ 
[16] https://moodgym.anu.edu.au/welcome/new/splash. 
[17] Chattopadhyay S, Kaur P, Rabhi F, Acharya UR (2011) Neural Network Approaches to 

Grade Adult Depression, Journal of Medical Systems 36:2803-15. 
[18] Yu S, Lin Y (2008)  Applications of Fuzzy Theory on Health Care: An Example of 

Depression Disorder Classification Based on FCM, WSEAS Transactions on Information 
Science and Applications 5:31-36. 

[19] McBurnie K, Kwiatkowska M, Matthews L, D’Angiulli A (2007) A Multi-factor Model for 
the Assessment of Depression Associated with Obstructive Sleep Apnea: A Fuzzy Logic 
Approach, in Fuzzy Information Processing Society, NAFIPS '07. Annual Meeting of the 
North American, San Diego, 301-306. 



 22

[20] Kwiatkowskaa M, Kielan K (2013)  Fuzzy logic and semiotic methods in modeling of 
medical concepts. Fuzzy sets and systems, Fuzzy Sets and Systems 214:35-50. 

[21] Aamodt A, Gundersen OE, Loge JH, Wasteson E, Szczepanski T (2010) Case-Based 
Reasoning for Assessment and Diagnosis of Depression in Palliative Care, in IEEE 23rd 
International Symposium on Computer-Based Medical Systems (CBMS), Perth, 480-485. 

[22] Zhang ZX, Tian XW, Lim JS (2011) New Algorithm for the Depression Diagnosis Using 
HRV: A Neuro-Fuzzy Approach, in International Symposium on Bioelectronics and 
Bioinformatics (ISBB), Suzhou, 283-286. 

[23] Satter RM, Cohen T, Ortiz P, Kahol K, Mackenzie J, Olson C, Johnson M, Patel VL (2012) 
Avatar-based simulation in the evaluation of diagnosis and management of mental health 
disorders in primary care, Journal of Biomedical Informatics 45(6):1137-1150. 

[24] Hu B, Hu B, Wan V, Dennis V, Chen H, Li L, Zhou Q (2010) Ontology-based ubiquitous 
monitoring and treatment against depression, Journal Wireless Communications & Mobile 
Computing - Pervasive Computing Technology and Its Applications 10:1303-1319. 

[25] Zheng F, Hu B, Liu L, Zhu V, Li Y (2009) Fuzzy Logic in Exploring Data Effects: A Way 
to Unveil Uncertainty in EEG Feedback, in In proceeding of: Digital Human Modeling, 
Second International Conference, ICDHM , San Diego, 754-763. 

[26] Serretti A, Olgiati P, Liebman MN, Hu H, Zhang Y, Zanardi I, Colombo C, Smeraldi E 
(2007)  Clinical prediction of antidepressant response in mood disorders: Linear multivariate 
vs. neural network models, Psychiatry Research 152:223–231. 

[27] Aziz AA, Klein MCA, Treur J (2009)  An Ambient Intelligent Agent for Relapse and 
Recurrence Monitoring in Unipolar Depression, Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence 
5651:186-190. 

[28] Dickerson RF, Gorlin EI, Stankovic JA (2011) Empath: a Continuous Remote Emotional 
Health Monitoring System for Depressive Illness, in Wireless Health, October 10-13, San 
Diego, 5. 

[29] Sung M, Marci C, Pentland A (2005)  Objective Physiological and Behavioral Measures 
for Identifying and Tracking Depression State in Clinically Depressed Patients, MIT 
Technical Report 595:1-20. 

[30] Optimisim Apps. http://www.findingoptimism.com/ [accessed: 15.Jan.2013]. 
[31] Warmedarm L, Riper H, Klein M, Van Den Ven P, Rocha A, Henriques MR, Tousset E, 

Silva H, Andersson G, Cuijpers P (2012) Innovative ICT solutions to improve treatment 
outcomes for depression:The ICT4Depression project, in Studies in Health Technology and 
Informatics, B.K. Wiederhold and G. Riva, Eds., 339-343. 

[32] Stone EA, Lin Y, Quartemain Q (2008) A final common pathway for depression Progress 
toward a general conceptual framework, Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 32:508-24. 

[33] American Psychiatric Association: Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 
(2013) Fifth Edition. Arlington, VA, American Psychiatric Association  

 [34] Kroenke K, Spitzer RL, Williams JB (2001)  The PHQ-9: validity of a brief depression 
severity measure, J. Gen. Intern. Med. 16 606–613. 

 [35] Wulsin L, Somoza E, Heck J (2002) The feasibility of using the Spanish PHQ-9 to screen 
for depression in primary care in Honduras, Prim. Care Companion J. Clin. Psychiatr. 4:191–
5. 

[36] Löwe B, Kroenke K, Herzog W, Gräfe K (2004) Measuring depression outcome with a 
brief self-report instrument: sensitivity to change of the Patient Health Questionnaire (PHQ-
9), J. Affect, Disorders 81:61–6. 

[37] Pinto-Meza A, Serrano-Blanco A, Peñarrubia MT, Blanco E, Haro JM (2005) Assessing 
depression in primary care with the PHQ-9: can it be carried out over the telephone?, J Gen 
Intern Med 20:738-42. 

[38] Brugha T, Bebbington P, Tennant C, Hurry J (1985) The List of Threatening Experiences: 
a subset of 12 live event categories with considerable long-term contextual threat, 
Psychological Medicine 15:189–194. 

[39] Sheehan DV, Lecrubier Y, Harnett-Sheehan K, Janavs J, Weiller E, Bonora LI, Keskiner 
A, Schinka J, Knapp E, Sheehan MF, Dunbar GC (1997) Reliability and Validity of the 
MINI International, European Psychiatry 12:232-241. 



 23

[40] ICSI - Institute for Clinical Systems Improvement, http://www.icsi.org/ [accessed 
21.04.2015] 

[41] Monsen KA, Neely C, Oftedahl G, Kerr MJ, Pietruszewski P, Farri O (2012) Feasibility of 
encoding the Institute for Clinical Systems Improvement Depression Guideline using the 
Omaha System, Journal of Biomedical Informatics, 45:719-725. 

[42] The Macarthur Initiative on Depression and Primary Care, http://www.depression-
primarycare.org  

[43] Frank E, Prien RF, Jarrett RB, Keller MB, Kupfer DJ, Lavori PW, Rush AJ, Weissman 
MM (1991) Conceptualization and rationale for consensus definitions of terms in major 
depressive disorder. Remission, recovery, relapse, and recurrence, Arch. Gen. Psychiatry, 
48(9):851-5. 

[44] Pae CU, Mandelli L, Kim TS, Han C, Masand PS, Marks DM, Patkar AA, Steffens DC, De 
Ronchi D, Serretti A (2009) Effectiveness of antidepressant treatments in pre-menopausal 
versus post-menopausal women: a pilot study on differential effects of sex hormones on 
antidepressant effects, Biomed Pharmacother 63:228-35. 

[45] Zhang M, Cheow E, Ho CSh, Ng BY, Ho R, Cheok CC (2014) Application of low-cost 
methodologies for mobile phone app development. JMIR Mhealth Uhealth. 9;2(4):e55. 
PMID: 25491323. 

[46] Harris KM, Syu JJ, Lello OD, Chew YLE, Willcox CH, Ho RHM (2015) The ABC's of 
Suicide Risk Assessment: Applying a Tripartite Approach to Individual Evaluations. PLoS 
One. 2015 Jun 1;10(6):e0127442. PMID: 26030590 

[47] Zhang MWB, Ho RCM (2016) Moodle: The cost effective solution for internet cognitive 
behavioral therapy (I-CBT) interventions. Technol Health Care. 2016 Sep 20. [Epub ahead 
of print] PMID: 27689560). 

 


	caratulaIOSPress.pdf
	UPCommons
	Portal del coneixement obert de la UPC
	http://upcommons.upc.edu/e-prints


