































































Ship Detection in SAR Images Based on Maxtree Representation and Graph Signal Processing


This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING 1

Ship Detection in SAR Images Based on Maxtree
Representation and Graph Signal Processing

Philippe Salembier , Fellow, IEEE, Sergi Liesegang, and Carlos López-Martínez, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract— This paper discusses an image processing archi-
tecture and tools to address the problem of ship detection in
synthetic-aperture radar images. The detection strategy relies
on a tree-based representation of images, here a Maxtree, and
graph signal processing tools. Radiometric as well as geometric
attributes are evaluated and associated with the Maxtree nodes.
They form graph attribute signals which are processed with
graph filters. The goal of this filtering step is to exploit the
correlation existing between attribute values on neighboring tree
nodes. Considering that trees are specific graphs where the con-
nectivity toward ancestors and descendants may have a different
meaning, we analyze several linear, nonlinear, and morphological
filtering strategies. Beside graph filters, two new filtering notions
emerge from this analysis: tree and branch filters. Finally,
we discuss a ship detection architecture that involves graph signal
filters and machine learning tools. This architecture demonstrates
the interest of applying graph signal processing tools on the tree-
based representation of images and of going beyond classical
graph filters. The resulting approach significantly outperforms
state-of-the-art algorithms. Finally, a MATLAB toolbox allowing
users to experiment with the tools discussed in this paper on
Maxtree or Mintree has been created and made public.

Index Terms— Branch filter, graph filter, graph signal process-
ing, machine learning, Maxtree, ship detection, support vector
machine (SVM), synthetic-aperture radar (SAR), tree filter.

I. INTRODUCTION

OCEAN and sea monitoring by means of Earth observa-tion data include many activities and applications sup-
porting different needs: sustainable fishing, marine ecosystems
protection, natural resources extraction, commerce and trade,
and so on. Undoubtedly, they are related as, for instance,
marine fisheries around the world remain seriously threatened
from fishing overcapacity. Marine ecosystems are polluted by
activities related to the increase of maritime traffic. In the
latest report of the state of the world’s fisheries and aqua-
culture, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations reported that 87% of the world fishing stocks, for
which assessment information is available, is either fully
exploited (57%) or overexploited (30%), and only 13% is

Manuscript received January 31, 2018; revised June 5, 2018 and
September 12, 2018; accepted October 9, 2018. This work was supported
by the Spanish Ministerio de Economía y Competitividad and the European
Regional Development Fund under Project TEC2013-43935-R and Project
TEC2016-75976-R. (Corresponding author: Philippe Salembier.)

The authors are with the Signal Theory and Communications
Department, Technical University of Catalonia–BarcelonaTech, Barcelona,
Spain (e-mail: philippe.salembier@upc.edu; sergi.liesegang@upc.edu;
carlos.lopez@tsc.upc.edu).

Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available
online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.

Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TGRS.2018.2876603

not fully exploited. In many occasions, overexploitation is
conducted by illegal fishing involving small to medium size
boats. Regarding maritime traffic, the world fleet of cargo-
carrying vessels has increased from 77.500 vessels in 2008 to
some 100.000 vessels in 2018 comprising a total capacity of
more than 2.100 million deadweight tonnage. Consequently,
maritime traffic governance, pollution control of maritime
environments, monitoring of efficient, and sustainable fish-
ing or of illegal fishing activities require reliable ship mon-
itoring tools.

Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) has largely demonstrated
in the past its capability to provide all-time all-weather data
over large areas with a high spatial resolution. In the context of
electronic systems, the high level of sophistication and auton-
omy of SAR systems is such that radar-based machine vision
with SAR imaging heavily relies on machine intelligence.
Nowadays, SAR capabilities are enhanced by a decrease in the
revisit time from the SAR sensor constellations. As a result,
ship detection tools based on SAR data have multiplied in
the last decade. The importance of this type of applications
is also supported by the commercial sector, as according
to [1], the commercial remote sensing data market is dom-
inated by optical data which represents 84% of that market.
In recent years, SAR data has not experienced the same growth
as optical data except for maritime surveillance including
ship monitoring. Finally, maritime surveillance is expected to
undergo a significant increase in the forthcoming years. For
example, in the framework of the Copernicus program [2],
maritime surveillance is expected to undergo an average annual
growth rate of Copernicus benefits of 43% up to 2020.

Concerning the specific ship detection application based on
SAR data, it has to be mentioned that as images refer to the
radar return, they exhibit a very large dynamic range, often up
to 60 dB and are moreover corrupted by the so-called speckle
noise. As a result, many classical image processing techniques
have limited performances in this context.

Generally, SAR ship detection algorithms are based on
a constant false alarm rate (CFAR) approach. Nevertheless,
the performances of a traditional CFAR technique decrease
with high spatial resolution SAR data, as the clutter probability
density function (pdf) presents a large variability and ships
may have complex forms. This results in a high probabil-
ity of a false alarm. In order to improve the detection of
ships, many researchers have developed CFAR approaches
that locally adapt to the intensity pdf considering Gaussian,
Gamma, or more complex distributions. In [3], a lognormal
mixture model is proposed to tackle the sea clutter pdf

0196-2892 © 2018 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

https://orcid.org/0000-0001-8884-9604


This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

2 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING

variability. Nevertheless, more recently, techniques trying to
take into account the data spatial correlation have been pro-
posed. Leng et al. [4] propose a bilateral filter to include
the spatial distribution of the SAR data. In [5], the data
correlation is exploited, and in [6], the concept of superpixel is
considered to assure a local homogeneous clutter. Among the
CFAR techniques, the SUMO technique [7] is a pixel-based
approach developed during the past 15 years under the aegis
of the European Commission. Other approaches have also
pursued a better characterization of the ship signal considering
different ship features [8] or Haar-like features [9]. More
recently, some authors have explored the idea to represent
ships by ellipses [10]. Other approaches have also exploited
the synthesis of independent lower resolution SAR images or
look [11], [12], as only the ship signal maintains the correla-
tion between the different looks. With respect to the evaluation
of the detection performances, in some cases, the automatic
identification system is considered, when available, as ground
truth [13]. In this paper, we conclude that the detection
performances depend on the SAR system, being the Radarsat-2
system in ScanSAR mode the one providing the best results.
The technique proposed in this paper, based on the Maxtree
representation, presents the advantage of avoiding the explicit
need to define a given pdf for the sea clutter. Moreover,
it also takes into account the data spatial relations and the
ship geometrical characteristics. In this sense, this technique
is able to combine different detection approaches considered
separately in the past. Furthermore, as will be explained in
the sequel, the approach avoids the use of any speckle filter
and is, therefore, able to preserve the spatial resolution of the
data. Finally, it also involves the use of a machine learning
algorithm and therefore combines artificial intelligence ideas
with SAR imaging systems.

As previously mentioned, we are interested in processing
strategies that rely on tree-based representations of images.
These representations provide a hierarchical description where
nodes represent regions. As a result, they allow the detection
to be based on both radiometric and geometric attributes.
We believe that this feature together with the hierarchical
aspect of the representation is important for many object
detection tasks and in particular for ship detection. Most of the
time, the first step of these strategies is to create a tree such
as a Maxtree or Mintree [14], [15] (also known as Component
Tree [16]), a Tree of Shapes [17] (also known as the Inclusion
Tree [18]), a Binary Partition Tree [19] or an α-Tree [20].
In the past, they have been used in numerous applica-
tions such as object detection [21]–[23], attribute filtering
[15], [24], [25], segmentation [19], [26], [27], texture analysis
and image content retrieval [28], remote sensing [29]–[31],
and visualization [32]. In the context of object detection,
once the tree is constructed, most classical approaches com-
pute radiometric and/or geometric attributes for each region
represented by tree nodes and assign the resulting attribute
values to these nodes. Then, the nodes and attribute values
are individually analyzed and a statement about the presence
of the object of interest is made. Instead of analyzing these
attribute values individually, one contribution of this paper is
to highlight that attribute values on neighboring nodes are

correlated and that there is a potential interest in exploiting
this correlation. The reason for this correlation is that the
tree structure represents an inclusion relationship between
regions: the region corresponding to a child node is included
in the region corresponding to a parent node. As a result,
the attribute values for child and parent nodes are related.
To our knowledge, no studies have been reported on how to
deal with this correlation.

A proper framework to deal with this attribute correlation
in a tree is what has been recently called graph signal
processing. Graph signals [33]–[35] are collections of data
that live on a graph structure. In this paper, the data are
radiometric or geometric attributes that have been evaluated
on regions represented by the tree nodes and that are assigned
to their respective nodes. They form a particular graph signal
that we call graph attribute signal. A natural choice to deal
with the attribute correlation could be to use graph signal
processing tools such as linear graph filters as those defined
in [36]–[38] or morphological graph filters [39]. However,
these tools were defined for arbitrary graphs. In this paper,
we are interested in trees which are specific graphs essentially
representing hierarchies. In particular, the notion of connec-
tivity toward ancestors and descendants may have a different
meaning. We therefore propose processing tools that may take
advantage of this distinction. As a result, the notions of tree
filter and branch filter will be defined and discussed and
their difference with graph filter highlighted. Linear, nonlinear
(median filter), and morphological (erosion, dilation, opening,
closing, and reconstruction) filters will be defined in both the
tree and branch filtering contexts. Concerning tree attribute
signal processing, an interesting proposal related to our work
is made in [40]. It consists of processing a tree-based repre-
sentation of images, a Maxtree, with a connected operator [25]
that also relies on a Maxtree. However, the interest in [40] is
essentially to extract the attribute extrema and not to study
nor to propose processing strategies to deal with the attribute
correlation in the tree structure.

Finally, we will present an architecture able to detect ships
in SAR images relying on Maxtree representation and graph
signal processing adapted to these representations. Several
graph, tree, and branch filters will be evaluated in this context.
Tree opening and branch mean filters will be shown to be
particularly attractive. The experimental evaluation will also
highlight the interest of going beyond graph filtering in the
context of trees. Beside tree opening and branch mean filters,
the detection scheme also involves a morphological Tophat
relying on a tree reconstruction process and an extinction
filter to process the node likelihood values. Finally, the result-
ing ship detection will be compared to four state-of-the-art
techniques providing a significant improvement in detection
performances.

This paper is organized as follows. Section II highlights
the main processing architecture proposed for ship detec-
tion. Section III discusses how the Maxtree representation
can be processed and how the results can be visualized.
Many of these tools are used in Section IV for ship
detection in SAR images. Finally, conclusions are reported
in Section V.



This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

SALEMBIER et al.: SHIP DETECTION IN SAR IMAGES BASED ON MAXTREE REPRESENTATION AND GRAPH SIGNAL PROCESSING 3

Fig. 1. Processing strategy for object detection.

II. OBJECT DETECTION ON TREE-BASED
REPRESENTATION OF IMAGES

The tree-based object detection scheme we consider in this
paper is illustrated in Fig. 1. It is a fairly generic scheme
that can be used for many detection tasks but we will focus
here on ship detection. The first step consists of computing
a tree representation of the image, here a Maxtree [14]–[16].
A Maxtree describes the entire set of connected components
resulting from the threshold decomposition of upper level sets.
The resulting connected components are ordered by inclusion
and structured in a tree. The tree leaves represent the image
maxima and the root node the entire image support. A Maxtree
can then be viewed as a multiscale description of the image
maxima. This property makes them very attractive for ship
detection given that ships appear as bright areas in SAR
images. Note that the Maxtree is used here purely as an
image representation which describes the original SAR image
without any preprocessing. In this representation, the ship
detection task is formulated as the search for tree nodes that
correspond to ship instances.

To perform this search once the tree is computed, several
attributes are extracted from the image. They can deal with
radiometric as well as geometric information. This access to
the geometric information is the second main motivation to use
the Maxtree representation. The attributes are measured on the
sets of pixels represented by the tree nodes and are assigned
to their corresponding nodes creating graph attribute signals.
Most object detection algorithms for tree-based representation
of images analyze these attribute values individually for each
node and make a prediction on the presence of the object
of interest on the region of support corresponding to a tree
node [22], [41]. However, as the tree represents inclusion
relationships between regions, the attribute values between
consecutive nodes along the tree branches are correlated.
Taking advantage of this correlation is a key point of the
strategy presented here and motivates the development of
tools that consider the attributes populating the tree as graph
attribute signals and process them to increase the detection
robustness.

The scheme illustrated in Fig. 1 involves an aggregation
step that takes into account the complete set of attributes and
estimates the likelihood of each node to represent an instance
of the object of interest, a ship. Several strategies can be
used for this aggregation, and as suggested in [22], [41], one
of the most efficient approaches relies on machine learning
techniques. For example, if one has access to a training data
set, a supervised classifier can be trained to estimate the object
class probability. For the final decision, a straightforward

Fig. 2. Maxtree representation of images. (a) Original image. (b) Correspond-
ing Maxtree. (c) 2-D branch representation. (d) 3-D branch representation.

approach can consider this likelihood as the final output and
simply binarize it. However, as this likelihood populates the
tree, it can itself be considered as a graph attribute signal which
exhibits some correlation between consecutive nodes. As a
result, the graph likelihood signal can be further processed to
increase the robustness of the final decision.

Section III discusses the Maxtree representation, the cre-
ation of graph attribute signals for ship detection and the graph
filtering tools needed to process these signals.

III. MAXTREE REPRESENTATION AND PROCESSING

A. Maxtree Representation and Visualization

A Maxtree represents all the binary connected components
that can be extracted from an image by thresholding at all
possible gray level values and it structures them by inclu-
sion. More precisely, each tree node represents a connected
component of the space that is extracted by the following
thresholding process: for a given threshold T , consider the set
of pixels XT that have a gray-level value larger than or equal
to T and the set of pixels YT that have a gray-level value
equal to T . The tree nodes represent the connected components
C of XT such that C ∩ Y �= ∅. Note that a connected
component obtained at a given threshold is included in another
one obtained at a lower threshold. The links between the
tree nodes represent this inclusion relationship between the
connected components of XT . Many algorithms have been
proposed to compute Maxtrees. A review can be found in [42].

Fig. 2 illustrates the tree creation with a simple 8 × 8
image. The leaves of the Maxtree represent the image maxima.
As the original image [Fig. 2(a)] has eight local maxima
(assuming four connectivity), the corresponding Maxtree has



This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

4 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING

eight leaves [Fig. 2(b)]. The root node represents the entire
image support (that is the connected component correspond-
ing to the lowest possible threshold). The remaining nodes
represent different connected components obtained at different
thresholds. Finally, in Fig. 2(b), the gray levels used to
display the nodes correspond to the threshold values that have
generated the connected components.

The graphical representation of the tree, as shown
in Fig. 2(b), is useful to visualize the structure of small trees.
However, it is impractical to represent trees corresponding
to images of reasonable size nor to analyze the evolution
of graph attribute signals. An alternative representation that
we have found useful in many situations is what we call
branch representation shown in Fig. 2(c). It is a gray-level
image in which the horizontal axis indexes the individual tree
branches and the vertical axis corresponds to the distance of
each node from the root. In the example of Fig. 2, the Maxtree
has eight leaves, therefore eight branches, and the longest
branch has length 6. Therefore, the branch representation is an
8 ×6 image. The gray-level value of pixel (i, j) in the branch
representation corresponds to the attribute value (here the gray
level) of the node that belongs to branch i and is at distance
j from the root. Note that, as many nodes belong to multiple
branches, they are duplicated in the branch representation. For
example, the root node belongs to all branches. This is the
reason why the gray level value associated with the bottom
line of the branch representation is the same for all pixels.
As the attribute values may drastically change between one
branch to the next one, it is often useful to visualize the branch
representation as a 3-D surface, as shown in Fig. 2(d).

Fig. 3(a) shows a typical image (3701 × 1651 pixels)
which was obtained with the Radarsat-2 system over the
Gulf of Guinea, western Africa. For visualization purpose,
the logarithm of the actual gray-level values is shown. A small
excerpt (200 × 200 pixels) of this image with three ships is
presented in Fig. 3(b). This excerpt will be used for many illus-
trations in the following sections. The ships appear as areas
of high mean gray-level values, with an elongated shape that
could be approximated by an ellipse. The presence of speckle
noise, inherent to SAR images, may hinder the detection. The
Maxtree of this small excerpt involves 17.601 nodes distributed
among 3.831 branches. As a result, a graphical representation
as the one shown in Fig. 2(b) is not appropriate. Fig. 3(c)
shows an alternative graphical representation of the tree with a
scalable force directed placement (sfdp) algorithm [43] which
efficiently deals with large graphs and which is available in the
Graphviz software package [44]. The node gray-level values
correspond to the gray levels of the image on the left. Note
that many nodes and branches overlap in the drawing. The
root node is in the center and an approximate idea of the tree
structure can be inferred from this representation. However,
the evolution of attribute signals is rather difficult to analyze.
Therefore, the branch representation [Fig. 2(c) and (d)] will
be used to visualize attribute signals in the sequel.

Once created, the Maxtree is populated with attributes that
may indicate the presence of ships. We will use three attributes
to characterize the binary connected components C associated
with the Maxtree nodes: 1) the mean gray-level value of the

Fig. 3. Example of (a) original image (logarithm of gray levels) of the Gulf of
Guinea, (b) 200×200 excerpt with three ships, and (c) Maxtree representation
of the excerpt (Graphviz sfdp layout).

Fig. 4. Mean gray-level attribute (branch representation) for the Maxtree
corresponding to the image of Fig. 3(b).

pixels belonging to C; 2) the eccentricity of the ellipse E that
has the same second moments as C1; and 3) the area ratio
which is the relation between the area of C and that of E . The
intuition behind these attributes is that ships are represented by
elongated ellipses of high mean gray-level values. Therefore,
we are looking for bright areas with a high eccentricity and
high area ratio (so that the shape of C is similar to an ellipse).

Fig. 4 presents the mean gray level attribute on the Maxtree
of Fig. 3(b) (branch representation). The Maxtree involves
3831 different branches and the longest branch length is 1063.
The branch representation is therefore an image of size
3831 × 1063. The presence of three branches on which the

1The eccentricity is defined here as the ratio of the distance between the
two foci of the ellipse and its major axis length.



This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

SALEMBIER et al.: SHIP DETECTION IN SAR IMAGES BASED ON MAXTREE REPRESENTATION AND GRAPH SIGNAL PROCESSING 5

Fig. 5. Eccentricity attribute (branch representation) for the Maxtree
corresponding to the image of Fig. 3(b).

mean gray levels reach extremely high values close to the
leaves can be observed in Fig. 4. The mean gray-level attribute
does not exhibit random variations and probably does not
require any further processing. However, many attributes are
not so clean and smooth. Let us consider the eccentricity
attribute shown in Fig. 5. We can clearly observe the cor-
relation in the attribute signal as values on neighboring nodes
is most of the time related. However, we can also see random
fluctuations along the tree branches in particular for sections
close to the leaves. Random fluctuations that only affect
locally very few nodes represent a challenge for the detection
algorithm. They should be considered as noise and removed
to increase the robustness of the detection. This kind of graph
attribute signals motivates the creation of filtering tools as the
one presented in the following section.

B. Maxtree Filtering

1) Graph Filter: Graph signal filtering [39], [45]–[47] is
generally considered as an extension of signal or image
filtering. A popular approach to define them relies on the
notion of graph shift [45] which can be considered as the
equivalent of the classical time shift or delay. In the graph
setting, it consists of replacing the signal values at a given node
by a linear combination of values at its one-hop neighbors,
which are specified by the adjacency matrix. Linear translation
invariant filters are polynomials in the adjacency matrix. As a
result, elementary linear graph filters replace the signal value
at a node with a weighted linear combination of values of
its K-hop neighboring nodes. A similar approach is used for
morphological filter: a flat erosion (dilation) replaces the signal
value at a node with the minimum (maximum) of values
of its K-hop neighboring nodes. As usual in mathematical
morphology, opening and closing are defined as combinations
of erosion and dilation.

As an illustration, consider the example of Fig. 6(a).
It corresponds to the Maxtree of the image of Fig. 2(a).
It has been populated with attribute values chosen to illustrate
various filtering approaches. Note that the attribute values are
represented here by the gray levels used to display the nodes.
Dark nodes represent low attribute values whereas bright nodes
correspond to high attribute values. Assume that we want to
apply a graph median filter [47] of size 2 to remove small

Fig. 6. Example of (a) attribute and the three types of filtering (b) graph,
(c) tree, and (d) branch. In all cases, a median filter of size 2 is used.

fluctuations of the graph signal. The size of the median filter
specifies which neighbors have to be included in the median
computation. Here, size 2 means that all 2-hop neighbors,
i.e., all nodes that are at a distance lower or equal to 2 from
the current node have to be taken into account.2 This is the
classical graph filter illustrated in Fig. 6(b). Isolated attribute
variations as the ones observed on nodes 3, 12, and 17 are
then removed by the filtering.

For arbitrary graphs, beside the values of the adjacency
matrix, no strong distinction among neighbors is generally
made. However, trees are specific graphs representing hier-
archies. Tree nodes have descendants and ancestors and the
connectivity toward each one of them may play different roles,
particularly in the context of object detection.

2) Tree Filter: Let us analyze node 10. In the context of
the longest branch composed of nodes 1, 2, 10, 15, 19, and
20, the bright attribute value of node 10 can be considered as
a small size fluctuation that should be removed by the median
filter. However, with the graph median filter, the filtered value
is determined by the values of node 10 itself, its descendant at
distance 2: nodes 15, 16, and 19, its ancestors: nodes 2 and 1
and also the descendants of node 2, that are nodes 4, 8, and 9.

2In order to interpret the results of Fig. 6, note that when the median filter
involves an even number of samples, the output is computed as the average
of the two middle values.



This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

6 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING

In total, we have nine values, five bright values, and four dark
ones. As a result, the filter output is bright. Note that many
bright values come from nodes that do not belong to the same
branch as node 10. If we want the filtering process to be more
guided by the branch structure of the tree, we may prevent
descendant nodes of the ancestors to influence the computation
of the output value. This is the idea of the tree filter in
which the neighborhood of a node is exclusively composed
of all its descendants and all its ancestors that are at distance
lower or equal to a given value. By comparison with graph
filters, the K-hop neighborhood in tree filters is not defined by
iteration of the adjacency matrix. The filtering process relies
on two different shift operations: one shift toward ancestors
and one toward descendants. Once the set of K-hop neighbors
are defined by the two shift operations, linear filters, median
filters, erosion, and dilation can be defined with rules similar
to the ones used for graph filters. As usual, tree opening
(tree closing) is defined as the composition of tree erosion
(dilation) followed by tree dilation (erosion). They possess
the algebraic properties of any opening (closing): increasing,
idempotent, and antiextensive (extensive).

In the illustration of Fig. 6, consider the case of the tree
median of size 2 applied on node 10, the neighborhood is
defined by node 10, its descendants 15, 16, and 19 and
ancestors 2, and 1. In particular, nodes 4, 8, and 9 which
were involved in the 2-hop graph neighborhood are not con-
sidered anymore. The corresponding filtering results are shown
in Fig. 6(c). As can be seen, the filtered value of node 10 is
strongly influenced by this change of strategy.

3) Branch Filter: The third filtering approach deals with
effects related to the disparity of node numbers in the different
branches. A typical example can be seen in the root (1).
Three main sets of branches are emanating from the root.
Two of them (the one passing through nodes 3 and 6)
involve mainly dark nodes. However, the filtered value of
node 1 is largely dominated by node 2 and its descendants
(nodes 10, 4, 8, and 9). Here, the key point is that the
descendants of node 2 are much more numerous than the
descendants of nodes 3 and 6. A possible way to deal with
this issue is to use a branch filter.

It is a two steps filtering approach. In the first step, called
estimation step, all branches passing through the current node
to be filtered are extracted. Considering node 1 as an example,
if a filter of size 2 has to be used, six individual branches
are involved: they all start at node 1 and, respectively, ends
at nodes 10, 4, 8, 9, 5, and 12. Note that if the node to be
filtered is not the root node, the individual branches would
also involve its ancestors. Once the branches are extracted, 1-D
filters are individually applied on each of them. This estimation
step produces several values that have to be aggregated in
the second step. This filtering strategy has some similarity
to the decomposition of 2-D separable filters into two 1-D
filtering steps. This filtering framework is rich and many com-
binations of estimation and aggregation steps can be done. The
corresponding study goes beyond the scope of this paper. Here,
we have focused on four basic filters described in Table I.
Moreover, we have defined the branch opening (closing) as
the composition of a branch erosion (dilation) followed by

TABLE I

DEFINITION OF THE ESTIMATION AND THE AGGREGATION
STEPS FOR ELEMENTARY BRANCH FILTERS

a branch dilation (erosion). Note that an interesting filtering
strategy may consist of using 1-D opening or 1-D closing as
estimation step and then an aggregation step based on mean,
median, min, or max (note that not all combinations produce
opening or closing in the algebraic sense). We leave this study
for future work.

As an illustration of the branch median filter, the filtering
results can be observed in Fig. 6(d) and compared to the graph
and tree filters results. Note that how the value at node 1 is
less dominated by the high number of descendants of node 2.

In general, the three filtering approaches are different, but
in some cases, the distinction disappears. Let us mention two
examples as follows.

1) The graph and tree filters are equivalent for all filters
of size one. The distinction appears for filters involving
neighbors that are beyond 1-hop neighbors.

2) If branch erosion and dilation are defined as in Table I,
in the case of flat structuring elements, they consist of
computing, respectively, the minimum and the maximum
of the input samples in a given neighborhood. As the
neighborhood is the same for tree and branch filters,
branch erosion (dilation) and tree erosion (dilation) are
equivalent. This equivalence translates to their compo-
sition such as branch/tree opening and closing.

Fig. 7 illustrates the median filter of size 25 applied on
the eccentricity attribute of Fig. 5. It can be observed how
the filter has smoothed some of the attribute variations. The
difference between the three filtering approaches is clearly
noticeable for nodes that are at distance between 400 and 600
from the root node. In particular, in the cases of the graph
and the tree filtering approaches, it can be observed that the
eccentricity attribute values remain very high for these nodes
although they were not so high in the unfiltered data. This
phenomenon is caused by the disparity of node numbers in the
different branches in particular for sections close to the leaves.
By contrast, the branch filtering approach produces a smooth
version of the signal with much less bias for the nodes at
distance 400–600 from the root node. In Section IV-B, several
graph, branch, and tree filters will be objectively compared in
the context of the ship detection application.

C. Morphological Reconstruction on Maxtree

Morphological reconstruction is a classical image process-
ing tool used to reconstruct extrema and create connected
operators (See [25] and the references herein). It can also
be applied on graph signals and defined through conditional
dilations. The connectivity of the reconstruction is defined
through an elementary structuring element CG of size one.



This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

SALEMBIER et al.: SHIP DETECTION IN SAR IMAGES BASED ON MAXTREE REPRESENTATION AND GRAPH SIGNAL PROCESSING 7

Fig. 7. Eccentricity attribute filtering with the three types of median filters
(branch representation). (Top) Graph median filter. (Center) Tree median filter.
(Bottom) Branch median filter.

This structuring element includes all nodes that are at distance
one from the current node. If f and g are graph signals
(respectively, called the “reference” and “marker” signal),
the antiextensive graph reconstruction ρ

↓
G(g| f ) of g under f

is given by

gk = δCG (gk−1)
∧

f

and ρ↓(g| f ) = lim
k→∞

gk (1)

where g0 = g ≤ f and δCG is the graph dilation with CG .
By duality, an extensive graph reconstruction ρ

↑
G(g| f ) of g

above f is given by

gk = εCG (gk−1)
∨

f

and ρ↑(g| f ) = lim
k→∞

gk (2)

where g0 = g ≥ f and εCG is the graph erosion with CG .

Fig. 8. Filtering of the area ratio attribute with a reconstruction from the
root and a Tophat (branch representation). (Top) Original area ratio attribute.
(Center) Reconstruction from the root. (Bottom) Tophat (after branch median
filtering).

Note that, as mentioned in Section III-B, erosion and
dilation of size 1 are equivalent in the graph, tree, or branch
approaches. Therefore, no distinction has to be made for
the graph reconstruction. However, in practice, it may be
useful to treat differently the connectivities toward descendants
and ancestors. To this end, two new elementary structuring
elements can be created: CTC and CTP . These structuring
elements include the current node and, respectively, all its
children or its parent. Substituting CG into 1 and 2 by either
CTC or CTP creates two tree reconstructions. The reconstruc-
tion is from root to leaves with CTC and from leaves to root
with CTP . Depending on how the marker signal is defined,
these two reconstructions can produce very different results.
As classically done in mathematical morphology, reconstruc-
tion can be used to create a connected opening or closing [25].
Let us show an example.



This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

8 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING

Fig. 8 presents an illustration of reconstruction involving the
area ratio attribute defined in Section III-A. It is the relation-
ship between the area of the connected component represented
by the node and that of its best fitting ellipse. The original area
ratio attribute, Fig. 8 (top), is quite noisy. Therefore, a branch
median filter of size 25 is applied. Furthermore, besides the
noise, it can also be observed that the attribute values are
rather high in the sections of the tree branches containing the
ships (the same branches as the one highlighted in the mean
gray-level attribute, see Fig. 4). Moreover, it is also very high
for nodes close to the root. This is because the image support
is a square and the best fitting ellipse is a circle. The regions
corresponding to nodes close to the root are similar to the
square image support and their area is close to the area of the
best fitting circle. As the presence of this attribute maximum
near the root does not reflect the presence of a ship, it is
appropriate to remove it and this can be efficiently done with
a reconstruction process. The original attribute signal plays the
role of reference and the marker is a graph signal equal to zero
everywhere except on the root node where it is equal to one.
The results obtained after applying a tree reconstruction from
root to leaves is shown in Fig. 8 (center). Note that, with this
specific marker, a graph reconstruction would have produced
the same result. The tree reconstruction is an opening and a
tree Tophat is obtained by computing the difference between
the original signal and the reconstructed one. This is shown
in Fig. 8 (bottom). We see that the presence of ships is more
clearly observable in the cleaned attribute signal.

D. Maxtree Extrema

Regional maxima (minima) are flat zones (largest connected
component of constant value) whose gray-level value is higher
(lower) than the surrounding flat zones. The distinction we
have made in previous sections concerning the connectivity
toward ancestors and descendants could be applied to the def-
inition of extrema. It would lead to nodes that are considered as
extrema or not depending on whether they are analyzed in the
context of specific branches. It is unclear how this distinction
could be useful in practice. As a result, we only consider the
classical graph connectivity in which each node is connected
to all its neighbors at distance one. In the context of trees, this
includes all the children and the parent nodes.

Classical algorithms used to identify extrema in images
can be easily adapted to graph and tree structures, but a
more powerful way to deal with extrema is to follow the
suggestion of [40]: use a Maxtree, a Mintree, or a Tree of
Shape to describe the extrema of a tree-based representation of
images. This idea is illustrated in Fig. 9. The original Maxtree,
Tree1, is shown in Fig. 9(a). It has been populated with an
attribute signal which exhibits three maxima. The attribute
signal itself can be described by a second Maxtree, Tree2,
presented in Fig. 9(b). The Maxtree construction is the same
as the one classically used for images. The only difference is
that the graph connectivity is used here. In Fig. 9, we have
indicated the correspondence between the leaves of Tree2 and
the attribute signal maxima in Tree1. In Section III-C, we have
mentioned that morphological reconstruction is one of the

Fig. 9. Maxtree representation of the maxima of a Maxtree. (a) Original
Maxtree, Tree1. (b) Maxtree representing the maxima of the original Maxtree,
Tree2. (c) Pruned version of the Maxtree of Fig. 9(b) with an area criterion.
(d) Restitution of the original Maxtree values with the pruned Maxtree
of Fig. 9(c).

classical ways to build connected operators. An alternative
strategy is to apply a pruning on a tree-based representation
of the signal. We briefly recall this approach in the following
section.

E. Maxtree Pruning

Pruning of Maxtree, Mintree, Tree of Shapes, or Binary
Partition Tree has classically been used to simplify the rep-
resentation itself or to create connected operators [14], [24],
[26], [32]. This idea is illustrated in Fig. 9(c) for Tree2, which
is the Maxtree describing the attribute signal of Tree1. The
pruning consists in measuring a new attribute, the area in this
example, and in removing all nodes of Tree2 that have an area
smaller than a given threshold, equal to two in this example.
The nodes 2, 3, and 6 of Tree2 have an area smaller or equal
to two (they represent connected components of Tree1 with
two or less nodes), therefore, they have to be removed. The
area is an increasing criterion so removing the nodes that do
not meet the criterion directly defines a pruning. If the criterion
is not increasing, several strategies have been proposed and
more details about this issue can be found in [25] and its
references.

Finally, the pruned Maxtree can be used to create a filtered
version of the attribute signal of Tree1. Similar to what is
done for images, the nodes of Tree1 that were assigned to
the pruned nodes of Tree2 are now assigned to their first
nonpruned ancestor. In the example of Fig. 9, this means that
nodes 5, 11, and 12 of Tree1 are now assigned to the root
node of the pruned version of Tree2. In the tree restitution step
shown in Fig. 9(d), the attribute value of nodes 5, 11, and 12
of Tree1 are now restituted with the same attribute value as



This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

SALEMBIER et al.: SHIP DETECTION IN SAR IMAGES BASED ON MAXTREE REPRESENTATION AND GRAPH SIGNAL PROCESSING 9

Fig. 10. Example of original images (logarithm of gray levels) of (a) Norway (Radarsat-2, Wide Fine Resolution mode) and (b)–(d) Gibraltar (Radarsat-2,
ScanSAR Wide Beam mode).

the root node of Tree2. This is a connected operator, an area
opening, applied on Tree1.

Before discussing how these ideas can be applied to ship
detection, let us mention that we have created and published a
MATLAB toolbox [48] involving most of the tools presented
in this section allowing interested researchers to easily exper-
iment with graph signal processing on Maxtree or Mintree.

IV. SHIP DETECTION IN SAR IMAGES

The tools discussed in Section III can be used for many
applications. In this paper, we are interested in their application
to the problem of ship detection in SAR images. In the
following, the proposed strategy used for this task is presented
and its performance evaluated.

A. Attribute Definition and Processing on Maxtree

The detection strategy follows the scheme of Fig. 1. The
Maxtree is initially created from the original image without
any prior speckle filtering, preserving thus the original spatial
resolution. To reduce the memory usage and the computational
complexity, the tree may be simplified by removing all nodes
that are either too small or too large to represent a ship.
We refer to this step as area pruning. For example, taking
into account the image resolution, all nodes involving less
than 20 pixels may be removed from the Maxtrees. This leads
to an average reduction of 60% in the number of tree nodes
taking into account the images we process for this application.
Moreover, considering the sizes of the world largest ships
and the image resolution, nonroot nodes of size larger than
7.000 pixels may be considered as not relevant for ship
detection and could also be removed. This leads to a further
reduction of 10% of the tree sizes.

After the tree simplification, the three features used as an
illustration in Section III are computed: 1) the mean gray-
level value of the pixels belonging to each node C; 2) the
eccentricity of the ellipse E that has the same second moment
as C; and 3) the area ratio which is the relation between the
area of C and that of E . Note that, as the tree may have been
simplified by removing the nodes that are too small or too
large to correspond to ships, the detection algorithm actually
relies on four attributes.

The mean gray-level attribute signal is left unprocessed.
However, as discussed in Section III-C, the area ratio attribute
signal exhibits high values for nodes corresponding to the
ships, but also for the nodes close to the root. To remove

the values related to the nodes that are close to the root, a tree
reconstruction from root to leaves is applied and then used to
compute a Tophat.

The following step is to use one of the filters discussed in
Section III-B on the eccentricity and on the area ratio attribute
signals. The goal of this filtering step is to smooth the attribute
signals and remove noisy fluctuations to improve the detection
robustness. In Section III, graph, tree, and branch median
filters were used for illustration purposes but Section IV-B
will objectively compare the graph, tree, and branch versions
of the mean, the median, the opening, and the closing filters.

The next step is to aggregate the processed features and
estimate the likelihood of each node to represent a ship.
In [41], this aggregation is done following a marginal approach
that considers all attributes as independent. We propose here to
aggregate the attributes and to transform them into an estimate
of the likelihood of ship presence through a multidimensional
supervised machine-learning technique. To this end, a support
vector machine (SVM) working as a binary classifier (ship
class/nonship class) is used on individual nodes. We refer to
this step as the node classification problem in the sequel.

To train and test the SVM, a node database was created.
The database was extracted from two large images taken
by Radarsat-2. Both images were acquired in the wide fine
resolution mode. The first image can be seen in Fig. 3(a).
It was acquired on March 18, 2013 and corresponds to the
Gulf of Guinea, with a spatial resolution of 5.2 m in range
and 7.7 m in Azimuth and an incidence angle about 42◦. The
size of image is 1651 × 3701 pixels. The second image is
presented in Fig. 10(a) and was acquired on March 19, 2014.
It corresponds to the coast of Norway, where the spatial
resolution is 3.1 m in Azimuth and 4.6 m in range, presenting
an average incidence angle on 25◦. In this case, the image
size is 3141 × 1979 pixels. As it can be observed, both
images present similar spatial resolution. 50 images of size
100 × 100 pixels containing a variety of ships, sea, and land
areas were extracted from the two large original images.
To define the ground truth, we manually defined the ideal
ellipses indicating the presence of ships and subjectively
matching the ships contour. Then, we computed the Maxtree
representation of the 50 images. In order to define the ground
truth at the level of the tree nodes, we considered positive
sample for the ship class, the Maxtree nodes with an overlap
of at least 40% with the ideal ellipses. Negative samples were
defined as nodes with no overlap with any ideal ellipses.
Note that nodes with an overlap with ideal ellipses in-between



This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

10 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING

Fig. 11. Likelihood estimation (branch representation). (Top) Original
likelihood. (Bottom) Processed likelihood.

0% and 40% were not considered in the node database.
Following this procedure, we ended up with 4.000 ship nodes
and 70.000 of nonship ones. Then, each class of the complete
node data set was divided into training, validation, and test
sets with a proportion of 60%, 20%, and 20%, respectively.
The validation set was used to optimize the size of the filters.

Once trained, the SVM is used to populate the Maxtree
nodes with a new attribute that is the ship class likelihood. The
resulting likelihood attribute signal is shown in Fig. 11 (top).
It corresponds to the same image as the one used in Section III
to illustrate the processing tools. Note, however, that the
support of the branch visualization is not exactly the same.
In particular, the length and number of the branches have been
drastically reduced because of the tree simplification based on
the area pruning. The original number of branches (maximum
branch length) was 3.831 (1.063) and is reduced to 241 (442)
after size simplification.

The likelihood shown in the upper part of Fig. 11 clearly
reveals the presence of three ships in three branches. This
could be considered as the final detection result. However,
it may be useful to consider this likelihood as a graph signal
and further process it to remove spurious maxima that may
hinder the detection in difficult cases. Although the results in
the upper part of Fig. 11 are quite clean, we may observe
more than three maxima. Some small maxima are visible on
the middle branch beside the main large one.

Several processing strategies are possible but an effi-
cient option relies on the Maxtree pruning discussed
in Section III-E. As the goal here is to remove some of the
maxima of the likelihood attribute signal, the first step is to

Fig. 12. Overview of the detection process (Maxtrees are represented with
the sfdp layout of Graphviz). (a) Tree1: original Maxtree with likelihood
attribute. (b) Tree2: Maxtree of Tree1 with the correspondence of some
maxima. (c) Pruned Tree2 with a contrast extinction opening. (d) Restitution
of the processed likelihood on Tree1.

compute its Maxtree representation. This step is illustrated in
the upper part of Fig. 12. In this figure, Tree1 represents the
original Maxtree populated with the likelihood attribute signal.
It corresponds to the sfdp layout of the branch representation
shown in the top of Fig. 11. Tree2 [Fig. 12(b)] is the Maxtree
representation of the likelihood populating Tree1. We have
indicated in the figure that the correspondence between three
leaves of Tree2 and three maxima of the likelihood attribute
signal on Tree1. Note that the correspondence of the remaining
two leaves and maxima is not drawn to maintain the fig-
ure clarity.

The complete removal of Tree1 maxima corresponds to the
pruning of entire terminal branches of Tree2. Here, terminal
branches refer to complete sets of nodes going from a leaf
node to a branch bifurcation. In the case of Tree2, we may
want to remove all terminal branches of low contrast, i.e., sets
of nodes such that the difference in likelihood values between
a leaf node and a bifurcation node is lower than a given thresh-
old. Following the suggestions made in [27], using different
threshold values for this pruning would lead to hierarchical
ship detection. Alternatively, we may want to remove terminal
branches of small area that are terminal branches for which
the area at a bifurcation point is lower than a threshold. This
type of attribute is known as extinction attribute [49]. For
an increasing attribute, the extinction value of a tree node is
the maximal attribute value such that the terminal branch it
belongs to still exists after the pruning. Extinction attributes
can be efficiently computed on structures such as Maxtree [50]
and essentially allow pruning of trees at nodes where a bifurca-
tion exists. The tree resulting from an area extinction pruning
is shown in Fig. 12(c). It perfectly preserves the three wide
maxima and removes the presence of the remaining maxima.



This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

SALEMBIER et al.: SHIP DETECTION IN SAR IMAGES BASED ON MAXTREE REPRESENTATION AND GRAPH SIGNAL PROCESSING 11

Fig. 13. Example of ship detection results (Radarsat-2, Wide Fine Resolution
mode). The gray levels of the images have been adjusted to allow a clear view
of the ship. Detections are indicated by red ellipses.

Finally, the simplified likelihood values can be restituted in
the original Tree1 [See Fig. 12(d) for the sfdp layout and the
lower part Fig. 11 for the branch visualization]. The presence
of three ships is perfectly highlighted by many nodes along
three branches that have a high probability of being in the ship
class.

The final output of the algorithm should be to state whether
a ship is present or not at a particular image location. This last
step is called here the ship classification task (which has not
to be confused with the node classification task previously
discussed). The idea is to keep all nodes with a ship class
probability higher than a high value (e.g., 80%). Each of these
nodes is modeled by its best fitting ellipse E . Along each
branch including the nodes with high probability, many nodes
have a ship class probability higher than 80%. Each node is
associated with an ellipse and the set of ellipses of nodes
belonging to the same branch and having high ship class
probability overlaps. However, in practice, only one ellipse
per branch has to be kept. To this end, for each branch,
we compute the median ellipse of the set of overlapping
ellipses. This median ellipse is considered as the final output.
Some detection examples are illustrated in Fig. 13. Note that
with this strategy, we are able not only to detect the presence
of a ship but also its orientation and, to some extent, its
size.

In terms of evaluation, the ship classification task will be
evaluated on the database composed of the 50 images already
used for the node classification task. As previously mentioned,
the ground truth in terms of the ship was specified by manually
defining the ideal ellipses.

Before presenting the performances of the algorithm, let
us come back to the statement made at the beginning of this
section following which no speckle filter is used. We believe
that this is an important point as it allows us to preserve the
image resolution which is essential for the detection of small
objects as ships in SAR images. The speckle noise is often
modeled as a multiplicative noise. It generates positive and
negative fluctuations around the pixel noise-free value. In the
Maxtree, the positive fluctuations are represented as sets of
nodes forming small branches. The negative fluctuations are
not represented on their own by specific nodes. They appear

TABLE II

NODE CLASSIFICATION RESULTS WITHOUT FILTERING

in nodes combined with other pixels of the same gray-level
value. It is the SVM node classification step that handles the
presence of the speckle noise. To be more precise, the SVM
learns to distinguish between nodes representing ship instances
and all other types of nodes including nodes representing
the sea clutter, nodes representing positive fluctuations of
the speckle noise, nodes combining pixels corresponding to
negative fluctuations of the speckle noise with other pixels,
nodes corresponding to ground areas, and so on.

B. Evaluation

This section discusses the objective evaluation of the tools
presented in previous sections and also assesses the ship
detection performances. The proposed algorithm involves two
classification steps: one dealing with nodes and the final one
dealing with the ship. Let us start by evaluating the node
classification step.

1) Node Classification: In the context of the node classifica-
tion, an SVM with a Gaussian kernel is trained. As classically
done for binary classification, the performance of the algorithm
is assessed with the Precision, P , and Recall, R, parameters
as well as FScore = 2 P R/(P + R).

Let us start by providing the reference classification results
obtained with a system where no area pruning is done and
no filter is used on the attribute signals. The only processing
which is done is the tree Tophat applied on the area ratio
(to remove the high values of the attribute on nodes close to
the root). Table II gives the Precision, Recall, and F-Score of
the node classification for the training, validation, and test sets.
As the values are very similar for the three sets, we may con-
clude that there is no overtraining or overfitting of the SVM.

The next step is to evaluate the interest of applying a
filter on the area ratio and the eccentricity attribute signals.
Table III provides the results for the graph, tree, and branch
versions of the mean, the median, the opening, and the closing
filters. Note that we do no evaluate erosions nor dilations
as they would not preserve the position of the transitions
in the attribute signals. Moreover, the results for the tree
opening and closing are the same as the ones for the branch
opening and closing. As discussed in Section III-B, these can
be viewed as alternative implementations of the same filter.
The F-Score evaluated on the test set can be considered as
the final estimation of the system performances. Therefore,
in Table III, we have highlighted in bold font the best F-Score
results on the test set (values above 0.930). They correspond
to the tree/branch opening and the branch mean filters. Note
in particular how these values are significantly higher than
the one obtained with the reference system that does not
involve any filter (Table II). Based on these results, we have
selected the tree/branch opening for the remaining experiments



This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

12 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING

TABLE III

INFLUENCE OF ATTRIBUTE SIGNAL FILTERING ON THE NODE CLASSIFICATION RESULTS WITH SVM

TABLE IV

NODE CLASSIFICATION RESULTS: INFLUENCE OF THE TREE TOPHAT AND THE AREA PRUNING (RADARSAT-2, WIDE FINE RESOLUTION MODE)

presented in this paper. This experiment allows us to draw
two conclusions: first, the use of filters applied on graph
signals actually improves the node classification performances.
Second, in the context of tree, there is an interest in going
beyond graph filters as the best results are provided by
tree or branch filters.

The last question we address concerns the influence of the
Tophat and of the area pruning. The central part of Table IV
reports the results of the tree/branch opening with the tree
Tophat on the area ratio and without the area pruning. Those
are the same results as the one given in Table III. On the left
side of Table IV, one can see the decrease in performances in
case the tree Tophat is not used on the area ratio. Finally, on the
right side of the table, the results obtained when the area-based
tree pruning is done. The increase of performances in both
precision and recall reveals that the presence of false positives
and false negatives is still significant for nodes corresponding
to small areas. Therefore, the area pruning is useful not only
to decrease the tree complexity but also to improve the classi-
fication results. As a conclusion, the final node classification
algorithm involves the area pruning, the tree Tophat, and the
tree/branch opening. The resulting node attribute values are
used as descriptors by the SVM which in turn estimates the
node likelihood to represent a ship.

2) Ship Classification: Once the node likelihood has been
estimated with the SVM, the last step of the algorithm is to
detect the presence of ships. To increase the robustness of this
last step, we have proposed to use an extinction filter applied
on the likelihood attribute signal.

TABLE V

FINAL SHIP DETECTION PERFORMANCES WITH AND WITHOUT THE AREA
EXTINCTION FILTER ON THE LIKELIHOOD ATTRIBUTE SIGNAL.

COMPARISON WITH STATE-OF-THE-ART APPROACHES
[3], [11], [12], [51] (RADARSAT-2, WIDE

FINE RESOLUTION MODE)

To evaluate the ship detection performances, we considered
as true positive the cases where the final ellipse produced by
the algorithm estimating the presence of a ship had an overlap
of at least 40% with the ideal ellipse. Table V shows the ship
detection performances with and without the area extinction
filter. As can be seen, the area extinction filter provides a clear
improvement in terms of Precision. The final F-Score on the
ship detection task is very high.

Finally, we compare these results with four state-of-the-
art techniques for ship detection in SAR images [3], [11],
[12], [51]. The algorithm proposed in [3] is a CFAR algorithm
that essentially relies on the gray-level attribute. The approach
described in [11] relies on the discrete wavelet transform and
deals with spatial pixel correlation at multiple resolutions.



This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

SALEMBIER et al.: SHIP DETECTION IN SAR IMAGES BASED ON MAXTREE REPRESENTATION AND GRAPH SIGNAL PROCESSING 13

In the case of [12], the strategy consists in detecting coherent
targets based on the generalized likelihood ratio test (GLRT)
initially developed in [52]. Finally, Wang and Chen [51]
propose to measure the local dissimilarity between ships and
their neighborhood by using a variance weighted information
entropy measure. The results are reported in Table V. Note
that, as our algorithm involves a pruning step removing all
regions of areas smaller than 20 pixels, the output of the state-
of-the-art algorithms [3], [12], [51] was also postprocessed
by removing all detections involving less than 20 pixels
(it was not possible to do this postprocessing with [11] as
the algorithm provides the locations of ship detections but not
a binary mask of the detected areas). With [12], [51], we have
also noticed that a single ship could sometimes be represented
by several connected components. As a result, we have added
a morphological opening with a small structuring element
in order to reconnect these components. The size of the
opening was chosen such that it maximizes the F-score. The
state-of-the-art algorithms perform rather well. Among them,
the GLRT algorithm provides the best results. Finally, our
proposed algorithm provides a significantly higher F-score
than the four state-of-the-art algorithms.

Once trained, the scheme proposed in this paper can be
used on any image that is similar to the ones used during the
training stage. However, if there is a strong mismatch between
the images to process and the ones used for the training, a new
training may be necessary. In any case, the results quality
reported here on highresolution images acquired by Radarsat-2
in Wide Fine Resolution mode are not dependent on this
particular mode or sensor. To illustrate this point, we have
created a second database composed of images also acquired
by Radarsat-2 but on August 4, 2013 with the ScanSAR
Wide Beam mode. They can be seen in Fig. 10(b)–(d). They
correspond to the strait of Gibraltar. The resolution of these
images is of 50 m both in Azimuth and range. It is much
lower than the ones obtained with the Wide Fine Resolution
mode. The incidence angle is between 20◦ and 49◦ and the size
of the resulting images is 1700 × 1100 pixels. We followed
exactly the same procedure as the one described for the Wide
Fine Resolution case [50 images of size 100×100 pixels con-
taining a variety of ships, sea, and land areas were extracted.
The ground truth was manually defined. The node data set
was divided into training (60%), validation (20%), and test
(20%) sets]. As the resolution of these images is very different
from the one corresponding to the Wide Fine Resolution mode,
the features characterizing the geometry of the data have
significantly different statistics. As a result, a new training of
the SVM for the node classification was performed. In fact,
any change of sensors or of acquisition mode that implies
significant changes in the radiometric or in the geometrical
characterization of the image content requires a new SVM
training. Note that, as the resolution of the image is rather
low compared to the ship size, we have not used any size-
oriented tree pruning removing nodes corresponding to small
areas. This is the only modification that was made to the
algorithm. The results of the node classification step are shown
in Table VI. We only reproduce here the results for the branch
opening which was found to be the best in the Wide Fine

TABLE VI

NODE CLASSIFICATION RESULTS FOR THE STRAIGHT OF GIBRALTAR
IMAGES (RADARSAT-2, SCANSAR WIDE BEAM MODE)

TABLE VII

FINAL SHIP DETECTION PERFORMANCES FOR THE STRAIGHT OF
GIBRALTAR IMAGES (RADARSAT-2, SCANSAR

WIDE BEAM MODE)

Fig. 14. Example of ship detection results (Radarsat-2, ScanSAR Wide
Beam mode). The gray levels of the images have been adjusted to allow a
clear view of the ship. Detections are indicated by red ellipses.

Resolution mode. The final ship detection results are given
in Table VII. As can be seen, the F-Score for node as well
as ship detection are very good and the results are similar to
the ones previously reported for Wide Fine Resolution images.
Finally, some detection examples are illustrated in Fig. 14.

Compared to classical SAR-based ship detection algorithm,
the approach described in this paper presents some important
conceptual advantages. First of all, classical techniques are
usually based on the use of a speckle filter in order to
minimize the influence of this noise component. This filtering
step induces a loss of spatial resolution, which is critical
in the ship detection application, as the objects of interest
correspond to very small areas involving a very low number
of pixels. Instead, the proposed approach does not need
any preliminary filtering step and, thus, avoids the loss of
spatial resolution and does not alter the ship shape. Moreover,
the proposed technique has an additional advantage which is
that the detection can be based not only on radiometric fea-
tures, as most conventional approaches, but also on geometric
features. Here, eccentricity and the area ratio are two attributes
that characterize the geometry of the regions associated with
the tree nodes. In addition, the use of graph filtering tools
adapted to the tree structure allows us to increase the detection
robustness. This improvement results from the exploitation of
the correlation existing among the attributes in neighboring
nodes. To support this last statement, we have run a final exper-
iment on the Radarsat-2 Wide Fine Resolution mode images
that consisted in removing the tree/branch opening as well
as the tree Tophat involved in the node classification stage.
The ship classification step remained unchanged (in particular
involving the area extinction filters). This experiment revealed



This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

14 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING

that the F-score dropped from 0.973 (as shown in Table V)
to 0.864. This highlights the importance of the graph filtering
associated with the node classification in the context of the
complete algorithm. Finally, another advantage of the proposed
technique is that it does not require to explicitly define a sea
clutter pdf nor to process differently sea and ground areas.

In terms of limitations, we may note that with the current
MATLAB implementation we have used for the experiments,
the algorithm is not very CPU efficient. The Appendix pro-
vides some information about the CPU workload we have
observed during the experiments and its distribution. It also
includes some hints on how to improve the CPU efficiency.
A second area of improvement could address the processing
of unfocused ship response caused by ship motion. Finally,
as previously stated, our approach has not processed dif-
ferently sea and ground areas. We have not observed any
significant reduction of robustness in ground areas but if,
in the context of a specific application, one wishes to remove
ground areas from the processing, ground masks, or coastal
line detection algorithms such as [53]–[55] could be used.

Finally, the results reported in this paper were obtained with
the MATLAB Maxtree Processing toolbox [48]. This package
was designed to allow easy experimentation of most of tools
described in this paper.

V. CONCLUSION

This paper has discussed an image processing architecture
and a set of tools to address the problem of ship detection
in SAR images. The detection strategy relies on a Maxtree
representation of images and graph signal processing tools.
Radiometric as well as geometric attributes are evaluated and
associated with the Maxtree nodes forming graph attribute
signals which are further processed to take into account the
correlation between neighboring attribute values in the tree.

Considering that trees are specific graphs where the connec-
tivity toward ancestors and descendants may have a different
meaning, we have analyzed several linear, nonlinear, and mor-
phological filtering strategies. Beside graph filters, two new fil-
tering notions have emerged: tree and branch filters. The graph
filter approach relies on the classical graph connectivity where
no distinction is made between ancestors and descendants. The
tree filter approach limits the neighborhood to the descendants
and the ancestors of the node to be filtered and removes the
influence of all remaining descendants of the ancestors. As a
result, the transfer of information from one branch to another
is limited. Finally, the branch filter controls the effects related
to the disparity of node numbers in the different branches.
It is a two steps filtering approach: In the estimation step,
all branches passing through the current node are filtered
and produce several values that are aggregated in the second
step. Beside these filters, morphological reconstruction and
connected filters on tree-based representation of an image are
also discussed.

The complete ship detection algorithm involves these graph
signal filters applied on the Maxtree representation. The
processed attribute values are used with machine-learning
tools (SVM) to detect ships. The proposed algorithm demon-
strates the interest of applying graph signal processing tools

TABLE VIII

CPU TIME DISTRIBUTION

on tree-based representation of images and of going beyond
classical graph filters. The resulting ship detection approach
significantly outperforms state-of-the-art algorithms.

In terms of the future work related to the ship detection
application, one may consider the use of deep-learning tech-
niques avoiding the use of hand-crafted attributes. However,
this approach would require a large database of SAR images
suitable for ship detection and its associated ground truth.
As such a database does not currently exist, its creation would
be the first challenge to be faced.

Note that the graph processing tools have been applied
in this paper on Maxtree, but they can be applied on any
tree-based representation of images including Mintree, Tree
of Shapes [17], Binary Partition Tree [19], or α-Tree [20].
The use of these trees and associated graph processing tools
for other applications than ship detection is an attractive
topic. In term of extension of our work, depending on the
application, one could extend the set of attributes used to train
the classifier and include for example texture attributes such
as those described in [56], [57] or even learned attributes as
proposed in [58].

In the context of branch filters, interesting research could
certainly be done on a complete study of combinations of
estimation and aggregations steps.

Finally, a MATLAB toolbox involving most of the tools
presented in this paper allowing interested researchers to
easily experiment with graph signal processing on Maxtree
or Mintree has been made public [48].

APPENDIX

With the MATLAB implementation we have used for the
experiments of this paper, the processing time of ship detection
on a 100 × 100 image is equal to 15 s in average. The
distribution of this CPU time is described in Table VIII.
As can be seen, more than 64% of the time is devoted to the
computation of the best fitting ellipse of the Maxtree nodes.
This step relies on the MATLAB regionprops command.
Besides this step, the tree/branch opening applied on both the



This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

SALEMBIER et al.: SHIP DETECTION IN SAR IMAGES BASED ON MAXTREE REPRESENTATION AND GRAPH SIGNAL PROCESSING 15

TABLE IX

RELATIVE CPU TIME FOR THE GRAPH, TREE, AND BRANCH FILTERS.
THE GRAPH MEAN FILTER IS USED AS REFERENCES.

ALL FILTERS HAVE LENGTH 25

eccentricity and the area ratio attribute signal represents each
about 14% of workload. A proper C++ implementation and a
research on the best algorithms to perform these steps should
provide a more efficient algorithm.

Table IX describes the relative workload of the various
filters involved in the experiments. We have used as reference
the graph mean filter of size 25. This table shows that, with
the current implementation, tree filters are much more efficient
in terms of workload than graph filters and that branch filters
are slightly more efficient than graph filters. Moreover, mean,
median, erosion, and dilation need roughly the same CPU time
whereas opening and closing need twice as much time as they
involve a combination erosion and dilation.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

The authors would like to thank Prof. J. Mallorqui and
Dr. M. Sanjuán-Ferrer for providing results of the algorithm
defined in [11], [12] and Prof. Y. Cui for providing the
software corresponding to [3].

REFERENCES

[1] G. Denis et al., “Towards disruptions in Earth observation? New Earth
Observation systems and markets evolution: Possible scenarios and
impacts,” Acta Astronautica, vol. 137, pp. 415–433, Aug. 2017.

[2] Copernicus Market Report, vol. 1, Pub. Office Eur. Union,
PriceWaterhouseCoopers, London, U.K., Nov. 2016.

[3] Y. Cui, J. Yang, and Y. Yamaguchi, “CFAR ship detection in SAR images
based on lognormal mixture models,” in Proc. 3rd IEEE Int. Asia–Pacific
Conf. Synth. Aperture Radar, Seoul, South Korea, Sep. 2011, pp. 1–3.

[4] X. Leng, K. Ji, K. Yang, and H. Zou, “A bilateral CFAR algorithm
for ship detection in SAR images,” IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett.,
vol. 12, no. 7, pp. 1536–1540, Jul. 2015.

[5] C. Wang, F. Bi, W. Zhang, and L. Chen, “An intensity-space domain
CFAR method for ship detection in HR SAR images,” IEEE Geosci.
Remote Sens. Lett., vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 529–533, Apr. 2017.

[6] T. Li, Z. Liu, R. Xie, and L. Ran, “An improved superpixel-level
CFAR detection method for ship targets in high-resolution SAR images,”
IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 11, no. 1,
pp. 184–194, Jan. 2018.

[7] H. Greidanus, M. Alvarez, C. Santamaria, F.-X. Thoorens, N. Kourti,
and P. Argentieri, “The SUMO ship detector algorithm for satellite radar
images,” Remote Sens., vol. 9, no. 3, p. 246, 2017.

[8] C. Wang, S. Jiang, H. Zhang, F. Wu, and B. Zhang, “Ship detection for
high-resolution SAR images based on feature analysis,” IEEE Geosci.
Remote Sens. Lett., vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 119–123, Jan. 2014.

[9] C. P. Schwegmann, W. Kleynhans, and B. P. Salmon, “Synthetic aperture
radar ship detection using Haar-like features,” IEEE Geosci. Remote
Sens. Lett., vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 154–158, Feb. 2017.

[10] W. Ao, F. Xu, Y. Li, and H. Wang, “Detection and discrimination of ship
targets in complex background from spaceborne ALOS-2 SAR images,”
IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 11, no. 2,
pp. 536–550, Feb. 2018.

[11] M. Tello, C. López-Martínez, and J. J. Mallorquí, “A novel algorithm for
ship detection in SAR imagery based on the wavelet transform,” IEEE
Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett., vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 201–205, Apr. 2005.

[12] A. Marino, M. J. Sanjuan-Ferrer, I. Hajnsek, and K. Ouchi, “Ship
detection with spectral analysis of synthetic aperture radar: A compar-
ison of new and well-known algorithms,” Remote Sens., vol. 7, no. 5,
pp. 5416–5439, 2015.

[13] R. Pelich, N. Longépé, G. Mercier, G. Hajduch, and R. Garello, “AIS-
based evaluation of target detectors and SAR sensors characteristics for
maritime surveillance,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth Observ. Remote
Sens., vol. 8, no. 8, pp. 3892–3901, Aug. 2015.

[14] P. Salembier, A. Oliveras, and L. Garrido, “Motion connected oper-
ators for image sequences,” in Proc. 8th Eur. Signal Process. Conf.
(EUSIPCO), Trieste, Italy, Sep. 1996, pp. 1083–1086.

[15] P. Salembier, A. Oliveras, and L. Garrido, “Antiextensive connected
operators for image and sequence processing,” IEEE Trans. Image
Process., vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 555–570, Apr. 1998.

[16] R. Jones, “Component trees for image filtering and segmentation,”
in Proc. IEEE Workshop Nonlinear Signal Image Process., Mackinac
Island, MI, USA, 1997, pp. 1–5.

[17] P. Monasse and F. Guichard, “Fast computation of a contrast-invariant
image representation,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 9, no. 5,
pp. 860–872, May 2000.

[18] N. Ray and S. T. Acton, “Inclusion filters: A class of self-dual connected
operators,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 14, no. 11, pp. 1736–1746,
Nov. 2005.

[19] P. Salembier and L. Garrido, “Binary partition tree as an efficient
representation for image processing, segmentation, and information
retrieval,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 561–576,
Apr. 2000.

[20] P. Soille, “Constrained connectivity for hierarchical image partitioning
and simplification,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 30,
no. 7, pp. 1132–1145, Jul. 2008.

[21] C. Berger, T. Geraud, R. Levillain, N. Widynski, A. Baillard, and
E. Bertin, “Effective component tree computation with application to
pattern recognition in astronomical imaging,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Image
Process., San Antonio, TX, USA, Sep./Oct. 2007, pp. IV-41–IV-44.

[22] V. Vilaplana, F. Marques, and P. Salembier, “Binary partition trees
for object detection,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 17, no. 11,
pp. 2201–2216, Nov. 2008.

[23] G. K. Ouzounis and M. H. F. Wilkinson, “Hyperconnected attribute
filters based on k-flat zones,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell.,
vol. 33, no. 2, pp. 224–239, Feb. 2011.

[24] E. J. Breen and R. Jones, “Attribute openings, thinnings, and granulome-
tries,” Comput. Vis. Image Understand., vol. 64, no. 3, pp. 377–389,
Nov. 1996.

[25] P. Salembier and M. H. F. Wilkinson, “Connected operators: A review of
region-based morphological image processing techniques,” IEEE Signal
Process. Mag., vol. 26, no. 6, pp. 136–157, Nov. 2009.

[26] H. Lu, J. C. Woods, and M. Ghanbari, “Binary partition tree analysis
based on region evolution and its application to tree simplification,”
IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 16, no. 4, pp. 1131–1138, Apr. 2007.

[27] Y. Xu, E. Carlinet, T. Géraud, and L. Najman, “Hierarchical segmenta-
tion using tree-based shape spaces,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach.
Intell., vol. 39, no. 3, pp. 457–469, Mar. 2017.

[28] G.-S. Xia, J. Delon, and Y. Gousseau, “Shape-based invariant tex-
ture indexing,” Int. J. Comput. Vis., vol. 88, no. 3, pp. 382–403,
Jul. 2010.

[29] C. Kurtz, N. Passat, P. Gançarski, and A. Puissant, “Extraction of com-
plex patterns from multiresolution remote sensing images: A hierarchical
top-down methodology,” Pattern Recognit., vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 685–706,
2012.

[30] A. Alonso-Gonzalez, S. Valero, J. Chanussot, C. Lopez-Martinez, and
P. Salembier, “Processing multidimensional SAR and hyperspectral
images with binary partition tree,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 101, no. 3,
pp. 723–747, Mar. 2013.

[31] M. A. Veganzones, G. Tochon, M. Dalla-Mura, A. J. Plaza, and
J. Chanussot, “Hyperspectral image segmentation using a new spectral
unmixing-based binary partition tree representation,” IEEE Trans. Image
Process., vol. 23, no. 8, pp. 3574–3589, Aug. 2014.

[32] M. A. Westenberg, J. B. T. M. Roerdink, and M. H. F. Wilkinson,
“Volumetric attribute filtering and interactive visualization using the
max-tree representation,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 16, no. 12,
pp. 2943–2952, Dec. 2007.

[33] D. I. Shuman, S. K. Narang, P. Frossard, A. Ortega, and
P. Vandergheynst, “The emerging field of signal processing on graphs:
Extending high-dimensional data analysis to networks and other irregular
domains,” IEEE Signal Process. Mag., vol. 30, no. 3, pp. 83–98,
May 2013.



This article has been accepted for inclusion in a future issue of this journal. Content is final as presented, with the exception of pagination.

16 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING

[34] A. Sandryhaila and J. M. F. Moura, “Big data analysis with signal
processing on graphs: Representation and processing of massive data
sets with irregular structure,” IEEE Signal Process. Mag., vol. 31, no. 5,
pp. 80–90, Sep. 2014.

[35] S. Chen, R. Varma, A. Sandryhaila, and J. Kovačević, “Discrete signal
processing on graphs: Sampling theory,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process.,
vol. 63, no. 24, pp. 6510–6523, Dec. 2015.

[36] S. K. Narang and A. Ortega, “Perfect reconstruction two-channel wavelet
filter banks for graph structured data,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process.,
vol. 60, no. 6, pp. 2786–2799, Jun. 2012.

[37] A. Sakiyama and Y. Tanaka, “Oversampled graph Laplacian matrix
for graph filter banks,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 62, no. 24,
pp. 6425–6437, Dec. 2014.

[38] D. Shuman et al., “A multiscale pyramid transform for graph sig-
nals,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 64, no. 8, pp. 2119–2134,
Apr. 2013.

[39] J. Cousty, L. Najman, F. Dias, and J. Serra, “Morphological filtering on
graphs,” Comput. Vis. Image Understand., vol. 117, no. 4, pp. 370–385,
2013.

[40] Y. Xu, T. Géraud, and L. Najman, “Connected filtering on tree-based
shape-spaces,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 38, no. 6,
pp. 1126–1140, Jun. 2016.

[41] S. Valero, P. Salembier, and J. Chanussot, “Object recognition in
hyperspectral images using Binary Partition Tree representation,” Pattern
Recognit. Lett., vol. 56, pp. 45–51, Apr. 2015.

[42] E. Carlinet and T. Géraud, “A comparative review of component tree
computation algorithms,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 23, no. 9,
pp. 3885–3895, Sep. 2014.

[43] Y. Hu, “Efficient, high-quality force-directed graph drawing,” Math. J.,
vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 37–71, 2005.

[44] Graphviz—Graph Visualization Software. Accessed: 2018. [Online].
Available: https://www.graphviz.org

[45] A. Sandryhaila and J. M. F. Moura, “Discrete signal processing on
graphs,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 61, no. 7, pp. 1644–1656,
Apr. 2013.

[46] S. Chen, A. Sandryhaila, J. M. F. Moura, and J. Kovacevic, “Signal
denoising on graphs via graph filtering,” in Proc. IEEE Global Conf.
Signal Inf. Process. (GlobalSIP), Dec. 2014, pp. 872–876.

[47] S. Segarra, A. G. Marques, G. R. Arce, and A. Ribeiro, “Center-weighted
median graph filters,” in Proc. IEEE Global Conf. Signal Inf. Process.
(GlobalSIP), Dec. 2016, pp. 336–340.

[48] Maxtree Processing Toolbox. Accessed: 2018. [Online]. Available:
https://github.com/imatge-upc/Maxtree-Processing-Toolbox

[49] C. Vachier and F. Meyer, “Extinction value: A new measurement of
persistence,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop Nonlinear Signal Image Process.
(NSIP), Halkidiki, Greece, vol. 1, Jun. 1995, pp. 254–257.

[50] A. G. Silva and R. D. A. Lotufo, “New extinction values from efficient
construction and analysis of extended attribute component tree,” in
Proc. 21st Brazilian Symp. Comput. Graph. Image Process., Oct. 2008,
pp. 204–211.

[51] X. Wang and C. Chen, “Ship detection for complex background SAR
images based on a multiscale variance weighted image entropy method,”
IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett., vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 184–187, Feb. 2017.

[52] M. J. Sanjuan-Ferrer, “Detection of coherent scatterers in SAR data:
Algorithms and applications,” Ph.D. dissertation, ETH Zurich, Zürich,
Switzerland, 2013.

[53] M. T. Alonso, C. López-Martínez, J. J. Mallorquí, and P. Salembier,
“Edge enhancement algorithm based on the wavelet transform for
automatic edge detection in SAR images,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote
Sens., vol. 49, no. 1, pp. 222–235, Jan. 2011.

[54] F. Baselice and G. Ferraioli, “Unsupervised coastal line extraction
from SAR images,” IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett., vol. 10, no. 6,
pp. 1350–1354, Nov. 2013.

[55] M. Modava and G. Akbarizadeh, “Coastline extraction from SAR images
using spatial fuzzy clustering and the active contour method,” Int. J.
Remote Sens., vol. 38, no. 2, pp. 355–370, 2017.

[56] G. Akbarizadeh, “A new statistical-based kurtosis wavelet energy feature
for texture recognition of SAR images,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote
Sens., vol. 50, no. 11, pp. 4358–4368, Nov. 2012.

[57] K. Kayabol and J. Zerubia, “Unsupervised amplitude and texture clas-
sification of SAR images with multinomial latent model,” IEEE Trans.
Image Process., vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 561–572, Feb. 2013.

[58] Q. Oliveau and H. Sahbi, “Learning attribute representations for remote
sensing ship category classification,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth
Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 10, no. 6, pp. 2830–2840, Jun. 2017.

Philippe Salembier (M’96–SM’09–F’11) received
the Electrical Engineering degrees from Ecole Poly-
technique, Palaiseau, France, and Ecole Nationale
Supérieure des Télécommunications, Paris, France,
in 1983 and 1985, respectively, and the Ph.D. from
the EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland, in 1991.

From 1985 to 1989, he was with the Laboratoires
d’Electronique Philips, Limeil-Brévannes, France.
In 1989, he joined the Swiss Federal Institute
of Technology in Lausanne, Lausanne. He was a
Post-Doctoral Fellow with the Harvard Robotics

Laboratory, Cambridge, MA, USA. In 1992, he joined the Technical Univer-
sity of Catalonia–BarcelonaTech, Barcelona, Spain, where he is currently a
Professor of digital signal and image processing. His research interests include
remote sensing image processing, image and video sequence processing, and
mathematical morphology.

Dr. Salembier was a member of the Image and Multidimensional Signal
Processing Technical Committee of the IEEE Signal Processing Society
between 2000 and 2006 and an AdCom Officer of the European Association
for Signal Processing (EURASIP) between 1994 and 1999. He was the
Chair of the Multimedia Description Scheme Group from 1999 to 2001,
when he was involved in the definition of the MPEG-7 standard (Multimedia
Content Description Interface). He served as an Associate Editor of various
journals including the Journal of Visual Communication and Image Repre-
sentation (Academic Press), Signal Processing (Elsevier), Signal Processing:
Image Communication (Elsevier), the EURASIP Journal on Image and Video
Processing, the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON IMAGE PROCESSING, the IEEE
TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS FOR VIDEO TECHNOLOGY,
and the IEEE SIGNAL PROCESSING LETTERS.

Sergi Liesegang received the bachelor’s degree
in telecommunication engineering from ETSETB,
Technical University of Catalonia–BarcelonaTech,
Barcelona, Spain, in 2015, and the master’s degree in
telecommunication engineering from the Technical
University of Catalonia–BarcelonaTech, in collab-
oration with the Technical University of Munich,
Munich, Germany, in 2017. He is currently pursu-
ing the Ph.D. degree with the Signal Theory and
Communications Department, Technical University
of Catalonia–BarcelonaTech.

From 2015 to 2017, he was a Research Assistant with Signal Theory and
Communications Department. His research interests include signal processing,
multimedia technologies, and information and communication theory.

Carlos López-Martínez (S’97–M’04–SM’11)
received the MSc. degree in electrical engineering
and the Ph.D. degree from the Universitat
Politècnica de Catalunya, Barcelona, Spain, in 1999
and 2003, respectively.

From 2000 to 2002, he was with the Frequency
and Radar Systems Department, German Aerospace
Center, Oberpfaffenhofen, Germany. From 2003 to
2005, he has been with the Image and Remote
Sensing Group—SAPHIR Team, Institute of
Electronics and Telecommunications of Rennes,

Rennes, France. In 2006, he joined the Technical University of Catalonia–
BarcelonaTech, Barcelona, Spain, as a Ramón-y-Cajal Researcher, where
he is currently an Associate Professor of remote sensing and microwave
technology. He has authored or co-authored more than 100 articles in
journals, books, and conference proceedings in the radar remote sensing and
image analysis literature. His research interests include synthetic-aperture
radar (SAR) and multidimensional SAR, radar polarimetry, physical
parameter inversion, digital signal processing, estimation theory, and
harmonic analysis.

Dr. López-Martínez has organized different invited sessions in international
conferences on radar and SAR polarimetry. He has presented advanced
courses and seminars on radar polarimetry to a wide range of organizations
and events. He was a recipient of the Student Prize Paper Award at the
EUSAR 2002 Conference, the First Place Student Paper Award at the
EUSAR 2012 Conference, and the IEEE-GRSS 2013 GOLD Early Career
Award. He served as a Guest Editor for the European Association for Signal
Processing Journal on Advances in Signal Processing. He is an Associate
Editor of the IEEE JOURNAL OF SELECTED TOPICS IN APPLIED EARTH
OBSERVATIONS AND REMOTE SENSING.


