

















































Crossing the Death Valley to Transfer Environmental Decision Support Systems to the Water Market


F
U
L
L
 P

A
P
E
R

(1 of 10) 1700009wileyonlinelibrary.com© 2017 The Authors. Published by WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim

Crossing the Death Valley to Transfer Environmental 
Decision Support Systems to the Water Market

Manel Poch, Joaquim Comas,* Ulises Cortés, Miquel Sànchez-Marrè, 
and Ignasi Rodríguez-Roda

Prof. M. Poch, Prof. J. Comas, Prof. I. Rodríguez-Roda
Laboratory of Chemical and  
Environmental Engineering (LEQUIA)
Universitat de Girona
Campus de Montilivi s/n  
17071 Girona, Catalonia, Spain
E-mail: jcomas@icra.cat
Prof. J. Comas, Prof. I. Rodríguez-Roda
Catalan Institute for Water Research (ICRA)
Parc Científic i Tecnològic de la Universitat de Girona
Emili Grahit, 101-17003 Girona, Catalonia, Spain
Prof. U. Cortés, Prof. M. Sànchez-Marrè
Knowledge Engineering and Machine Learning Group (KEMLG)
Computer Science Department
Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya-BarcelonaTech
Jordi Girona 1-3, 08034 Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain
Prof. U. Cortés
Barcelona Supercomputing Center, Jordi Girona s/n
08034 Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain

DOI: 10.1002/gch2.201700009

sensors, and the overwhelming evidence 
of environmental strain and global eco-
nomic issues caused by the extensive pres-
sure on resources exerted by the demands 
of growing populations indicate that envi-
ronmental systems composed of multiple 
interacting agents or variables that cause 
emergent behavior require complex 
manage ment strategies. In addition, 
improving environment-friendly practices 
related to the use and/or reuse of natural 
resources to minimize detrimental effects 
on the natural environment has become a 
prominent issue. Therefore, increasingly 
advanced and sophisticated management 
tools capable of integrating heuristic 
knowledge and quantitative and qualitative 
information are required.

The initial concept of a decision support 
system (DSS) emerged in the business, economics, and man-
agement sciences. A DSS is an intelligent information system 
that reduces the time in which decisions are made within a 
domain and improves the consistency and quality of these 
decisions.[1] DSSs use a combination of models, analytical tech-
niques, and information retrieval to help develop and evaluate 
appropriate alternatives;[2,3] and such systems focus on strategic 
decisions and not operational ones. More specifically, a DSS 
should contribute to the reduction of the uncertainty faced by 
managers when they need to take decisions regarding future 
options.[4] Similar definitions can be found in ref. [5,6]

Environmental decision support systems (EDSSs) are a class 
of DSS that demonstrates all of the capabilities of a DSS on an 
environmental field scale.[5,7,8] EDSSs have been increasingly 
applied in more intense and efficient ways, and an increased 
number of systems have been developed. A metric of their 
increasing implementation is that more than 3300 references 
have been cited on this topic in specialized journals over the 
last ten years (search on SCOPUS on February 2016).

The quality and quantity of available water resources is 
decreasing because of the intensive use of surface and ground-
water by cities, industry and agriculture, and the associated 
impacts of the point pollution and diffuse discharge of the gen-
erated wastewater.[9] The optimal and integrated management 
of water resources is a paradigmatic example of circumstances 
in which an EDSS can play an important role by integrating 
data from different origins and with different quality with 
infrastructures managed by several public and private actors 
under different legal frameworks with a final goal of preserving 

Environmental decision support systems (EDSSs) are attractive tools to cope 
with the complexity of environmental global challenges. Several thoughtful 
reviews have analyzed EDSSs to identify the key challenges and best prac-
tices for their development. One of the major criticisms is that a wide and 
generalized use of deployed EDSSs has not been observed. The paper briefly 
describes and compares four case studies of EDSSs applied to the water 
domain, where the key aspects involved in the initial conception and the use 
and transfer evolution that determine the final success or failure of these tools 
(i.e., market uptake) are identified. Those aspects that contribute to bridging 
the gap between the EDSS science and the EDSS market are highlighted in the 
manuscript. Experience suggests that the construction of a successful EDSS 
should focus significant efforts on crossing the death-valley toward a general 
use implementation by society (the market) rather than on development.

1. Introduction

New environmental challenges are qualitatively different 
from those of the recent past. The increasing understanding 
of environmental problems, the availability of more accurate 
modeling techniques, the considerable amount of deployed 

This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative Commons 
Attribution License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in 
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

www.global-challenges.comwww.advancedsciencenews.com

Global Challenges 2017, 1, 1700009

http://doi.wiley.com/10.1002/gch2.201700009
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/


F
U
L
L
 P

A
P
E
R

1700009 (2 of 10) wileyonlinelibrary.com © 2017 The Authors. Published by WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim

the local (and global) environment while fulfilling the users’ 
requirements.

1.1. EDSS Development and EDSS Use and Transfer

There are two main aspects to consider once an EDSS has been 
selected to resolve an environmental problem: the development 
of the tool and the use and transfer of the tool to the market.

Regarding development, the problem must be clearly identi-
fied, all of the available data and knowledge must be gathered 
and filtered, the necessary tools to infer the solution must be 
integrated, and all alternatives must be compared and ranked 
in a multi-criteria framework. In addition to considering the 
technical aspects, the environmental, economic, and social 
aspects must also be appropriately considered in relation to the 
restrictions caused by a limited (and often public) budget.

Several methodologies have been proposed in the literature 
for the development of EDSSs,[10–16] and many EDSSs have been 
deployed. These methodologies propose the basic steps, tools 
and main concepts to be considered when developing an EDSS.

The major challenges that have been identified in the devel-
opment step are as follows:

• Knowledge acquisition and maintenance
• System validation
• Model integration and interoperability
• Uncertainty analysis and management
• Spatial and temporal reasoning

Historically, because of the complexity of the development 
step, most efforts have been devoted to this technical phase. In 
our opinion, a significant degree of maturity has been reached 
in the development of EDSSs, which are considered well-estab-
lished and reliable tools. The results obtained for the develop-
ment of the basic concepts and tools and their integration and 
application to specific problems have been satisfactory in terms 
of applicability and usability, although work is still required for 
the development of new tools and applications.

For the second step, the use and transfer of the EDSS, the 
procedures and the relevant factors are not clear enough to 
guarantee the success of the developed tool. This finding is 
common for a number of innovative products, which face 
considerable barriers when crossing the death valley from an 
academic conception to a viable product in the market. Such 
barriers are more formidable for EDSSs because of the par-
ticularities of the environmental problems, tools, and potential 
users.

In this step, the following must be identified: the source of 
the problem; the associated effects of the problem; the indivi-
duals tasked to manage the problem; when the problem must be 
managed; and the implications if the problem cannot be solved 
(e.g., the solution suggested by the EDSS was not successful or 
was not applied). Additionally, it is necessary to identify who 
the final user is, whether the problem must be resolved once or 
upon frequent reappearances, and whether the user must con-
front other environmental problems when considering aspects of 
reuse, including the reuse of knowledge and the inference tool.

Regarding the challenges identified by McIntosh et al.,[17] we 
suggest that the following challenges are the most important:

• Identifying problem ownership and engaging the end-user
• encouraging longevity and financial sustainability
• evaluating the system

The main goal of this paper is to identify the key aspects to 
improve the technology transfer of EDSSs to the water market. 
In Section 2, four case studies of an EDSS developed by the 
authors for the wastewater treatment field are described and 
analyzed. The principal analysis and discussion are provided in 
Section 3, and the conclusions are detailed in Section 4.

2. Analysis of the Developed EDSS

This section describes and compares four EDSS case studies 
developed by the authors and applied to the water treatment 
domain. These four cases represent different common situ-
ations in the EDSS development domain. Two of them cor-
respond to EDSS for planning where response times are not 
critical while the other two supports the operation of water 
infrastructures where process dynamics is very important. 
Besides, one of them was commissioned by water authorities, 
two were initially conceived from the academic world, with the 
intention to be adopted later in the market, i.e., willing to cross 
the death valley, and the last one was envisaged totally in col-
laboration between academia and one company of the water 
sector.

For each EDSS, both the development and use and transfer 
steps are illustrated, aiming at highlighting the most relevant 
features (Table 1). The first two cases (PSARU and ATL) are 
only briefly described as they were previously presented in Poch 
et al.[14]; however, two new complementary examples (NOV-
EDAR and COLMATAR) are described in more technical detail. 
Information related to the objectives and development (e.g., 
identifying the environmental problem, determining whether 
the problem is market or research driven, and assessing the 
funding scheme, knowledge engineering consortia characteris-
tics and commercial perspectives), as well as the evolution in 
terms of use and transfer to market of the four EDSSs are high-
lighted in this section to provide a basis for a final comparison 
and discussion in Section 3.

2.1. PSARU EDSS

2.1.1. Objectives and Development

The PSARU EDSS was commissioned by the Catalan Water 
Agency to a consortium of research groups with the objective 
of selecting the most appropriate wastewater treatment and dis-
posal system for 3500 communities with less than 2000 inhabit-
ants in Catalonia.

A consortium of four environmental engineering research 
groups from different universities and the Spanish Scientific 
Council led by the University of Girona was established to 
acquire and systematize the required knowledge and develop a 

www.global-challenges.com www.advancedsciencenews.com

Global Challenges 2017, 1, 1700009



F
U
L
L
 P

A
P
E
R

(3 of 10) 1700009wileyonlinelibrary.com© 2017 The Authors. Published by WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim

system capable of reproducing the reasoning process of a group 
of experts facing the complex situation in question.

The methodology of Poch et al.[14] was used to build the 
EDSS. This particular application posed challenges in the fol-
lowing three sustainability dimensions.

• Social: Small communities have a strong perception of their 
sanitation treatment processes.

• Economic: Applications that pertain to a small percentage of 
the population (5%) but have a relatively high cost because 
of the scaling factor (i.e., the cost per cubic meter treated is 
significantly higher than for a large population).

• Environmental: Many target communities located in protect-
ed and/or tourist areas.

The project development involved intensive field and desk 
work, which required continuous interactions with the end-
users (the Catalan Water Agency) and with the stakeholders and 
the local authorities.

The PSARU EDSS provided satisfactory results with regard 
to assessing and validating the most appropriate sanitation sys-
tems in all of the predicted communities in Catalonia, which 
was the principal outcome.

2.1.2. Use and Transfer Evolution

After the success of the first project, two new goals were estab-
lished: use the PSARU EDSS in future implementation phases 
of the Catalan Sanitation Plan and use the base (KB) and the 
evaluation criteria contained in the EDSS to resolve similar 
issues in other European regions required to implement the 
European Directive 91/271. However, none of these goals were 

achieved. Regarding the first goal, an economic crisis delayed 
the implementation of the Catalan Sanitation Plan, and sub-
sequent changes occurred in the administration management; 
therefore, the product was relegated to a personal choice, 
and continuity was not observed. Regarding the second goal, 
although multiple contacts were established and negotiations 
were performed, neither the research groups nor the administra-
tions were able to transfer and apply the system to other regions 
facing similar issues. We believe that such circumstances repre-
sent a general issue for many EDSSs that are designed and used 
for a specific requirement, which justified its construction, and 
then no longer used after the initial implementation.

2.2. ATL EDSS

2.2.1. Objectives and Development

The ATL EDSS originated in the mid-1990s when two environ-
mental engineering and artificial intelligence research groups 
joined forces to optimize the operation of the biological pro-
cesses of municipal wastewater treatment plants (WWTPs). 
Initially, the work was performed conceptually by developing 
specific decision trees in the context of conventional expert 
systems.

Once a set of decision trees was generated to diagnose and 
resolve operational problems in an activated sludge system, a 
second phase was begun to build a complete EDSS. Among 
the modules, a case-based reasoning system[18] and a mecha-
nistic model were developed. The same methodology as that 
used by Poch et al.[14] was followed, and the resulting tool was 
implemented in a full-scale facility (Granollers, NE Spain) that 
treated 35 000 m3 d−1. The ATL EDSS supervised the process 
for ten months, diagnosed problems and identified the causes 

www.global-challenges.comwww.advancedsciencenews.com

Global Challenges 2017, 1, 1700009

Table 1. Summary of the main features of each of the developed EDSSs.

PSARU ATL NOVEDAR COLMATAR

Domain Wastewater Wastewater Wastewater Wastewater

Level of decision Planning Operation Planning/design Operation/control

Commissioned by Water authority University Consortium of 11 universities University and company

Developed by Consortium of universities Two universities 11 Universities University and company

Funded by Water authority Research projects Research project Research and transfer of technology 

projects

Time for development Three years Ten years Four years Six years

Methodology for development Poch et al.[14] Poch et al.[14] Poch et al.[14] Poch et al.[14] simplified

Reasoning tools Rule-based system Rule-based system + case-based 
reasoning + modeling

Knowledge-based system Rule-based system and  

mathematical model

Knowledge update/mainte-

nance (incl. funding)

No update Commercial spin off Private company University and private company

Current status Unused Commercial Crossing the death valley License agreement

Stakeholder implication Strong Weak Under requirement Medium

Validation Expert-based and stakeholders Pilot and full-scale Expert-based and pilot  

and full scale

Pilot and full scale

Research to market strategy Null Spin off Licensing protocol Patent and license agreement



F
U
L
L
 P

A
P
E
R

1700009 (4 of 10) wileyonlinelibrary.com © 2017 The Authors. Published by WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim

on the same day (70%) or several days in advance (30%) of the 
problem.[19]

2.2.2. Use and Transfer Evolution

Based on the satisfactory scientific results observed for 
EDSSs, the next goal was to adapt the tool for implementa-
tion in other facilities with similar wastewater treatment 
technologies. At this point, a problem arose as to whether 
this goal should be part of a research project or performed 
in collaboration with public or private companies. The pro-
posed solution was the creation in 2003 of a spin-off com-
pany named SISLtech which was tasked with proceeding 
with the further development and commercialization of the 
ATL EDSS, with the researchers signing on as entrepreneurs. 
However, the protocol for the practical implementation of 
the ATL EDSS to any WWTP was complex and long, and it 
required too much effort from the developers (researchers) 
and the end-users (facility managers). Therefore, the com-
mercial initiative to develop the ATL EDSS was considered 
unsuccessful.

In 2009, a key shift in orientation occurred. The owner of the 
WWTP where the first version of ATL EDSS was validated iden-
tified a market opportunity for product commercialization and 
subsequently bought most of the shares of the spin-off com-
pany. A new manager took control as director of the company, 
and the five initial entrepreneurs became the research unit 
behind the scenes and developed and refined aspects related to 
the knowledge engineering tasks, although they did not have an 
influence on the commercialization. The first and main task of 
the company was the adaptation of the product (and its imple-
mentation protocol) for actual market needs. The complexity 
of the tool was high as a result of the development method-
ology, which represented a considerable opportunity from an 
academic perspective for the exploration and publication of 
new approaches. From a commercial perspective, however, the 
system had to be drastically simplified for practical implemen-
tation. Thus, an optimal cost/benefit balance had to be found, 
which was an aspect that the researchers did not consider. Pres-
ently, the spin-off SISLtech has successfully implemented an 
evolved version of the ATL EDSS to more than one hundred 
plants in ten countries treating more than a million of cubic 
meters a day.

2.3. NOVEDAR EDSS

2.3.1. Objectives and Development

The NOVEDAR EDSS was developed in the framework of an 
academic research project with the goal of selecting the optimal 
integration of both conventional and innovative technologies 
for the treatment of specific wastewater in a specific location. 
The project started in 2007, and the consortium involved 11 
universities, which had the general goal of defining the con-
cept of a 21st century WWTP. The framework was organized in 
four main work units: (i) study and optimization of innovative 
techno logies for wastewater treatment and recovery strategies; 

(ii) process modeling for performance and cost; (iii) develop-
ment of economic, environmental, technical and social evalua-
tion criteria; and (iv) integration of knowledge into an EDSS to 
select the optimal combination of conventional and innovative 
technologies for a specific scenario according to specific evalu-
ation criteria.[20]

Five steps were followed to build the NOVEDAR EDSS 
according to the methodology of Poch et al.[14]:

2.3.1.1. Problem Identification: The selection of an optimal 
combination of technologies for a WWTP configuration is a 
complex problem. A single solution is not sufficient, and a com-
bination of different technologies for the water (pretreatment, 
primary treatment, secondary treatment, and advanced treat-
ment) and the sludge lines (thickening, enhanced digestion, 
and dewatering) is necessary. The NOVEDAR EDSS included 
250 different existing technologies and had a large number of 
potential alternatives to compare. In addition, the criteria used 
to evaluate the suitability of the design became increasingly 
elaborated. The achievement of adequate effluent water quality 
levels was not the sole consideration, and additional aspects, 
such as the operational safety, cost (with special attention to 
energy requirements), and the environmental impact of the 
plant with respect to greenhouse gases and emissions, also had 
to be considered.

2.3.1.2. Data and Knowledge Acquisition: The data required to 
build the knowledge base of the EDSS was extracted from inter-
views with experts within the NOVEDAR Consolider research 
project from 11 universities, project engineers from 29 water 
companies, and experts from 14 public wastewater treatment 
authorities. A scientific and technical literature review was also 
used.

2.3.1.3. Model Selection: The proposed knowledge model was 
based on a hierarchical decision approach that reduced the 
complex design problem into a series of issues that were easier 
to analyse and evaluate. For each of these issues, three levels 
of abstraction were defined (units, sub-metaunits, metaunits) to 
modify the degree of engineering detail and facilitate the deci-
sion making of each design step.[20]

2.3.1.4. Model Implementation: WWTP alternatives were gener-
ated by the interaction between two KB. The first KB included 
the main features of the different treatment technologies, 
whereas the second KB contained information on the degree of 
compatibility among the different technologies. Both KBs were 
linked to other databases with additional information on leg-
islation and environment-related issues. These characteristics 
were described using an integrated modeling approach through 
mechanistic process equations, cost models, life-cycle assess-
ments, and expert and bibliographic knowledge. The com-
bination of the wastewater treatment technology properties, 
network structure model, decision trees, and recursive evalua-
tion method with a multi-criteria decision analysis allowed for 
(i) the synthesis of multiple flow process diagrams, including 
different treatment schemes; and (ii) the analysis of these dia-
grams from an environmental, economic, social, and technical 
perspective. Next, a multi-criteria decision method selected 

www.global-challenges.com www.advancedsciencenews.com

Global Challenges 2017, 1, 1700009



F
U
L
L
 P

A
P
E
R

(5 of 10) 1700009wileyonlinelibrary.com© 2017 The Authors. Published by WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim

the sequence of unit processes that maximized the degree of 
satisfaction of the different objectives by using multi-criteria 
and sensitivity analysis tools.[21,22]

2.3.1.5. Model Validation: The software was verified and vali-
dated by different research groups of the NOVEDAR Con-
solider research project and the Water 2020 Cost-Action 
program (ES1202-110614-044095) and engineers from compa-
nies participating in the project. The results were considered 
satisfactory.

2.3.2. Use and Transfer Evolution

Maintenance of the KB was the first and presumably most 
critical issue identified. New knowledge was generated from 
basic and demonstration research projects, particularly those 
related to innovative technologies for wastewater treatment 
and quantifying the evaluation criteria. Once the NOVEDAR 
Consolider research project was completed, additional funding 
was not available to update the NOVEDAR EDSS knowledge 
base; therefore, the tool could have quickly become obsolete. 
The consortium thought that the best method of ensuring the 
maintenance of the EDSS was to transfer the system to the 
market and receive funding from users. A different commercial 
strategy was used in this case. NOVEDAR EDSS was presented 
to several water companies, and one company was interested 
in reaching an agreement for license commercialization. The 
intellectual property rights (IPR) were shared and distributed 
between the universities that developed the system.

Negotiations with the company lasted for more than a 
year. A protocol for evaluating innovative projects by different 
departments of the company (processes, engineering, legal, 
computing, commercial, etc.) was strictly followed. Thus, the 
company had to verify interest in and the reliability of the NOV-
EDAR EDSS, but it also had to evaluate the cost of adapting the 
product to market needs. Similar to the ATL EDSS, the NOV-
EDAR EDSS was scientifically sound and complete but not 
ready for commercial use.

2.4. COLMATAR EDSS

2.4.1. Objectives and Development

The main objective of the COLMATAR EDSS was to improve 
the integrated control of the biological and filtration pro-
cesses of membrane bioreactors (MBR) for wastewater treat-
ment in terms of the effluent quality and operational costs. 
The COLMATAR EDSS was initiated in 2006, and it was based 
on academic work and the funding of three research projects 
obtained in public competitive calls for research. From the 
onset, several wastewater practitioners identified the relevance 
of the proposal and showed a potential interest in collabo-
rating. Specifically, a water engineering and construction com-
pany became fully committed to the development of the EDSS 
at an early stage.

Again, the protocol defined in Poch et al.[14] was followed to 
build the COLMATAR EDSS.

2.4.1.1. Problem Identification: MBRs were an emerging tech-
nology for municipal and industrial wastewater treatment and 
the MBR global market was growing, especially in regions 
where water was scarce or water reuse required high-quality 
reclaimed water. However, the high-energy consumption rate 
of MBRs related to membrane cleaning via air scouring and 
limited knowledge or experience in MBR design and opera-
tion posed an obstacle to water authorities and companies that 
were considering committing to a definite implementation. In 
addition to the complex management of biological processes, 
the use of MBRs includes considerations for filtration processes 
and guarantees of adequate removal efficiencies with minimal 
fouling rates and operational costs.

2.4.1.2. Data and Knowledge Acquisition: The data and knowl-
edge required to develop the COLMATAR EDSS were mainly 
acquired through the processing and interpretation of empir-
ical data from experiments at different scales. The EDSS 
was tested on both laboratory[23] and industrial scales[24] to 
validate the operations and control of MBRs under extreme 
conditions.

2.4.1.3. Model Selection: The models selected to represent the 
knowledge base were based on mathematical calculations for 
numerical data processing, whereas knowledge-based tech-
niques were used for the advanced control algorithm and expert 
supervision simulation.

2.4.1.4. Model Implementation: The KB was implemented 
using the 3-level architecture presented in Comas et al.[25]: 
(i) data gathering and signal processing, (ii) advanced control 
system, and (iii) knowledge-based supervision. The lowest 
architecture level implements a set of mathematical data ver-
ification algorithms to identify data errors (missing data, out-
liers, etc.) and to perform reconstruction. The middle level 
includes the control logics of the advanced control system, 
which are implemented as a decision tree[24] that involved a 
series of control actions for energy optimization based on 
the temporal evolution of MBR performance as specified by 
the nutrient removal efficiency, biomass characteristics, and 
permeability trends. Finally, the top level consists of a set 
of knowledge-based rules that supervise the control module 
and regulates the module in case of operational problems, 
start-up phases, and mechanical equipment or electrical mal-
functions and/or failure.

2.4.1.5. Validation: The COLMATAR EDSS was successfully 
validated for long-term operations in three pilot plants and 
a full-scale WWTP (La Bisbal d’Empordà); thus, the EDSS 
covered a wide range of design and operational conditions 
(e.g., wastewater type, plant size, hydraulic conditions, bio-
mass characteristics, operational flux, MBR and membrane 
configuration, and surface). The EDSS was shown to be a 
reliable and robust tool capable of optimizing the perfor-
mance of MBR processes and reducing operational costs, as 
it decreased around 30% and 20% (on average) of the energy 
required to operate the pilot-scale and full-scale plants, 
respectively,[24,23] and presented a corresponding reduction of 
CO2 emissions. Although the main objective was to reduce 

www.global-challenges.comwww.advancedsciencenews.com

Global Challenges 2017, 1, 1700009



F
U
L
L
 P

A
P
E
R

1700009 (6 of 10) wileyonlinelibrary.com © 2017 The Authors. Published by WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim

energy consumption, the EDSS also improved the online 
fouling monitoring, reduced the chemicals consumption and 
overall increased the reliability and efficiency of the waste-
water treatment process.

2.4.2. Use and Transfer Evolution

The research project funding enabled the development of the 
proof of concept of the tool and the sequential development, 
implementation and validation of the EDSS at the pilot plant, 
both on a laboratory and an industrial scale. The successful 
results achieved at the pilot scale together with the identifica-
tion of market needs for such technology directed our efforts 
to the improvement of the academic EDSS prototype so that a 
viable technical and commercial product could be developed. 
This step was clearly facilitated by two new projects sup-
porting technology transfer. The goal was twofold: first, the 
technical objective was to finalize a robust EDSS and valorize 
it through a proof of concept of the tool’s benefits at the full 
scale over long-term periods (two years); second, the com-
mercial objective was to foster communication and transfer 
the plans for the EDSS to the market. Both the research 
group and the company jointly conducted these valorization 
projects.[26]

The EDSS was protected by a Spanish patent (ES 
2333837B1) owned equally by the university and the com-
pany, and the name for the commercial product was regis-
tered as SmartAirMBR. The valorization projects also ena-
bled the evaluation of different alternatives for patent mar-
keting and the organization of showcase meetings with 
water resource managers. Based on our previous experience, 
the best solution included locating an industrial partner 
working on process automation and control who was inter-
ested in exploiting the patent. Finally, the research group 
and the company received another technology transfer grant 
to demon strate the viability of the EDSS in other countries 
at different configurations and scales and to further explore 
colla boration projects.

The market demand together with the feasibility illus-
trated at the full scale and the absence of close competitors 
suggests that the COLMATAR EDSS has a significant poten-
tial for commercial development because it provides a good 
solution for an important wastewater treatment problem at 
a competitive investment cost, and it does not require addi-
tional equipment and has an estimated return period of two 
to three years.

3. Discussion

As previously mentioned, the use and transfer step is complex 
and involves interrelated critical challenges. In this section, our 
experience is discussed according to the three primary chal-
lenges identified in the introduction (Figure 1): (i) identifying 
problem ownership and engaging the end-user, (ii) encour-
aging longevity and financial sustainability, and (iii) trusting 
and evaluating the system.

3.1. Problem Ownership and End-User Engagement

The problem owner depends on the problem the EDSS is trying 
to solve. Sometimes, it will be a utility for operational and 
maintenance problems, sometimes a water agency for cost-ben-
efit problems or sustainability, but it could also be a regulating 
agency for political transparence. The identification of the 
problem owner, which might be different of the one affected by 
the problem, and his/her recognition of ownership is essential 
to take actions to solve the problem. The mental framework of 
each owner is different since they have different goals and dif-
ferent procedures to achieve them. We do not think a generic 
recipe is valid but it will depend on each situation. However, we 
propose some general criteria.

Utilities have usually very specific information from their 
installations, which allows specific knowledge to be acquired 
after high efforts, due to the paradox of expertise.[27] Besides, 
there is a difficulty on generalizing this expert knowledge. 
However, its implementation and use is guaranteed since the 
knowledge base fits very well with the problem requirements. 
This is typically the case for EDSS designed for the manage-
ment of water infrastructures.

For water agencies, there is a similar problem regarding the 
specificity but different in terms of the implementation and use. 
In this case, EDSS are usually developed as tools for planning. 
The identification of the problem owner in the PSARU EDSS 
was excellent, allowing its direct involvement and achieving 
great trust in the tool. However, the transfer step to similar 
problems was not done due to the specificity of the problem 
and the lack of interest of the problem owner in gaining any 
additional benefit beyond the resolution of their problems.

A regulator can be an excellent problem owner if it identi-
fies EDSS as standardized tool that can be useful for their work. 
In this case, the status of independent entity that makes these 
tools can be very useful because they allow regulators, as inde-
pendent entities, to negotiate with their interlocutors in a more 
systematic way, justifying their decision-making.

A consulting engineer may be the optimal problem owner 
when the objective is a massive application of an EDSS. That 
is the case for the ATL EDSS, since it has been implemented 
in various facilities all over the world. From the developer’s 
point of view, this application might present some limitations 
because consultant engineer usually are interested in simplified 

Figure 1. EDSS: from science to market with expected death valley.

www.global-challenges.com www.advancedsciencenews.com

Global Challenges 2017, 1, 1700009



F
U
L
L
 P

A
P
E
R

(7 of 10) 1700009wileyonlinelibrary.com© 2017 The Authors. Published by WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim

and generic tools, which sometimes contradicts with the more 
systematic academic will.

End-user engagement is typically considered a key element 
for successfully applying EDSSs[28] because it can elicit rele-
vant information and knowledge and enable easier adop-
tion by reducing the cost and effort related to training and 
dissemination. However, according to our experience, such 
outcomes do not always occur. Only one out of the four case 
studies presented in this paper followed this ideal engage-
ment scheme perfectly, and another case partially followed 
this scheme; however, the remaining cases exhibited different 
characteristics.

For the PSARU EDSS (see Section 2.1), user involvement 
was important. A clear champion within the institution was 
identified who could manage the challenge of selecting the 
most adequate WWTP for small communities using an inno-
vative recommendation approach. This solid engagement also 
enabled the incorporation of relevant information and facili-
tated the adoption of the EDSS within the commissioning 
authority.

The COLMATAR EDSS (Section 2.4) was a private end-user 
driven approach. In this case, the driving force was shared with 
the university (developer), who had an interest in developing a 
practical tool but also in progressing the fundamental knowl-
edge and tools within the MBR scientific field. In addition, the 
end-user wanted to solve a new problem with a new mentality 
by developing a smart system for the improvement of MBR 
control. This involvement enabled the identification of relevant 
information, and when the company realized that there was 
a business opportunity, it also enabled the development of a 
business plan to optimize the implementation costs for other 
end-users.

Nevertheless, end-user involvement cannot be guaranteed 
in all cases, particularly when the users do not properly iden-
tify or explain the problem or they do not take risks with new 
approaches to solve new problems, which occurred for both the 
ATL EDSS (Section 2.2) and NOVEDAR EDSS (Section 2.3). In 
the former, the application of artificial intelligence techniques 
was not considered feasible for the improvement of activated 
sludge process operation and control. Despite its complexity, 
neither the authorities nor the operating companies felt that 
the investment of resources and time to develop an EDSS was 
worthwhile. However, academia perceived that EDSSs were 
needed to improve process supervision and began their devel-
opment. Therefore, the end-user involvement in this case was 
not absent, although it was reactive to the developers’ demand 
rather than pro-active, and they only participated in meetings 
and replied to questionnaires and did not represent a critical 
factor. Instead, the university determined the road map. A 
similar situation occurred with the NOVEDAR EDSS, which 
involved eleven European universities and several companies. 
However, from the very beginning of the project, it was evi-
dent that an academic product would be delivered. For these 
two case studies, if real engagement did not occur at the begin-
ning of EDSS development, then interest in the information 
included in the tool could not be guaranteed. Moreover, the 
adoption of these two EDSSs was also more difficult because 
they were initially validated primarily by academics, although 
the case studies evaluated were real.

3.2. Longevity and Financial Sustainability

Although the longevity challenge could be related a priori to 
end-user engagement (because it can be used to obtain a tool 
that provides relevant information, is easily adopted and has a 
lower promotional cost), our experience indicates that reality 
does not necessarily follow this pattern. The evolution of the 
four EDSSs allowed for the identification of different situations 
regarding the relationship between longevity and end-user 
engagement.

For the PSARU EDSS, although a champion was identi-
fied and strong user engagement occurred during the devel-
opment phase, the longevity was limited. Once the EDSS 
resolved the problem that motivated its development, the 
water agency was not interested in continuing supporting 
the knowledge base update, commercializing the EDSS or 
finding a company that could perform the commercializa-
tion. Although the promotional phase would not have been 
particularly costly, it was not among the water agency’s objec-
tives, and outside companies considered the EDSS to be too 
problem specific. Therefore, a business plan was never devel-
oped for this application.

The driving force for both the NOVEDAR EDSS and ATL 
EDSS was identifying the problem to be solved by the research 
groups, particularly when the problem was not recognized 
by practitioners (utilities and companies). The advantage of a 
research-driven approach is the possibility of evaluating mul-
tiple alternatives, which may include risky, time consuming, or 
even nonviable alternatives by the end-users. Such situations 
enable the development of ambitious EDSSs that initially might 
not find demand among end-users but can have a longer ser-
vice life and later dissemination. Therefore, although the adop-
tion process was more expensive and longer, the longevity of 
the EDSS offered higher guarantees.

The first business plan for the ATL EDSS developed by the 
researchers was rejected because the prototype was built from 
an academic perspective. Thus, a second business plan was 
required, and the end-users ultimately turned to entrepreneurs 
to adapt the prototype for practical implementations.

The commercialization step was easier for the NOVEDAR 
EDSS because private company decided to license it after the 
prototype was carefully analyzed using different evaluation 
protocols. Thus, the company itself developed the business 
plan according to its specifications. An intermediate situation 
occurred for COLMATAR EDSS because the business plan was 
developed by the company and the university together.

In our experience, end-user engagement may certainly help 
to ensure EDSS longevity; however, involvement should occur 
in the development and application phases as well as in the 
commercialization and dissemination phases. If the idea is 
good enough, then researchers can become the driving force 
and achieve product longevity, even if the adoption process 
is longer. This pathway requires a higher activation energy, 
although it might provide a more favorable outcome.

On the other hand, the existence of incentives to end-users 
to incorporate innovations such as EDSS or tools for optimi-
zation in general is a key point to ensure EDSS longevity and 
financial sustainability. There should be an adequate regulatory 
or economic framework favoring those utilities or authorities 

www.global-challenges.comwww.advancedsciencenews.com

Global Challenges 2017, 1, 1700009



F
U
L
L
 P

A
P
E
R

1700009 (8 of 10) wileyonlinelibrary.com © 2017 The Authors. Published by WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim

who take some risks and implement innovations in field. Oth-
erwise, if economic or governance schemes do not promote 
incentives, because operating companies have too short time to 
recover the investment, EDSS will hardly be used. For example, 
water utilities often sign exploitation contracts with a short 
time frame, which do not facilitate any investment in innova-
tion, such as on implementing mathematical models, EDSS 
or other support tools for process or design optimization. In 
any case, EDSS can incentivize better than other tools (sensors, 
conventional control systems) because they can justify eco-
nomic or energy savings and, in addition, the reasons of the 
decisions taken can be rationalized. In this way, the tool fos-
ters the end-user confidence in the system. In fact, if correctly 
developed and implemented, EDSS can in theory provide more 
reliable decisions that potentially subjective decisions that 
humans could make when dealing with a complex problem.

3.3. Trust and Evaluation

Confidence in EDSS and between EDSS developers and end-
users is fundamental, very difficult to gain but easy to lose. 
Besides, no clear mechanisms/methodologies to obtain it 
exists since, in some cases, this can be obtained quickly, while 
in others it has appeared after a longer experience of joint col-
laboration in previous studies between academia and water 
agencies, probably not related to EDSS development. That was 
the case for the PSARU EDSS.

The EDSS capability on providing justifications for the rea-
soning processes used to carry out diagnosis, to look for the 
causes of the problem, to find solutions and to, finally, propose 
different alternatives considerably helps on improving the trust 
during EDSS operation. This is especially true for those EDSS 
involving intelligent deliberative components, which use a 
latent reasoning mechanisms, such as the rule-based reasoning 
systems or case-based reasoning systems, which enable to gen-
erate explanations about the reasoning processes that promote 
the end-user trust on the EDSS results.[29,30]

Finally, the EDSS validation is a very important step to 
enhance end-users confidence. When end-users are involved 
from the very beginning, as it was the case for the ATL EDSS, 
a continuous evaluation of the different ongoing EDSS proto-
types was carried out, so that trust on the decision proposed by 
the final version of the EDSS is guaranteed. On the contrary, 
when end-users are not involved from the very beginning, 
either end-users are fully involved in the final validation step or 
validation results are perceptibly shown to them. For the NOV-
EDAR EDSS, for example, a well-defined procedure involving 
several meetings with the different departments of the com-
pany were needed before trust on the tool results was assured.

Even the most advanced EDSS can also integrate traditional 
design or operational guidelines as part of the knowledge base 
to reproduce conventional or current practices carried out by 
human experts. That would also foster confidence of end-users 
to EDSS results. However, as today, EDSS can only provide sup-
port to decision-making. The final responsibility never belongs 
to the EDSS tool but to the person(s)/actors using it and 
making decisions based on its outputs, i.e., water authorities or 
companies operating wastewater infrastructures. Normally, this 

should be specified in the agreement between EDSS developers 
and final users.

Regarding the evaluation challenge, the four EDSSs were suc-
cessful with respect to user satisfaction, although this success 
occurred at different steps in the development process. For 
PSARU EDSS, the client was satisfied with the results because 
the EDSS was finally applied to select the most adequate waste-
water treatment for approximately 3500 small communities. 
It is difficult to determine whether the results provided by the 
EDSS would have been the same as those provided by a set of 
experts facing the same problem; however, the procedure was 
able to provide standardized proposals that were greatly appre-
ciated by the end-user (a public administration).

For the ATL EDSS, the initial prototype presentations to the 
potential clients were not satisfactory because the clients indi-
cated that the analysis of the activated sludge operational prob-
lems conducted by the EDSS were too complex and time con-
suming. When the system was adapted to actual situations by 
practitioners instead of researchers, all of the different evalua-
tion criteria were positive. Currently, more than one hundred 
WWTP managers worldwide rely on the ATL EDSS to improve 
activated sludge process supervision and meet effluent water 
quality regulations with minimum energy consumption.

NOVEDAR EDSS and COLMATAR EDSS have suc-
cessfully passed client examinations for implementation and 
generalization; therefore, we are confident that their successful 
application and adoption will occur in the near future.

3.4. Sociocultural Contexts

A close relationship and trust between EDSS developers and 
local end-users will guarantee the avoidance of sociocultural 
problems. However, this relationship sometimes is not so 
good or simply does not exist. For example, when aiming at 
developing EDSS to solve generic environmental problems 
taking place in different parts of the world. In the latter case, 
the aim should be to develop EDSSs generic enough which 
do not conflict with sociocultural aspects of the application 
country. Indeed, an important part of the phenomena related 
to wastewater management can be generalized and, as such, 
must be described in EDSS by means of WWTP ontologies.[31] 
For example, the fact that MBR produce higher effluent 
quality than CAS can be understood similarly in Catalonia 
as in Japan. However, there are always some local aspects or 
specificities to take into account when taking decisions that 
EDSS should also take into account. These local criteria must 
be defined within the EDSS as customizable parameters based 
on the local technical, economic, environmental, or political 
criteria. For example, different environmental regulations 
might apply for different countries. The NOVEDAR EDSS 
includes by default the Spanish legislation (transposed from 
European Directives) but this type of information is para-
metrizable so that it can be customized or modified when 
applied to another country. The ATL EDSS for online control 
system of conventional WWTPs is a good example since, even 
though developed in Catalonia from the academia, with the 
involvement of local end-users, it is nowadays implemented in 
Poland, England and Chile, among nine more other countries 

www.global-challenges.com www.advancedsciencenews.com

Global Challenges 2017, 1, 1700009



F
U
L
L
 P

A
P
E
R

(9 of 10) 1700009wileyonlinelibrary.com© 2017 The Authors. Published by WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim

around the globe. Sociocultural aspects can also be easily 
considered in EDSS for planning purposes by modifying the 
assigned weights of the existing social criteria (increasing or 
decreasing depending on the local relevance) or, if needed, 
by adding more specific criteria. See the case for NOVEDAR 
EDSS, which has also been validated with case studies from 
US.[32] Therefore, transferability of our EDSS is easy and has 
already been demonstrated, since a significant part of the 
knowledge base can be generalized while the specific part 
related to sociocultural difference not yet but we foresee that 
being easy as well.

4. Conclusions

Although each analyzed case was different, a set of common 
traits could be identified and generalized in these EDSS use 
and transfer processes. In all cases, we identified situations 
considered to be the death valley for the product, which is the 
moment when a product developed by academics has reached a 
level of maturity such that researchers are not interested in its 
further development, but it is still not marketable. New stages 
should be defined to achieve this goal.

For the PSARU EDSS, because the administration did not 
provide a driving force, the product did not succeed in crossing 
the death valley. For the ATL EDSS, the university entrepreneur 
did not have enough influence, and the product was at risk 
of not crossing the death valley. However, this stage was suc-
cessfully overcome because of the commercial interest of new 
partners, which permitted the establishment of a significant 
synergy (pulling it from the market). For the NOVEDAR EDSS, 
the death valley will be crossed with a private company that is 
assuming the cost of implementing the market requirements 
for the EDSS and commercializing the process. This situation 
appears to be similar to what occurs with the mathematical 
models of WWTPs or environmental systems in general, which 
has been recently noted by Robson.[33]

The role of the end-user and the identification of an internal 
champion are positive for certain aspects pertaining to develop-
ment and adoption; however, they also may introduce limita-
tions to the process and do not guarantee the longevity of the 
tool.

Our experience demonstrates that the driving force can 
come from academia, which will increase the time and effort 
required to reach a final product. However, a research-driven 
approach enables the implementation of wider perspectives 
when evaluating different alternatives, which may be helpful 
for ensuring the successful application and final outcome of 
the EDSS and could be constrained for projects directed by end-
users. Although it seems contradictory, in certain cases, a lack 
of end-user involvement at the beginning of the process can be 
beneficial over the long term.

The existence of incentives to end-users to incorporate inno-
vations such as EDSS or tools for optimization in general is a 
key point to ensure EDSS longevity and financial sustainability. 
Besides, a successful validation and end-users confidence on 
the EDSS results is indispensable for successful market appli-
cation and adoption. Another positive element is the accelerated 
improvement in available instrumentation (more data and more 

reliable), faster computation and better and faster connectivity 
that will allow the implementation of better EDSS in many 
communities at a cheaper price.

In summary, we suggest that the construction of a suc-
cessful EDSS should focus significant efforts on crossing the 
death valley toward a general use implementation by society 
(the market) rather than on development (climbing down). The 
final step has become the major task (hill climbing) to obtain 
a useful EDSS that can be used by the public. Thus, the death 
valley has shifted from the development step to the use and 
transfer step.

Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank the Catalan Water Agency (Agència 
Catalana de l’Aigua), Besòs River Basin Regional Administration 
(Consorci per la Defensa de la Conca del Riu Besòs), SISLtech, and 
Spanish Ministry of Science and Innovation for providing funding 
(CTM2012-38314-C02-01 and CTM2015-66892-R). LEQUIA, KEMLG, and 
ICRA were recognized as consolidated research groups by the Catalan 
Government under the codes 2014-SGR-1168, 2013-SGR-1304 and 
2014-SGR-291.

Received: January 26, 2017
Published online: April 10, 2017

[1] I. G. Haagsma, R. D. Johanns, in Environmental Systems (Ed.:  
P. Zannetti), Vol. 2, WITPress, San Francisco 1994, p. 205.

[2] L. Adelman. Evaluating Decision Support and Expert Systems, John 
Wiley and Sons, NY 1992.

[3] R. H. SpragueJr., E. D. Carlson, Building Effective Decision Support 
Systems, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1982.

[4] I. Graham, P. L. Jones, Expert Systems: Knowledge, Uncertainty, 
Decision. Chapman and Hall, NY 1988.

[5] U. Cortés, M. Sànchez-Marrè, L. R. Ceccaroni, I. Roda, M. Poch, 
Appl. Intell. 2000, 13, 77.

[6] F. D’Erchia, C. Korschgen, M. Nyquist, R. Root, R. Sojda, P. Stine, 
Report for the U.S. Geological Survey, Biological Resources Division, 
Information And Technology, Report USGS/BRD/ITR-2001-0002, 
June  2001.

[7] G. Guariso, H. Werthner, Environmental Decision Support Systems. 
Ellis Horwood-Wiley, NY 1989.

[8] A. E. Rizzoli, W. J. Young, Environ. Model. Software 1997, 12, 237.
[9] D. Butler, Global Challenges 2015, 1, 61.

[10] R. M. Argent, J. M. Perraud, J. M. Rahman, R. B. Grayson, 
G. M. Podger, Environ. Model. Software 2009, 24, 809.

[11] A. Elmahdi, D. McFarlane, in 18th World IMACS Congress and 
MODSIM09 International Congress on Modelling and Simulation, 
(Eds.:R. S. Anderssen, R. D. Braddock, L. T. H. Newham), Modelling 
and Simulation Society of Australia and New Zealand and Interna-
tional Association for Mathematics and Computers in Simulation, 
Cairns, Australia 2009, pp. 3803–3809.

[12] A. J. Jakeman, R. A. Letcher, J. P. Norton, Environ. Model. Software 
2006, 21, 602.

[13] M. Matthies, C. Giupponi, B. Ostendorf, Environ. Model. Software 
2007, 22, 123.

[14] M. Poch, J. Comas, I. Rodríguez-Roda, M. Sànchez-Marrè, 
U. Cortés, Environ. Model. Software 2004, 19, 857.

[15] M. J. Twery, P. D. Knopp, S. A. Thomasma, H. M. Rauscher, 
D. E. Nute, W. D. Potter, F. Maier, J. Wang, M. Dass, H. Uchiyama, 
A. Glende, R. E. Hoffman, Comput. Electron. Agric. 2005, 49, 24.

www.global-challenges.comwww.advancedsciencenews.com

Global Challenges 2017, 1, 1700009



F
U
L
L
 P

A
P
E
R

1700009 (10 of 10) wileyonlinelibrary.com © 2017 The Authors. Published by WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim

www.global-challenges.com www.advancedsciencenews.com

Global Challenges 2017, 1, 1700009

[16] H. Van Delden, R. Seppelt, R. White, A. J. Jakeman, Environ. Model. 
Software 2011, 26, 266.

[17] B. S. McIntosh, J. C. Ascough, M. Twery, J. Chew, A. Elmahdi, 
D. Haase, J. J. Harou, D. Hepting, S. Cuddy, A. J. Jakeman, 
S. Chen, A. Kassahun, S. Lautenbach, K. Matthews, W. Merritt,  
N. W. T. Quinn, I. Rodriguez-Roda, S. Sieber, M. Stavenga, 
A. Sulis, J. Ticehurst, M. Volk, M. Wrobel, H. van Delden,  
S. El-Sawah, A. Rizzoli, A. Voinov, Environ. Model. Software 2011, 
26, 1389.

[18] I. R. Roda, J. Comas, M. Poch, M. Sànchez-Marrè, U. Cortés, Ind. 
Eng., Chem. Res. 2001, 40, 3353.

[19] I. Rodriguez-Roda, M. Sànchez-Marrè, J. Comas, J. Baeza, 
J. Colprim, J. Lafuente, U. Cortés, M. Poch, Water Sci. Technol. 2002, 
45, 289.

[20] M. Garrido-Baserba, R. Reif, I. Rodriguez-Roda, M. Poch, Water Sci. 
Technol. 2012, 66, 165.

[21] M. Garrido-Baserba, A. Hospido, R. Reif, M. Molinos-Senante, 
J. Comas, M. Poch, Environ. Model. Software 2014, 56, 74.

[22] M. Molinos-Senante, M. Garrido-Baserba, R. Reif, 
F. Hernández-Sancho, M. Poch, Sci. Total Environ. 2012, 427, 11.

[23] H. Monclús, G. Buttiglieri, G. Ferrero, I. Rodriguez-Roda, J. Comas, 
Bioresour. Technol. 2012, 106, 50.

[24] G. Ferrero, H. Monclús, G. Buttiglieri, J. Comas, I. Rodriguez-Roda, 
Desalination 2011, 268, 276.

[25] J. Comas, E. Meabe, L. Sancho, G. Ferrero, J. Sipma, H. Monclús, 
I. Rodriguez-Roda, Water Sci. Technol. 2010, 62, 2829.

[26] H. Monclús, M. Dalmau, S. Gabarrón, G. Ferrero,  
I. Rodríguez-Roda, J. Comas, Water Res. 2015, 79, 1.

[27] P. E. Johnson, J. Med. Philos. 1983, 8, 77.
[28] A. Voinov, N. Kolagani, M. K. McCall, P. D. Glynn, M. E. Kragt, 

F. O. Ostermann, S. A. Pierce, P. Ramu, Environ. Model. Software 
2016, 77, 196.

[29] B. M. Muir, Int. J. Man-Mach. Stud. 1987, 27, 527.
[30] W. Wang, I. Benbasat, J. Manage. Inf. Syst. 2008, 24, 249.
[31] L. Oliva-Felipe, I. Gómez-Sebastià, M. Verdaguer, M. Sànchez-Marrè,  

M. Poch, U. Cortés, Environ. Model. Software 2017, 89:106.
[32] A. Castillo, J. Porro, M. Garrido-Baserba, D. Rosso, D. Renzi, 

F. Fatone, V. Gómez, J. Comas, M. Poch, J. Environ.l Manage. 2016, 
184, 409.

[33] B. J. Robson, Environ. Model. Software 2014, 51, 287.


