




















































Hybrid Machine Translation Editorial


Hybrid machine translation: integration of linguistics and statistics: editorial 

José A.R. Fonollosa, Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya, Jordi Girona 1-3, 
Barcelona 08034, Spain  

Marta R. Costa-jussà, Institute for Infocomm Research, 1 Fusionopolis Way, 
Singapore 138632, Singapore 

Hybrid systems mix two or more approaches with the aim of combining the 
advantages of both of them. Hybrid vehicles are a good popular example of the 
success of this hybrid approach in engineering. Despite their cost, hybrid vehicles 
are now manufactured and sold with success by many companies and they are a 
usual choice for certain types of vehicles as taxicabs and delivery trucks. 

However, hybrid systems also imply the need of developing, integrating and 
maintaining two different technologies to attack the same problem. Additionally, a 
hybrid system may also suffer in some degree from the deficiencies of both 
approaches. 

In Machine Translation (MT), researchers have concentrated most of their efforts 
during the last years in the development of statistical approaches and tools, as the 
amount of available data continue to increase. However linguist information and 
human-derived rules are still useful in many cases, in pre or post-processing the 
corpora or in the core of the system. 

The annual workshops on hybrid approaches to translation (HyTra) are a good 
example of the interest of the scientific community in the subject and a source of 
new ideas. 

Hybrid approaches are also widely used in commercial MT systems. For 
companies specialized in MT services, hybrid solutions are the key to personalized 
high quality systems adapted to the needs of the customers and the available 
language resources. 

This special issue collects a variety of interesting ideas on how to combine 
linguistic and statistical information in MT. As follows we provide a short 
overview of all the papers in the volume. 

In order to introduce hybrid approaches in the area of MT, this special issue starts 
with an overview of the Latest Trends in Hybrid Machine Translation and its 
Applications by Costa-jussà and Fonollosa. 

The paper Linguistically-augmented Perplexity-based Data Selection for 
Language Models by Toral et al. studies how to reduce the perplexity of the 
language model including linguistic information in the selection of the training 



corpus. The language model itself continues to be an n-gram language model, but 
the linguistically motivated matching rules are clearly of help in the process of 
selecting the relevant training sentences. Although the paper does not propose or 
study any hybrid MT scheme, the hybrid approach for corpus selection in 
language modeling can be applied in MT. Moreover, it is also a good starting point 
to develop a similar hybrid selection method of bilingual corpora. 

In the paper A Tree Does Not Make a Well-Formed Sentence: Improving Syntactic 
String-to-Tree Statistical Machine Translation with More Linguistic Knowledge, 
Sennrich et al. describe another example in which additional linguistic information 
is the key to obtain a competitive translation system. In their paper, a syntactic 
string-to-tree statistical MT system is clearly improved with the introduction of 
more morphological constraints and syntactic rules. 

The paper A Generalised Alignment Template Formalism and its Application to 
the Inference of Shallow-transfer Machine Translation Rules from Scarce 
Bilingual Corpora by Sánchez-Cartagena et al. follows a complete different 
approach. The authors develop here a new method to use scarce parallel corpora to 
automatically infer a set of shallow- transfer rules. No human experts are required 
to infer rules, but the automatically learned rules can be post-edited and can co-
exist with hand-written rules. 

In Translating Noun Compounds Using Semantic Relations, Balyan and Chatterjee 
propose a hybrid approach to solve the problem of translating noun compounds 
from English to Hindu. The investigated rule-based scheme based on semantic 
relations is shown to be a good complementary tool for state-of-the art systems as 
Moses. 

In the paper Translating without In-domain Corpus: Machine Translation Post-
Editing with Online Learning Techniques by Lagarda Arroyo et al., a statistical 
MT system is proposed as an automatic post-editing module in an online learning 
framework. The resulting system uses the output of any MT system as input, and it 
is a good choice for domain adaptation when the documents to be translated have 
the usual internal (n-gram) repetition property. 

The paper Hybrid Arabic–French Machine Translation using Morphological 
Processing and Language Analysis by Mohamed and Sadat presents a rule-based 
pre-processing for an Arabic–French system based on Moses. The morphological 
rules reduce the morphology of the source language (Arabic) to a level that makes 
it closer to that of the target language (French). They also consider the 
introduction of additional swapping rules for a structural matching between the 
source language and the target language. 

Finally, the paper Using Decision Tree to Hybrid Morphology Generation of 



Persian Verb for English-Persian Translation by Mahmoudi and Faili proposes 
hybrid solutions for the translation of verbs from English to morphological rich 
languages as Persian. The develop approach can be part of a rule-based MT or it 
could be applied as an independent post-processing step of any statistical or rule-
based MT. 

 

	  


