
































Medical & Biological Engineering & Computing manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)

The Influence of Alignment-Free Sequence
Representations on the Semi-Supervised
Classification of Class C G Protein-Coupled
Receptors

Semi-supervised Classification of class C GPCRs

Raúl Cruz-Barbosa · Alfredo Vellido ·
Jesús Giraldo

Received: date / Accepted: date

Abstract G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) are integral cell membrane
proteins of relevance for pharmacology. The tertiary structure of the trans-
membrane domain, a gate to the study of protein functionality, is unknown
for almost all members of class C GPCRs, which are the target of the cur-
rent study. As a result, their investigation must often rely on alignments of
their amino acid sequences. Sequence alignment entails the risk of missing rel-
evant information. Various approaches have attempted to circumvent this risk
through alignment-free transformations of the sequences on the basis of dif-
ferent amino acid physicochemical properties. In this paper, we use several of
these alignment-free methods, as well as a basic amino acid composition rep-
resentation, to transform the available sequences. Novel semi-supervised sta-
tistical machine learning methods are then used to discriminate the different

Raúl Cruz-Barbosa
Computer Science Institute, Universidad Tecnológica de la Mixteca, Huajuapan, Oaxaca,
México
E-mail: rcruz@mixteco.utm.mx
Present address: Institut de Neurociències and Unitat de Bioestad́ıstica, Universitat
Autònoma de Barcelona, Bellaterra, Spain

Alfredo Vellido
Departament de Ciències de la Computació, Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya -
BarcelonaTech, Barcelona, Spain
E-mail: avellido@cs.upc.edu

Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red en Bioingenieŕıa, Biomateriales y Nanomedicina
(CIBER-BBN), Barcelona, Spain

Jesús Giraldo
Institut de Neurociències and Unitat de Bioestad́ıstica, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona,
Bellaterra, Spain
Tel.: +34-93-5813813
Fax: +34-93-5812344
E-mail: Jesus.Giraldo@uab.es



2 Raúl Cruz-Barbosa et al.

class C GPCRs types from the transformed data. This approach is relevant
due to the existence of orphan proteins to which type labels should be as-
signed in a process of deorphanization or reverse pharmacology. The reported
experiments show that the proposed techniques provide accurate classifica-
tion even in settings of extreme class-label scarcity and that fair accuracy can
be achieved even with very simple transformation strategies that ignore the
sequence ordering.

Keywords Class C G protein-coupled receptors · Semi-supervised learning ·
Alignment-free sequence representations

1 Introduction

G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) are integral cell membrane proteins of
great relevance to normal physiology and pathology due to their role in trans-
ducing a wide range of extracellular signals after specific ligand binding. It has
been reported that 36% of all drugs that were approved by the US Food and
Drug Administration during the past three decades target GPCRs [31]. For
this reason, and beyond basic research, GPCRs have become the subject of a
vast research effort from the pharmaceutical industry [28].

The first GPCR crystal structure, that of rhodopsin, was fully-determined
in 2000 [29], and it is only in recent years that the structures of some other
distinct receptors, most of them belonging to GPCR class A, have been deter-
mined [19].

An alternative way to work on GPCR structural models, when the tertiary
3D crystal structures are not available, is the investigation of their functional-
ity through the analysis of their primary structure: the amino acid sequences,
which are well-documented and of which databases are publicly available. This
assumes that protein function is encoded in its sequence.

The research reported in this study focuses on class C GPCRs, a receptor
family that has of late become an increasingly important target for new ther-
apies [21]. Their remarkable complexity and their sequence diversity makes
them an especially attractive system for sequence classification. The discrim-
ination of class C GPCR sequences into the seven different types this class
consists of in situations of partial label availability is the ultimate aim of our
investigation. The correct discrimination of class C into types may constitute a
first step in the study of the molecular processes involved in receptor signalling,
both in normal and pathological conditions.

Many of the existing classification approaches use aligned versions of pro-
tein sequences [18]. Sequence alignment allows the application of more con-
ventional quantitative analysis techniques, but at the price of risking the loss
of relevant information contained in the discarded sequence fragments.

Different approaches have attempted the analysis of alignment-free se-
quences on the basis of their transformation according to the amino acid
physicochemical properties (for a recent review see, for instance, [23]). In the



Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length 3

current study, we use several of them to transform the data sequences, includ-
ing the Auto-Cross Covariance (ACC) transform [22] and the physicochemical
distance transformation (PDT: [23]). In a less complex procedure described
in [10] and [26], each GPCR is represented using the means of five z-scale
physicochemical descriptors over the sequence. Finally, we also use a further
and very simple amino acid sequence transformation that consists on consid-
ering only the relative frequencies of appearance of the 20 amino acids in the
sequence (thus ignoring the sequential order).

Statistical machine learning (SML) techniques have only recently begun to
be applied in bioinformatics and in the -omics sciences [2]. SML models aim
to couple the theoretical soundness of probability theory with the data anal-
ysis flexibility provided by machine learning, in the common goal of pattern
recognition.

In this paper, semi-supervised SML generative models of the manifold
learning family [7,8] are applied to the analysis of alignment-free sequences of
class C GPCRs, transformed according to the physicochemical properties of
their constituent amino acids. The rationale behind the use of semi-supervised
approaches is the fact that they can deal with a very common problem in real
scientific databases: the only partial availability of class labels. In the case of
protein sequential data, this would help the analyst to typify sequences with
missing class labels according to the available ones. This is the scenario of, for
instance, sequence deorphanization, the process (also known as reverse phar-
macology) for which an orphan receptor (a receptor of an initially unknown
ligand) matches its natural ligand.

The results of the experiments reported in this paper, which build on those
preliminarily presented in [9], indicate that semi-supervised methods working
on the physicochemical properties of alignment-free class C GPCR sequences
can quite accurately discriminate between the seven types that constitute this
class, even in settings of extreme class-label scarcity. Amongst these meth-
ods, semi-supervised Generative Topographic Mapping (SS-GTM) consistently
yielded the best accuracy results. The use of the ACC data transformation is
also shown to provide the most accurate classification. A further interesting
finding is that fair accuracy can be achieved even with a very simple trans-
formation that completely ignores the ordering in the protein sequence. The
novel inductive version of the SS-GTM proposed in this study is shown in our
experiments to infer the most probable class C type labels for several orphan
sequences.

2 Materials and Methods

2.1 Materials

GPCRs are the most abundant family of membrane-bound receptors, with
more than 800 members in the human proteome [13]. From the determination
of the first GPCR crystal structure, that of rhodopsin, in 2000 [29], only in



4 Raúl Cruz-Barbosa et al.

recent years the structures of some other 15 distinct receptors, all belonging to
GPCR class A, have been determined [19]. Having solved in part some of the
most stringent difficulties of GPCR crystallography, the number of receptor
structures is rapidly growing. Thus, 9 structures from the former list of 15
reported in [19] were published just in 2012, while two new class A-ones [37,
38] and, for the first time [39], one not belonging to this family but to the
Frizzled class [12] and two to class B [16,33] were reported in 2013. At the
time of writing, the first structures of the 7TM domains of two class C receptors
have just been published [42,11].

The characterization of GPCR structure is being made possible thanks to
efforts from different laboratories, following diverse approaches [19]. In partic-
ular, one of the most active initiatives in the field, the GPCR Network (respon-
sible for the determination of 12 out of 21 current crystal GPCR structures)
aimed at achieving 40-60% structural coverage of non-olfactory receptors for
the 2010-2015 period by a combination of experimentally solved structures
and computationally predicted GPCR 3D-models, if a 35% sequence identity
is established as a threshold for GPCR accurate homology modeling [34].

The current study focuses on class C GPCRs, which have become an in-
creasingly important target for new therapies, particularly in areas such as
Fragile-X syndrome, schizophrenia, Alzheimer’s disease, Parkinson’s disease,
epilepsy, L-DOPA-induced dyskinesias, generalized anxiety disorder, migraine,
chronic pain, gastroesophageal reflux disorder, hyperparathyroidism and os-
teoporosis[21].

Because of its specificity, data were taken from GPCRDB, which is defined
[36] as a molecular-class information system that collects, combines, validates
and disseminates large amounts of heterogenous data on GPCRs. GPCRDB di-
vides the GPCR superfamily in 5 families: the class A Rhodopsin like, the class
B Secretin like, the class C Metabotropic glutamate/pheromone, Vomeronasal
receptors (V1R and V3R) and Taste receptors T2R.

Class C GPCRs were selected for analysis because of (i) their structural
complexity, (ii) high sequence-length variability and (iii) therapeutic relevance.
Briefly, (i) whereas all GPCRs are characterized by sharing a common seven-
transmembrane (7TM) domain, responsible of G protein/β-arrestin activation,
most class C GPCRs include, in addition, an extracellular large domain, the
Venus Flytrap (VFT) and a cysteine rich domain (CRD) connecting both [30].
To date, no class C-GPCR 7TM domain has been characterized structurally,
although some authors anticipate some progress in this respect, even in the
short term [34]. (ii) The full or partial presence of the whole domain structure
confers a high sequence-length variability to this family. (iii) The involvement
of class C GPCRs in many neurological disorders, as previously mentioned,
makes this class an attractive target for drug discovery and development.

Class C is, in turn, subdivided into seven types: Metabotropic glutamate,
Calcium sensing, GABA-B, Vomeronasal, Pheromone, Odorant and Taste.
The investigated dataset consists of a total of 1,510 class C GPCR sequences,
obtained from GPCRDB, version 11.3.4 as of March 2011. Their distribution
into types is as follows: 351 Metabotropic glutamate, 48 Calcium sensing, 208



Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length 5

GABA-B, 344 Vomeronasal, 392 Pheromone, 102 Odorant and 65 Taste. The
lengths of these sequences varied from 250 to 1,995 amino acids.

2.2 Methods

2.2.1 Alignment-Free GPCR Representations

A very common preprocessing step for protein classification is multiple align-
ment. When this is used, the protein classification results strongly depend on
the characteristics of the information provided by the alignment. For GPCRs,
some disadvantages of this process are: a) that it restricts the analysis strictly
to transmembrane domains (loops and N- and C-terminal regions of GPCR
proteins are excluded) and, consequently, relevant biological information is
lost; b) that the generation of reliable multiple alignments is difficult to ob-
tain when divergent protein sequences are included.

To avoid these drawbacks, and as an attempt not to renounce to any
relevant information that might be conveyed by an amino acid sequence,
alignment-free protein representations have been defined in the literature.
Among these, some rely on transformations based on the amino acid physico-
chemical characteristics, such as the ACC transformation [22,41] and the mean
transformation [26]. Some advantages of these representations are that: a) they
can help to discover divergent receptor genes [20]; b) they do not require a ho-
mologous relationship among similar sequences to be assumed; and c) their
transformed output can directly be used by standard pattern recognition and
machine learning methods.

In this paper, we consider a total of four alignment-free data transforma-
tions to obtain fixed-length vectors as input data for semi-supervised SML
algorithms.

The first and most simple one reflects the amino acid composition (AA-
comp) of the primary sequence: the relative frequencies of occurrence of the
20 amino acids are calculated for each sequence resulting in a N × 20 matrix,
where N is the number of sequences in the data set. This transformation does
not take into account the relative position of amino acids in the sequence.

The remaining three are physicochemical transformations. The second and
third, related by the descriptors obtained in [32], are the mean (MeanT) and
ACC transformations, respectively.

MeanT, applied in [26] and [10], consists on describing each amino acid
sequence using five z-scales (descriptors) and then using their averages as the
final feature vector. That is, each of the resulting feature vectors consists on
five values calculated as ( 1

n

∑n
i=1 z1i,

1
n

∑n
i=1 z2i, . . . ,

1
n

∑n
i=1 z5i)

T , where n
is the length of the amino acid sequence and z1i, . . . , z5i are the z-values for
the i-th amino acid. An extension of the mean transformation (xMeanT) was
developed in [10], in which information about the N- and C-terminus of each
protein (sequence) is taken into account in order to improve accuracy results.
Out of the 15 elements of its resulting feature vector, the first five are obtained



6 Raúl Cruz-Barbosa et al.

as in MeanT; the next five elements are the z-score mean from the first 150
amino acids of a sequence (N-terminus); and the last five are obtained from
the z-score mean of the last 150 amino acids of the sequence (C-terminus).

For the more sophisticated ACC transformation [22,41], time series mod-
els are applied to the protein sequences in order to extract their sequential
patterns and, consequently, the extracted information is sequence-order de-
pendent. This representation was originally developed in [41] and then applied
and modified in [22] and [27].

The ACC transformation can be described as follows: each sequence is
first translated into physicochemical descriptors by representing each amino
acid with the five z-scales derived in [32], where these scales are in turn ob-
tained from 26 physicochemical properties. The Auto Covariance (AC) and
Cross Covariance (CC) variables are then computed from the transformed se-
quences. The AC measures the correlation of the same descriptor, d, between
two residues separated by a lag, l, along the sequence, and it can be calculated
as

ACd(l) =
n−l∑
i=1

(vd,i − v̄d)(vd,i+l − v̄d)
(n− l)p

. (1)

The CC variable measures the correlation of two different descriptors between
two residues separated by a lag along the sequence, and it can be computed
as

CCdd′(l) =

n−l∑
i=1

(vd,i − v̄d)(vd′,i+l − v̄d′)
(n− l)p

, (2)

where l = 1, . . . , L and L is the maximal lag, which must be lesser than the
length of the shortest sequence in the dataset; n is the total number of amino
acids in the sequence; vd,i is the value of descriptor d = 1, . . . , D (D = 5) of
an amino acid in a sequence at position i; v̄d is the mean value of descriptor
d across all positions; and p is a degree of normalization.

From these, the ACC fixed-length vectors are obtained: First, the AC
and CC terms from eqs. 1 and 2 are concatenated for each lag (C(l) =
[AC(l) CC(l)]) and then the ACC is obtained for a maximum lag L by con-
catenating the C(l) terms, that is, ACC(L) = [C(1), . . . , C(L)]. Details of this
procedure can be found in [22,27].

The fourth and last representation used in our experiments, namely PDT,
was recently proposed in [23]. This is an extension of ACC, where the AC,
described above, is extended to use 531 physicochemical properties instead of
26. This extended AC-like measure, understood as the distance between two
residues separated by a lag, l, along a sequence using the same descriptor, d,
is computed as

δd(l) =

∑n−l
i=1 (Id(Ai)− Id(Ai+l))

2

n− l
=

n−l∑
i=1

(Id(Ai)− Id(Ai+l))2

n− l
, (3)

where Id(Ai) and Id(Ai+l) are the normalized physicochemical property values
of amino acid Ai and Ai+l, respectively, for index d, which can be calculated



Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length 7

as

Id(Ai) =
Îd(Ai)−

∑20
m=1

Îd(Rm)
20√∑

20

k=1

(
Îd(Rk)−

∑
20

m=1

Îd(Rm)

20

)2
20

(4)

and Îd(Ai) is the raw value of the physicochemical property of amino acid
Ai for index d = 1, . . . , D (D = 531); Rm (m = 1, . . . , 20) represents the 20
standard amino acids.

The fixed length vector provided by PDT has 531 ∗ L dimensions, where
L is a maximal distance or lag (l = 1, . . . , L, as in the ACC transformation).
This poses a potential problem in the form of a very high data dimensionality,
even for small values of L. It is noteworthy that the resulting PDT variables
do not include, unlike ACC, any CC information of the descriptors based on
the 531 physicochemical properties.

2.2.2 Semi-supervised Generative Topographic Mapping

GTM [4] is a latent variable model in which a sample of K regularly-spaced
points uk residing in a low-dimensional space are mapped into the usually high-
dimensional observed data space, each of them defining a prototype point. This
prototype yk is the image of the former according to the mapping function
that takes the form,

yk = WΦ(uk), (5)

where Φ is a set of M nonlinear basis functions ϕm, and W is a matrix of
adaptive weights that defines the specific characteristics of the mapping. The
prototype vector yk can be seen as a representative of those data points xn
which are closer to it than to any other prototype and, thus, can also be seen as
a cluster centroid. GTM performs a type of vector quantization that is similar
to that of Self-Organizing Maps.

The set of prototypes yk belongs to an intrinsically low-dimensional smooth
manifold that wraps around the observed data X = {xn}Nn=1. In this way,
GTM becomes a manifold learning method. If we assume that the observed
data lie close to the manifold, the conditional distribution of the observed data
variables, given the latent variables, p(x|u) can be described as a noise model:

p(x|u,W, β) =
(

β

2π

)D/2
exp

{
−
β

2

D∑
d=1

(
xd − yd(u)

)2}
, (6)

with variance β−1 and D is the data space dimensionality. From this, we can
integrate the latent variables out, obtaining the likelihood of the model, and
use maximum likelihood to estimate the adaptive parameters. Details of this
procedure can be found in [4].

In many real settings, and orphan GPCRs are an example of this, class
labels may not be readily available for all cases. If ultimately interested in the



8 Raúl Cruz-Barbosa et al.

classification of cases, we are faced with a semi-supervised learning problem in
which missing case labels must be inferred on the basis of the available ones.

Recently, GTM was redefined in a semi-supervised setting [7] as SS-Geo-
GTM. For this, and understanding the model prototypes and manifold as the
elements of a proximity graph, existing label propagation algorithms [44,15]
were adapted to a variant of GTM (namely Geo-GTM) in which Euclidean
distances were replaced by approximations of geodesic distances along the
GTM manifold.

A label vector Tk ∈ [0, 1]c (where c are the classes) is associated to each
Geo-GTM prototype yk. The weights of the edges are derived from the graph
distances dg between prototypes. The edge weight between nodes k and k

′ is
calculated as

wkk′ = exp(−d2g(k, k
′)/σ2). (7)

The available label information of xn ∈ X with class assignment c(xn) =
Ct ∈ {C1, . . . , Cc} is used to fix the label vectors of the prototypes to which
they are assigned, so that Tk,j = 1 if j = t, and Tk,j = 0 otherwise. Un-
labeled prototypes will then update their label by propagation, according
to Tnewk =

∑
k′ wkk′Tk′/

∑
k′ wkk′ . Unlabeled data items are finally labeled

by assignment to the class of highest prevalence on the label vector of the
prototype yk that bears the highest responsibility for them, according to
c(xn) = argmaxCj∈{C1,...,Ck} Tk,j .

A detailed description of SS-Geo-GTM can be found in [7], whereas a
practical application to a problem in the field of neuro-oncology is described
in [8]. In the following experiments, a version of this model that employs
Euclidean instead of geodesic distances, namely the SS-GTM, is also used.

2.2.3 Performance Assessment Measures

The semi-supervised multi-class classification results reported in this paper
were assessed using two performance measures: the accuracy and the Matthews
Correlation Coefficient (MCC) [24]. The former is widely known and used as
the proportion of correctly classified cases. The latter is of common use in the
bioinformatics field as a performance measure when the analyzed datasets are
class-unbalanced. It has of late attracted the attention of the machine learning
community due to its inclusion in recent versions of the widely used Weka data
mining toolkit. Both accuracy and MCC measures can be naturally extended
from the binary to the multi-class context [14].

Let us assume a classification problem with S samples and G classes, and
two functions defined as tc, pc : S → {1, . . . , G}, where tc(s) and pc(s) return
the true and the predicted class of s, respectively. The corresponding square
confusion matrix C is:

Cij = |{s ∈ S : tc(s) = i AND pc(s) = j}|, (8)

in which the ij-th entry of C is the number of cases of true class i that have
been assigned to class j by the classifier. Then, the confusion matrix notation



Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length 9

can be used to define both the accuracy and the MCC as:

accuracy =

∑G
k=1 Ckk∑G
i,j=1 Cij

, (9)

MCC =

∑
G

k,l,m=1
CkkCml − ClkCkm√∑

G

k=1

[(∑
G

l=1
Clk

)(∑
G

f,g=1f ̸=k
Cgf

)]√∑
G

k=1

[(∑
G

l=1
Ckl

)(∑
G

f,g=1f ̸=k
Cfg

)] .
(10)

MCC takes values in the interval [−1, 1], where 1 means complete corre-
lation (perfect classification), 0 means no correlation (all samples have been
classified to be of only one class) and -1 indicates a negative correlation (ex-
treme misclassification case). The MCC measure was originally extended to
the multi-class problem in [14]. Recently, and following a comparison between
MCC and Confusion Entropy [40] reported in [17], MCC was recommended
as an optimal tool for practical tasks, since it presents a good trade-off among
discriminatory ability, consistency and coherent behavior with varying number
of classes, unbalanced datasets and randomization.

3 Results and Discussion

The experiments whose results are reported next aim to gauge classification
performance in situations of only partial class label availability, using semi-
supervised methods. Therefore, the protein sequences described in Materi-
als, transformed according to the methods outlined in Methods, were used as
an input to the SS-Geo-GTM and SS-GTM models summarily described in
the previous section, but also, alternatively and for comparison, to a semi-
supervised SVM model for manifold learning (SS-SVMan, [43]). The latter is
a variant of the widely used SVM, in which the learning process is modified to
accommodate manifold consistency and the hinge loss of class prediction (an
approximation to misclassification error). The result is an SVM-like process.
There are three parameters involved in the choice of the SS-SVMan model: C,
γ, and ρ. The last one is a coefficient that guarantees the invertibility of an
expression leading to the obtention of the objective function. The other two
parameters, typical of an SVM, are chosen for our experiments as indicated in
[43].

All transformed datasets were first modeled using GTM and Geo-GTM,
where the latent grid was fixed to a square layout of approximately (N/2)1/2×
(N/2)1/2 and N is the number of points in the data set. SS-Geo-GTM, SS-
GTM and SS-SVMan were all implemented in MATLAB R⃝. For the experi-
ments reported next, the matrixW and the inverse variance β in SS-Geo-GTM
and SS-GTM were initialized according to a standard procedure described in
[4], which ensures the replicability of the results.



10 Raúl Cruz-Barbosa et al.

The goal of the experiments was threefold. Firstly, we aimed to gauge
the influence of the alignment-free amino acid sequence representations in the
semi-supervised classification of class C GPCR subfamilies. Secondly, we aimed
to compare the performance of the three semi-supervised models in terms of
classification performance. In both cases, we were interested not only in overall
classification results, but also in the individual results for each of the seven
class C GPCR types described in Materials. The latter should shed light on
the possibility that some of these types might be easier to discriminate from
the rest than others. Thirdly, we aimed to apply a semi-supervised method for
simulation purposes of a deorphanization process of some orphan GPCR’s.

Since unaligned amino acid sequences have varying lengths and the semi-
supervised methods use vectors of common dimensionality as input, data from
the seven types of class C GPCRs were first transformed according to the
alignment-free representations already described. Data normalization (or stan-
dardization) can be applied in such a way that the columns of the data matrix
all have zero mean and unit standard deviation. For comparison purposes, ex-
periments were carried out using both normalized and unnormalized versions
of the transformed data, and only the best results are reported in the following
figures.

The figures of merit used to assess the performance of the semi-supervised
models, described in the previous section, are the average classification accu-
racy over 100 runs and the MCC for multi-class problems. Labels were available
for all sequences in the sample originally extracted from the GPCRDB. In or-
der to evaluate the models in a semi-supervised setting, labels were therefore
randomly removed (thus becoming missing values) in every run of the exper-
iments. The class label effective availability was made to vary from a very
extreme (1%) to a relatively relaxed (30%) setting.

The average classification results for the dataset obtained using the se-
quence order-unrelated AAcomp transformation are graphically displayed in
Fig. 1. From these results, the SS-GTM is shown to outperform the rest of
methods, both in terms of accuracy and MCC, in the most extreme settings
up to 10% labeled data availability, which means that the unsupervised nature
of GTM-based models can help to discover the class structure in a better way
when very few labeled data are available. On the contrary, when the label
availability condition is relaxed, the SS-SVMan model outperforms the GTM-
based methods, which means that the supervised nature of SVM-based models
is likely to better reveal the class structure only when enough labeled data (as
much as 30% in this dataset) are available.

The results for the (also sequence order-unrelated) mean and extended
mean transformations are presented in Figs. 2 and 3. Here, the restriction
that the first and the last 150 amino acids in a sequence must be taken into
account reduces the dataset from 1510 to 1494 items: those with a length
greater or equal to 300. In both figures, the performance of the three semi-
supervised methods follow the same patterns found in Fig. 1. Despite the
fact that xMeanT yields better results than MeanT, confirming the results



Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length 11

reported in [10], both are clearly less discriminative than the more simple
AAcomp transformation.

The ACC transformation uses two parameters that must be set to ade-
quate values prior to classification: the maximum lag L and the degree of
normalization p. In this study, their optimal values were experimentally cho-
sen by investigating the impact of multiple combinations of possible values
on classification accuracy. Previous experiments, as those reported in [22] and
[27], have shown that the maximum lag is to be found in the range [1,160].
Following [27], and the rationale that a large maximum lag implies high data
dimensionality and the problems that come with it (curse of dimensionality),
we searched for L in the range of 1 to 30. The p parameter was set at different
values, including: 0, 0.5 and 1.0. The average classification results were com-
puted using 30% of labeled data for each combination. As an illustration, the
classification accuracy results for p values of 0.5 and 1.0 are shown in Online
Resource 1 (the results for p = 0 were not stable). Out of these, p = 0.5 pro-
vides the best results. A classification accuracy of around 85% was achieved
with a lag of 7 and results stabilized from a value of 13 onwards. For computa-
tional time expediency, a maximal lag of 13 was thus selected for the complete
ACC experiments.

The average classification results for the ACC representation, with L = 13
and p = 0.5, are shown in Fig. 4. The performance of the three analyzed
methods follows the same pattern found in Fig. 1 for AAcomp, but this time
more pronounced in favour of GTM-based models. The results for SS-GTM
and SS-Geo-GTM are very similar and these, in turn, clearly outperform the
SS-SVMan using from 1% to 20% labeled data. SS-SVMan is competitive only
when enough labeled data (30% in this case) are available. The accuracy and
MCC results are, again, quite consistent, which suggests that the models have
not been strongly affected by class-unbalance. Notice though that the result for
SS-SVMan at 1% label availability is an exception to this pattern, suggesting
that the model has been very negatively affected in this setting.

Given that the PDT transformation is an extension of the ACC, the L
(maximal distance) parameter must also be tuned. Following [23], this pa-
rameter was experimentally chosen by investigating the impact of varying its
values, in the range of 1 to 10, on the resulting classification accuracy. The
average classification results were computed using 30% of labeled data for each
value, as shown in Online Resource 2. A lag of value 8 was selected because a
maximal classification accuracy was achieved with this value. The correspond-
ing average classification results using the PDT representation with L = 8 are
shown in Fig. 5. The performance of the analyzed models is again consistent
with that reported in Figs. 1 and 4, with GTM-based models yielding the best
results when a low percentage of labels is available and the SVM-based model
becoming the most efficient for label availability of 20% and 30%. A detailed
account of the means and standard deviations of the accuracy and MCC re-
sults for all data representations used in this section can be found in Online
Resources 3 and 4.



12 Raúl Cruz-Barbosa et al.

As could be expected, the ACC transformation yields consistently better
classification than the far simpler AAcomp data representation. Surprisingly
though, the differences are only modest (in the range of 3-4% average accuracy
and 0.02-0.06 MCC) when enough labels become available (30%). This means
that the frequency of amino acid occurrence within the sequence conveys, by
itself, relevant discriminatory information. It also means that the sequence or-
dering itself adds only limited type-discriminatory information. Alternatively,
it could also mean that much of the sequence order information is already
implicitly present in the frequency of amino acid occurrence.

Interestingly, the PDT transformation does not provide any advantage for
the analyzed data when compared to ACC in terms of discrimination for the
GTM-based models. In fact, its performance is only slightly better than that
obtained with the AAcomp transformation. It is only when used with SS-
SVMan that this performance is superior to the best obtained with ACC using
GTM-based models. This relatively poor performance for the analyzed data
might be explained by three factors (acting separately or in combination):

– The high-dimensionality of the data resulting from the PDT transforma-
tion, which could hamper classification due to excessive sparsity.

– The possibility that the supplementary physicochemical information con-
sidered by PDT is either highly redundant or uninformative for type-
discrimination purposes.

– The PDT transformation, unlike ACC, does not include the descriptor
cross-covariance information of the physicochemical properties. This might
be counteracting the potentially beneficial effect of a richer physicochemical
information.

The power of the ACC representation can be further appreciated in the
following variation on the previous experiments. Instead of considering a com-
plete 20 amino acid vocabulary to represent the class C GPCR sequences, we
now consider a simplified vocabulary of 7 “grouped residues”. Using a group
definition based on that described in [5], the following 7 groups of amino acids
were considered: aliphatic hydrophobic (alanine, valine, isoleucine, leucine, me-
thionine, proline), aromatic hydrophobic (phenylalanine), positively charged
(lysine, arginine), negatively charged (aspartic acid, glutamic acid), aliphatic
polar (serine, threonine, cysteine, asparagine, glutamine), aromatic polar (ty-
rosine, histidine, tryptophan) and glycine. Then, for each sequence, each amino
acid was replaced by its corresponding group. Obviously, some biological in-
formation must be lost in this simplified translation.

In the first step of the transformation, each sequence is translated into
physicochemical descriptors by representing each amino acid with the five z-
scales derived in [32]. To do this in the newly coded sequences, each “grouped
residue” was represented by the five z-scales averaged over the amino acids
that belong to it. Then, the ACC transformation was carried out. The L and
p parameters were again experimentally selected according to the results in
Online Resource 5, which show that a maximum classification accuracy was
achieved with a lag of 15 and p = 1.0.



Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length 13

The classification results for this simplification of the ACC representation
are summarized in Fig. 6. They are indeed consistently lower than those of the
original ACC, but very similar to those obtained with the PDT transformation
even if obtained from a far less rich physicochemical information content.

3.1 Class C GPCR Type-Specific Classification and its Contribution to
Overall Classification

As previously stated, we are interested in finding to what extent each of the
seven class C GPCR types described in Materials can be discriminated from
the rest and how each of them influences the overall classification performance.
Previous research, using fully unsupervised kernel visualization methods ap-
plied to aligned class C GPCRs, has shown that some of these types might
be easier to discriminate from the rest than others [35]. More specifically, it
has been shown that the GABA-B type is clearly distinct from the rest (this
is not unexpected, as GABA-B is structurally different from the rest of class
C GPCRs in that, while including the VFT and 7TM domains, lacks of the
connecting CRD), whereas Vomeronasal, Pheromone, and Odorant are diffi-
cult to discriminate from each other (again, not unexpected given their shared
relationship to the odor function). Somewhere in between, Metabotropic glu-
tamate, Calcium sensing, and Taste have fairly specific features according
to their aligned representation. Furthermore, these different levels of discrim-
inability have been shown to be consistent with the standard phylogenetic tree
representations of their aligned sequences [6].

The classification accuracies as a function of the percentage of available
labels are presented, for all class C GPCR types, in Fig. 7 for each of the
most discriminative data transformation method (i.e. excluding the variants
of mean transformation). Following the same order as for the overall accuracy,
we first display the results for AAcomp in the first row of Fig. 7. The results for
ACC, PDT and the “grouped residues” simplification of ACC are displayed,
in turn, in the second, third and fourth row.

At a glance, it is clear from these figures that the overall pattern of semi-
supervised classification is quite stable across representation methods. The
main differences are actually observed not between different sequence repre-
sentations but between GTM-based and SVM-based methods. For both, some
types of class C GPCRs achieve high classification accuracy even with low label
percentages and increase it steadily thereafter. Other types, though, require
many more labels to increase their accuracy in any significant way.

Two individual results require further clarification: SS-Geo-GTM for AA-
comp and SS-SVMan for ACC with “residues groups” are atypical as they
both show the Metabotropic glutamate type to be almost perfectly classified
even for the extreme 1% label-availability limit, while, simultaneously, the rest
of types yield uncharacteristically poor accuracies than only recover normal
values at the highest levels of label availability. The most likely reason for this
anomaly (which also shows Metabotropic glutamate losing accuracy as label



14 Raúl Cruz-Barbosa et al.

availability increases, something that is counterintuitive) is that, in the ab-
sence of enough labels, the underlying models are completely biased towards
a type of high prevalence (Metabotropic glutamate is the 2nd most represented
type in the dataset) that is also relatively easy to discriminate. These models
unduly favour Metabotropic glutamate in detriment of the rest of types.

For GTM-based methods, GABA-B yields the best accuracies across all
representation methods, with the aforementioned single exception of AAcomp
with SS-GeoGTM. These results agree completely with the aligned-sequence
cluster structure visualization reported in [35,6]. Metabotropic glutamate is
second best in most cases, hitting an accurate classification upper limit quite
early in terms of label availability. Taste and Calcium sensing achieve similar
accuracies to Metabotropic glutamate, but they require a sizeable proportion
of labels for that. On the contrary, their classification deteriorates alarmingly
when class labels are scarce. This might reflect either the fact that these are
the types with lower prevalence in the analyzed dataset, or the intrinsic hetero-
geneity of these types. Vomeronasal, Pheromone and, most notably, Odorant
are the most difficult types to discriminate. Again, this is in accordance with
the results reported in [35,6].

The type-specific results are different for SS-SVMan. In this case,Metabotropic
glutamate is clearly the most differentiated type for all representations, with
high accuracies even in extreme settings of label availability. On the oppo-
site side, Taste and, specially, Odorant yield the worst accuracies. In between,
the rest of types are fairly easy to discriminate, at least in the presence of a
big enough number of labels. Across representations, though, SS-SVMan com-
pletely fails to recognize most types at low levels of label availability, reaching
accuracies lower than 10% for Odorant. This explains the low global accuracies
achieved by SS-SVMan in this setting.

The failure of SS-SVMan at low levels of label availability and the differ-
ences with GTM-based methods could at least be partially explained by the
sensitivity of the former to differences in type prevalence. In other words, the
SS-SVMan might be failing to classify those types that are less represented in
the dataset. According to the figures in Materials, Odorant and Taste are two
of the three least numerous types. The third one is Calcium sensing, for which
reasonably good accuracies are obtained. The reason for the latter result might
be the fact that this type is very homogeneous (low within-type variability)
and different enough from the rest, as reported in [6]. The sensitivity to rel-
ative type-prevalence might also be behind the unusually good performance
of Pheromone and Vomeronasal, because these are both highly represented in
the analyzed dataset.

3.2 Deorphanization Experiment using an Inductive Version of SS-GTM

In this section, we simulate a process of deorphanization of some sequences
which are known to belong to the class C GPCR family [30,1] but for whom
the corresponding natural ligand is unknown. For this, we developed a novel



Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length 15

inductive version of the naturally transductive SS-GTMmodel. Inductive mod-
els have the advantage of using the best previously trained model for testing
a new or unknown observation (a sequence, in this case) and classify it in
the corresponding class. In contrast, transductive models for classification of
new or unknown observations need to retrain the previously obtained models
including the new observations, a procedure that is computationally expensive.

Following [3], we transform the transductive SS-GTM model presented in
section 2.2.2 into an inductive version. This can be accomplished by using the
prototype points, yk, (Eq.5) with their corresponding label vectors, Tk, as
well as the σ parameter found by the transductive version, as described next.

First, the weight vector W of the edges between the new observation,
xnew, and the prototype points, yk, is computed as in Eq.7, which now uses
the Euclidean distance, as SS-GTM requires it. Then, the corresponding label
vector for xnew is calculated as:

Tnew =

∑
Wxnew,ykTk∑

k Wxnew,yk + ϵ
, (11)

where ϵ is a regularization term used for numerical stability, as suggested in
[3], and the

∑
symbol (without subindex) denotes sums along the columns of

the matrix formed by Wxnew,ykTk. Finally, the class label asigned to x
new is

given by c(xnew) = argmaxC∈{1,...,c} T
new.

We can now apply this inductive version of SS-GTM in some illustrative ex-
periments concerning the deorphanization of sequences GPRC5A, GPRC5B,
GPRC5C and GPRC5D, which are known to belong to the class C GPCR
family and can be accessed at the UniProt knowledge base1 with identifiers:
Q8NFJ5, Q9NZH0, Q9NQ84 and Q9NZD1, respectively. In this database,
Q9NZH0 and Q9NQ84 are provided with two isoform sequences and Q9NZD1,
with three. The resulting eight sequences were analyzed using the ACC trans-
formation where the necessary parameters were set as in section 3.

The results of their semi-supervised classification using the inductive SS-
GTM for deorphanization are summarized in Table 1. We observe that these
results are consistent in the sense that the isoform sequences are classified
within the same subfamily in all cases. The results in section 3.1 indicated
that the metabotropic glutamate subfamily is one of the two subfamilies best
discriminated by SS-GTM, which reinforces the reliability of the assignment of
the isoform sequences of Q9NZH0 and Q9NQ84 to the metabotropic glutamate
subfamily. Given that the same results indicate that the Odorant subfamily is
the worse discriminated by SS-GTM, the assignment of the isoform sequences
of Q9NZD1 to the subfamily of Odorant should be considered with more cau-
tion. Note that all these orphan GPCRs have been linked with the GABA-B
subfamily with which they have been reported to share high levels of sequence
homology, despite not having long N-termini for ligand binding [25]. Indeed,
these preliminary semi-supervised subfamily assignments should be further
confirmed by pharmacological laboratory tests.

1 http://www.uniprot.org/



16 Raúl Cruz-Barbosa et al.

Tables and Figures

Fig. 1 (a) Average accuracy and (b) MCC results using the AAcomp representation



Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length 17

Fig. 2 (a) Average accuracy and (b) MCC results using the MeanT representation



18 Raúl Cruz-Barbosa et al.

Fig. 3 (a) Average accuracy and (b) MCC results using the xMeanT representation



Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length 19

Fig. 4 (a) Average accuracy and (b) MCC results using the ACC representation



20 Raúl Cruz-Barbosa et al.

Fig. 5 (a) Average accuracy and (b) MCC results using the PDT representation



Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length 21

Fig. 6 (a) Average accuracy and (b) MCC results using the ACC representation for
“grouped residues”



22 Raúl Cruz-Barbosa et al.

Fig. 7 Class-specific percentage of contribution to overall classification for (first-row) AA-
comp representation, (second-row) ACC, (third-row) PDT and (fourth-row) ACC represen-
tation of “grouped residues”. Left-column: SS-GTM model; center-column: SS-Geo-GTM
(with label simplified as SS-Geo); right-column: SS-SVMan. In the inlaid legends, mGluR
stands for Metabotropic glutamate and CaSR stands for Calcium sensing



Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length 23

Table 1 The semi-supervised classification results by inductive SS-GTM for some orphan
GPCR sequences

Sequence ID UniProt ID Assigned Subfamily
GPRC5A Q8NFJ5 Taste
GPRC5B Q9NZH0-1 Metabotropic glutamate

Q9NZH0-2 Metabotropic glutamate
GPRC5C Q9NQ84-1 Metabotropic glutamate

Q9NQ84-2 Metabotropic glutamate
GPRC5D Q9NZD1-1 Odorant

Q9NZD1-2 Odorant
Q9NZD1-3 Odorant



24 Raúl Cruz-Barbosa et al.

4 Conclusions

The discovery of the tertiary structures of GPCRs has of late quickened its
pace, mostly thanks to several innovative protein engineering techniques and
crystallography methods. Despite this, an overwhelming majority of these ad-
vances relate to class A receptors. Given the interest of class C receptors
in pharmacology, and in the absence of much knowledge regarding their 3D
crystal structures, the investigation of their functionality can be approached
through the analysis of their primary structure in the form of amino acid
sequences.

Alignment-free representations of these sequences ensure that no relevant
primary information is lost. Several state-of-the-art as well as basic sequence
representations of this type have been investigated in this paper in the context
of semi-supervised classification of class C GPCR types. Among these, it has
been shown that the sequence order-dependent ACC transformation (based
on physicochemical properties of the amino acids) captures the most discrimi-
native characteristics of the class C sequences. Furthermore, it has been found
that accuracy does not decrease dramatically even when a very simple order-
independent amino acid composition transformation is used, suggesting that
most information is encoded in the own proportion of amino acids present in
the sequence.

In addition to this, type-specific classification results have shown that the
discriminative ability of the classifiers for each type varies according to the
utilized data representation, but keeping, in general, a stable and consistent
classification pattern across all representations. Moreover, and importantly
for the problem of deorphanization in reverse pharmacology, the experimental
results indicate that semi-supervised methods working on the physicochemical
properties of alignment-free class C GPCR sequences can quite accurately
discriminate between the seven types that constitute this class in settings of
extreme class-label scarcity. Amongst these methods, SS-GTM consistently
yielded the best accuracy results. Some preliminary experiments using a novel
and fully inductive version of SS-GTM have yielded promising results that
open the door to an at least partially automated quantitative procedure for
sequence deorphanization.

Given the need for robust bioinformatics tools well-suited for classification
and functional analysis of GPCRs, we expect semi-supervised methods, in-
cluding clustering and graphical network-based techniques, to become useful
alternatives for the challenges involved in these tasks.

Acknowledgements R. Cruz-Barbosa acknowledges the Mexican National Council for
Science and Technology for his postdoctoral fellowship. This research is partially funded
by Spanish research projects TIN2012-31377, SAF2010-19257, Fundació La Marató de TV3
(110230) and RecerCaixa 2010ACUP 00378.



Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length 25

References

1. Alexander, S.P.H., Benson, H.E., Faccenda, E., Pawson, A.J., Sharman, J.L., Spedding,
M., Peters, J.A., Harmar, A.J., CGTP-Collaborators: The concise guide to pharmacol-
ogy 2013/14: G protein-coupled receptors. Br J Pharmacol 170, 1459–1581 (2013)

2. Aliferis, C.F., Statnikov, A., Tsamardinos, I.: Challenges in the analysis of mass-
throughput data: A technical commentary from the statistical machine learning per-
spective. Cancer Inform 2, 133–162 (2006)

3. Bengio, Y., Delalleau, O., Roux, N.L.: Semi-Supervised Learning, chap. Label Propa-
gation and Quadratic Criterion, pp. 193–216. The MIT Press (2006)

4. Bishop, C.M., Svensén, M., Williams, C.K.I.: GTM: The Generative Topographic Map-
ping. Neural Comput 10, 215–234 (1998)

5. Branden, C., Tooze, J.: Introduction to Protein Structure. Garland Publishing (1991)
6. Cárdenas, M.I., Vellido, A., Olier, I., Rovira, X., Giraldo, J.: Complementing kernel-

based visualization of protein sequences with their phylogenetic tree. In: Lecture Notes
in Bioinformatics (LNCS/LNBI), Vol.7548, pp. 136–149 (2012)

7. Cruz-Barbosa, R., Vellido, A.: Semi-supervised geodesic Generative Topographic Map-
ping. Pattern Recognit Lett 31, 202–209 (2010)

8. Cruz-Barbosa, R., Vellido, A.: Semi-supervised analysis of human brain tumours from
partially labeled MRS information, using manifold learning models. Int J Neural Syst
21, 17–29 (2011)

9. Cruz-Barbosa, R., Vellido, A., Giraldo, J.: Advances in semi-supervised alignment-free
classification of G protein-coupled receptors. In: Procs. of the International Work-
Conference on Bioinformatics and Biomedical Engineering (IWBBIO’13), pp. 759–766
(2013)

10. Davies, M.N., Secker, A., Freitas, A.A., Mendao, M., Timmis, J., Flower, D.R.: On
the hierarchical classification of G protein-coupled receptors. Bioinformatics 23(23),
3113–3118 (2007)

11. Doré, A.S., Okrasa, K., Patel, J.C., Serrano-Vega, M., Bennett, K., Cooke, R.M., Er-
rey, J.C., Jazayeri, A., Khan, S., Tehan, B., Weir, M., Wiggin, G.R., Marshall, F.H.:
Structure of class C GPCR metabotropic glutamate receptor 5 transmembrane domain.
Nature 551, 557–562 (2014)

12. Foord, S.M., Bonner, T.I., Neubig, R.R., Rosser, E.M., Pin, J.P., Davenport, A.P.,
Spedding, M., Harmar, A.J.: International Union of Pharmacology. XLVI. G protein-
coupled receptor list. Pharmacol Rev 57(2), 279–288 (2005)

13. Fredriksson, R., Lagerström, M.C., Lundin, L.G., Schiöth, H.B.: The G-protein-coupled
receptors in the human genome form five main families. Phylogenetic analysis, paralogon
groups, and fingerprints. Mol Pharmacol 63, 1256–1272 (2003)

14. Gorodkin, J.: Comparing two K-category assignments by a K-category correlation co-
efficient. Comput Biol Chem 28, 367–374 (2004)

15. Herrmann, L., Ultsch, A.: Label propagation for semi-supervised learning in self-
organizing maps. In: Procs. of the 6th International Workshop on Self-Organizing Maps
(WSOM) (2007)

16. Hollenstein, K., Kean, J., Bortolato, A., Cheng, R.K., Doré, A.S., Jazayeri, A., Cooke,
R.M., Weir, M., Marshall, F.H.: Structure of class B GPCR corticotropin-releasing factor
receptor 1. Nature (2013). DOI 10.1038/nature12357. Available online

17. Jurman, G., Riccadonna, S., Furlanello, C.: A comparison of MCC and CEN error
measures in multi-class prediction. PLoS ONE 7(8), e41,882 (2012)

18. Karchin, R., Karplus, K., Haussler, D.: Classifying G-protein coupled receptors with
support vector machines. Bioinformatics 18, 147–159 (2002)

19. Katritch, V., Cherezov, V., Stevens, R.C.: Structure-function of the G protein-coupled
receptor superfamily. Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol 53, 531–556 (2013)

20. Kim, J., Moriyama, E.N., Warr, C.G., Clyne, P.J., Carlson, J.R.: Identification of novel
multi-transmembrane proteins from genomic databases usin quasi-periodic structural
properties. Bioinformatics 16, 767–775 (2000)

21. Kniazeff, J., Prézeau, L., Rondard, P., Pin, J.P., Goudet, C.: Dimers and beyond: The
functional puzzles of class C GPCRs. Pharmacol Ther 130, 9–25 (2011)



26 Raúl Cruz-Barbosa et al.

22. Lapinsh, M., Gutcaits, A., Prusis, P., Post, C., Lundstedt, T., Wikberg, J.E.S.: Classifi-
cation of G-protein coupled receptors by alignment-independent extraction of principal
chemical properties of primary amino acid sequences. Protein Sci 11, 795–805 (2002)

23. Liu, B., Wang, X., Chen, Q., Dong, Q., Lan, X.: Using amino acid physicochemical
distance transformation for fast protein remote homology detection. PLoS ONE 7,
e46,633 (2012)

24. Matthews, B.: Comparison of the predicted and observed secondary structure of T4
phage lysozyme. Biochim Biophys Acta - Protein Structure 405, 442–451 (1975)

25. Oh, D.Y., Kim, K., Kwon, H.B., Seong, J.Y.: Cellular and molecular biology of orphan
G protein-coupled receptors. Int Rev Cytol 252, 163–218 (2006)

26. Opiyo, S.O., Moriyama, E.N.: Protein family classification with partial least squares. J
Proteome Res 6, 846–853 (2007)

27. Otaki, J.M., Mori, A., Itoh, Y., Nakayama, T., Yamamoto, H.: Alignment-free classi-
fication of G-protein-coupled receptors using self-organizing maps. J Chem Inf Model
46, 1479–1490 (2006)

28. Overington, J.P., Al-Lazikani, B., Hopkins, A.L.: How many drug targets are there?
Nat Rev Drug Discov 5, 993–996 (2006)

29. Palczewski, K., Kumasaka, T., Hori, T., Behnke, C.A., Motoshima, H., et al.: Crystal
structure of rhodopsin: a G protein-coupled receptor. Science 289, 739–45 (2000)

30. Pin, J.P., Galvez, T., Prézeau, L.: Evolution, structure, and activation mechanism of
family 3/C G-protein-coupled receptors. Pharmacol Ther 98, 325–354 (2003)

31. Rask-Andersen, M., Sällman-Almén, M., Schiöth, H.B.: Trends in the exploitation of
novel drug targets. Nat Rev Drug Discov 10, 579–590 (2011)

32. Sandberg, M., Eriksson, L., Jonsson, J., Sjöström, M., Wold, S.: New chemical descrip-
tors relevant for the design of biologically active peptides. A multivariate characteriza-
tion of 87 amino acids. J Med Chem 41, 2481–2491 (1998)

33. Siu, F.Y., He, M., de Graaf, C., Han, G.W., Yang, D., Zhang, Z., Zhou, C., Xu, Q.,
Wacker, D., Joseph, J.S., Liu, W., Lau, J., Cherezov, V., Katritch, V., Wang, M.W.,
Stevens, R.C.: Structure of the human glucagon class B G-protein-coupled receptor.
Nature (2013). DOI 10.1038/nature12393. Available online

34. Stevens, R.C., Cherezov, V., Katritch, V., Abagyan, R., Kuhn, P., Rosen, H., Wüthrich,
K.: The GPCR network: a large-scale collaboration to determine human GPCR struc-
ture and function. Nat Rev Drug Discov 12, 25–34 (2013)

35. Vellido, A., Cárdenas, M.I., Olier, I., Rovira, X., Giraldo, J.: A probabilistic approach
to the visual exploration of G protein-coupled receptor sequences. In: Procs. of the 19th

European Symposiun on Artificial Neural Networks (ESANN 2011), pp. 233–238 (2011)

36. Vroling, B., Sanders, M., Baakman, C., Borrmann, A., Verhoeven, S., Klomp, J.,
Oliveira, L., de Vlieg, J., Vriend, G.: GPCRDB: information system for G protein-
coupled receptors. Nucleic Acids Res 39(suppl.1), D309–319 (2011)

37. Wacker, D., Wang, C., Katritch, V., Han, G.W., Huang, X.P., Vardy, E., McCorvy, J.D.,
Jiang, Y., Chu, M., Siu, F.Y., Liu, W., Xu, H.E., Cherezov, V., Roth2, B.L., Stevens,
R.C.: Structural features for functional selectivity at serotonin receptors. Science 340,
615–619 (2013). DOI 10.1126/science.1232808

38. Wang, C., Jiang, Y., Ma, J., Wu, H., Wacker, D., Katritch, V., Han, G.W., Liu, W.,
Huang, X.P., Vardy, E., McCorvy, J.D., Gao, X., Zhou, E.X., Melcher, K., Zhang, C.,
Bai, F., Yang, H., Yang, L., Jiang, H., Roth, B.L., Cherezov, V., Stevens, R.C., Xu,
H.E.: Structural basis for molecular recognition at serotonin receptors. Science 340,
610–614 (2013). DOI 10.1126/science.1232807

39. Wang, C., Wu, H., Katritch, V., Han, G.W., Huang, X.P., Liu, W., Siu, F.Y., Roth,
B.L., Cherezov, V., Stevens, R.C.: Structure of the human smoothened receptor bound
to an antitumour agent. Nature (2013). DOI 10.1038/nature12167

40. Wei, J.M., Yuang, X.J., Hu, Q.H., Wang, S.Q.: A novel measure for evaluating classifiers.
Expert Syst Appl 37, 3799–3809 (2010)

41. Wold, S., Jonsson, J., Sjöström, M., Sandberg, M., Rännar, S.: DNA and peptide se-
quences and chemical processes multivariately modelled by principal component analysis
and partial least-squares projections to latent structures. Anal Chim Acta 277, 239–253
(1993)



Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length 27

42. Wu, H., Wang, C., Gregory, K.J., Han, G.W., Cho, H.P., Xia, Y., Niswender, C.M.,
Katritch, V., Meiler, J., Cherezov, V., Conn, P.J., Stevens, R.C.: Structure of a class
C GPCR metabotropic glutamate receptor 1 bound to an allosteric modulator. Science
344(6179), 58–64 (2014)

43. Wu, Z., Li, C.H., Zhu, J., Huang, J.: A semi-supervised SVM for manifold learning. In:
Procs. of the 18th International Conference on Pattern Recognition (ICPR) (2006)

44. Zhu, X., Ghahramani, Z.: Learning from labeled and unlabeled data with label propa-
gation. Tech. Rep. CMU-CALD-02-107, Carnegie Mellon Univ. (PA) USA (2002)


