














































A MOOC on Approaches to Machine Translation 
Costa-jussà, Formiga, Torrillas, Petit and Fonollosa 

174 

 

International Review of Research in Open and Distributed Learning 
Volume 16, Number 6                   

                                      
 
November – 2015 
 
 

A MOOC on Approaches to Machine Translation 
 

 
Marta R. Costa-jussà, Lluís Formiga✚, Oriol Torrillas, Jordi Petit and José A. R. Fonollosa 

Instituto Politécnico Nacional, Mexico, 

✚Verbio Technologies S.L.,  Barcelona 

Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya, Barcelona 

 

Abstract 
This paper describes the design, development, and analysis of a MOOC entitled “Approaches to 

Machine Translation: Rule-based, statistical and hybrid”, and provides lessons learned and 

conclusions to be taken into account in the future. The course was developed within the Canvas 

platform, used by recognized European universities. It contains video-lectures, quizzes, and 

laboratory assignments. Evaluation was through on-line quizzes, programming assignments 

assessed by means of a specific code evaluation, and peer-to-peer strategies. This MOOC allowed 

people from various fields to be introduced to the theory and practice of Machine Translation. It 

also enabled us to internationally publicize various tools developed at the Universitat Politècnica 

de Catalunya. 

 

Introduction 
Several years after the first Massive Open Online Course (MOOC) by David Wiley in 20071, this 

type of course has received a great deal of attention from academics as a way to disseminate 

different levels of knowledge with the contribution of the participants. Among their various 

advantages, MOOCs require low levels of resources in relation to their potential international 

impact. 

                                                 

1 http://creativecommons.org/tag/massive-open-online-course 



A MOOC on Approaches to Machine Translation 
Costa-jussà, Formiga, Torrillas, Petit and Fonollosa 

175 

 

In the context of Natural Language Processing (NLP), Machine Translation (MT) brings together 

varied communities from linguists to engineers. From the Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya 

(UPC), with more than 12 years of experience in the topic, we launched a MOOC that provides an 

overview of the basis for the most popular MT systems. Our main motivations for developing this 

course are listed as follows: 

• To improve the content and digital resources of MT. 

• To adapt an MT course to an international public. 

• To propose a course on a complete platform that is used by large European universities. 

• To use and publicize the open-source NLP tools developed at the UPC that are useful for 

the MT community. 

Although the MOOC we are describing is very specific to MT, it was well received, with over 772 

students registering from all around the globe. The most relevant characteristic of the MOOC 

presented is its development under a low-resource scenario and its far-reaching marketing 

strategy using in-house low-budget tools. The MOOC was set up on the well-known Canvas 

platform, but customized to UPC requirements. In this sense, this paper extends our ongoing 

previous work (Costa-jussà, Formiga, Petit & Fonollosa, 2014) and describes the complete course, 

focusing on how the low-resource MOOC on the topic of MT has been developed, together with a 

deep analysis of the output of the course mainly in terms of participation. Therefore, this paper 

can be useful to professors and/or researchers that want to develop a MOOC on a fresh topic and 

independently from the big platforms. Among the different ideas that the reader can use, we 

provide details of how to: constitute a multidisciplinary group of people to develop the course; 

promote and motivate the course; proceed step-by-step for recording and preparing evaluation 

materials; and design and analyze the pre- and post-course surveys. 

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 depicts a brief description in both courses 

of MT with open material and already existing MOOCs under similar fields. Section 3 presents the 

course topic and contents. Section 4 describes the procedure for recording the video lectures and 

the promotional video, the functionalities of the Canvas platform, the MOOC team and how the 

course was promoted. Section 5 includes an analysis of the students including a demographic 

description, as well as a study into their background and experience of MOOCs. Section 6 gives 

details about participation in the course, such as how many people watched video-lectures, 

performed activities, and participated in the discussions; the section also describes the feedback 

received from students, and finally, it defines the correlation between participation and feedback, 

among other interesting issues. The last section concludes the paper with some closing remarks. 

Related Work 
MOOC has become a strong stakeholder in professional development; however, up until now, 

there was no evidence of any MOOC explicitly related MT. To the best of our knowledge, the most 



A MOOC on Approaches to Machine Translation 
Costa-jussà, Formiga, Torrillas, Petit and Fonollosa 

176 

 

similar MOOC is a course oriented to NLP in 2012 by Coursera2, a pioneering platform for such 

courses.  

Moreover, as will be detailed in Section 3, the MT community has put a lot of educational effort 

with the publication of several books, on-line slides, open source tools, tutorials, workshops, and 

self-assessment coding tools. Nevertheless, there are fundamental characteristics defining the 

particularities of this subject; MT itself lies between several autonomous fields such as 

engineering and linguistics, hence it emerges as a frontier for artificial intelligence. The profile of 

MT experts require both a strong background in engineering due to its statistical facet and major 

notions from the field of linguistics. However, undergraduate schools today teach the intricacies 

of the two combined disciplines, a field known as computational linguistics. Moreover, there is a 

consensus on the best way to teach and make comprehensible the dynamics of MT is a 

methodology of Problem-Based Learning (PBL). In that sense, moving from a teaching 

methodology with strong practical requirements to a massive environment becomes an added 

challenge to the MOOC presented. It is also important to note the peculiarities of our working 

scenario: 

1. Deploy an initial MOOC based on expertise (not introductory) that combines students 

from linguistics and engineering without a strong bias to both disciplines. 

2. Convert the teaching material that has traditionally been delivered in classroom, long-

run format at a university - sessions of 2 hours without much on-line support - to a 10-

minutes online-pill format lessons. 

3. Infer a PBL methodology where students cooperate with their work under 

multidisciplinary teams and therefore encouraging engineers to help linguists and vice-

versa. 

Next, we review some of the related work concerning these points of the scenario. Despite not all 

of that work has been considered into MOOC design; some parts are enumerated for their 

importance to the field. 

One of the first thorough studies about Open and Distance Learning (ODL) and linguistics was 

provided by Godwin-Jones in 2012, where the author introduced the trend in Western countries 

today to instruct language learning in higher education. Normally, the use of the Web was 

included as an additional resource in face-to-face classes, as an equal partner in instructional 

delivery in hybrid courses, or as the primary teaching and learning environment in distance 

learning. However, our course does not focus on teaching a specific language to humans, but on 

how machines can learn to translate. Nevertheless, some of his practical ideas helped us to design 

the working assignments for our course. In the same direction, (Abeer & Miri, 2014) examined 

students' preferences and views about learning in MOOCs and specified the criteria that make 

MOOCs a constructive learning environment based in its learning-by-doing philosophy. Another 

                                                 

2 https://class.coursera.org/nlp/lecture 



A MOOC on Approaches to Machine Translation 
Costa-jussà, Formiga, Torrillas, Petit and Fonollosa 

177 

 

topic beyond the intention of our course but on the basis of computational linguistics, is the 

increasing importance of emotional automatic analysis concerning students’ messages in forums, 

discussions, and opinions of the course. To that effect, Yang, Liu, Liu, Min, and Meng (2014) 

selected relevant features from original feature, train-based classifiers to build a dynamic and 

robust ensemble. The experimental results on the real-life moods posts demonstrated that their 

methodology outperformed conventional multi-view semi-supervised emotion recognition 

methods. With the same intention, but under the ontology perspective, Gil, Virgili-Gomá, García, 

and Mason (2015) applied ontologies in the context of Emotional Common Sense, collaboratively 

collecting emotion common sense and modelling it with an ontology named EmotionsOnto. Their 

experiments were conducted to automatically measure users’ emotional states using Brain 

Computer Interfaces. Moreover, under the social perspective Shen and Kuo (2015) depicted how 

many MOOCs have adopted social media tools for large student audiences to co-create knowledge 

and engage in collective learning processes, by adopting various social media mining approaches 

to investigate Twitter messages related to MOOC learning. In short, the findings pertaining social 

media mining afforded a holistic understanding of MOOC trends, public sentiment toward MOOC 

learning, and the influencers of MOOC-related re-tweets.  

Thanks to the rapid development in technology, which can be a common ground for many fields, 

interdisciplinary studies have gained importance resulting in an integration of different concepts, 

into ODL The field of ODL has been growing requiring research in theory and their application 

(Aydemir, Özkeskin, & Akkurt, 2015). A strong evidence of this growth is given in the research of 

Muñoz-Merino, Ruipérez-Valiente, Alario-Hoyos, Pérez-Sanagustín and Delgado Kloos, C. (2015) 

where Precise Effectiveness Strategy (PES) is presented. PES defines precise metrics allowing the 

calculation of the effectiveness of students when interacting with educational resources and 

activities within MOOCs and Small Private On-line Courses (SPOCs). It has to be taken into 

account the particular aspects of the learning context. PES visualizations can help teachers make 

quick and informed decisions in their case study, enabling the whole comparison of a large 

number of students at a glance, and a quick comparison of the four SPOCs divided by videos and 

exercises. Another important aspect to consider when designing a MOOC is the on-line social 

behaviour, especially when transferring existing syllabus dynamics from classrooms to on-line 

platforms. In that sense, Kolp and Wautelet, (2014) raised the strong link between ODL and social 

networks behaviour with the clear intention to disaggregate the analysis of MOOCs. More 

precisely, they overviewed a set of human organizational styles from literature’s theory. These 

theories were applied in an original manner to the representation of collaborative learning 

software systems. By using socially driven software development methodologies like Tropos, a 

new software system could be modelled as a set of collaborating actors pursuing collective and 

individual goals.  That team effort, in addition to the individual effort, was necessary to obtain a 

competitive and professional solution (Harms, 2015) under corporate environments. Therefore, 

Self-Regulated Learning (SRL) has shown to be an effective way to learn in entrepreneurial 

projects at the level of the individual student, demonstrating the effects of SRL, team learning, 

and psychological safety on various assessment types in the context of an entrepreneurship class. 

That evidence becomes a key factor in our MOOC as most of the human translation professionals 



A MOOC on Approaches to Machine Translation 
Costa-jussà, Formiga, Torrillas, Petit and Fonollosa 

178 

 

work as self-employed professional liberals allowing inferring the potential of Computer Aided 

Translation (CAT) into their own communities.  

Problem Based Learning (PBL) is an approach to learning where the syllabus is designed with 

problem scenarios central to student learning in each curricular component (modules/units). 

Terms such as “computer-mediated PBL” and “online PBL” have been used to define forms of 

PBL that utilise computers in some way. Despite this, many of the concerns raised by delegates at 

conferences around the world (Savin-Baden & Wilkie, 2006): include whether online PBL can:  

• affect the existence of face-to-face PBL since online PBL will be seen as being more cost 

effective. 

• destroy some of the original aims of PBL since some forms of online PBL tend to focus on 

solving narrowly defined problems that fail to encourage students to be independent 

inquirers who own their learning. 

• reduce the impact of learning in teams, in terms of students learning to work through 

team difficulties and conflicts in the way required by face-to-face PBL.  

Some forms of online learning are difficult to marry with types of PBL that seek to provide 

opportunities for the students to challenge, evaluate, and interrogate models of action, 

knowledge, reasoning, and reflection, such as PBL for critical contestability (Savin-Baden, 2000). 

Rendas and Gamboa (1999) introduced a computer simulation that was designed for PBL in order 

to motivate learning and structure knowledge. In the following sections, we detail how we tailored 

the content and activities of the course to a PBL methodology. 

 

Course Topic and Content 
The aim of the course was to provide a broad view of MT. Given that MT is a multidisciplinary 

field involving linguists, computer scientists, engineers, and computer technicians, this course 

was intended for all these profiles. The course reviewed the most important paradigms of MT 

including statistical, rule-based, and hybrid translation, giving an overview of state-of-the-art 

techniques and algorithms, and it outlined the most challenging problems in the field. In 

addition, an overview of several evaluation approaches was presented: automatic measures; 

human perception evaluation; and human linguistic evaluation, with emphasis on the advantages 

and disadvantages of each method. The course underlined how statistics and linguistics are 

combined in both development and evaluation and was organized over five weeks with the 

addition of two extra weeks. Table 1 shows the distribution of topics per week; the last two weeks 

were dedicated to the development of activities and the final exam. 



A MOOC on Approaches to Machine Translation 
Costa-jussà, Formiga, Torrillas, Petit and Fonollosa 

179 

 

Table 1  

Course Organization 

Week Topic 

1 Introduction and rule-based MT 

2 Alignment and phrase extraction 

3 Reordering, language modeling, tuning and decoding 

4 Evaluation and toolkits 

5 Hybrid MT and MT use case study 
 

From the theoretical point of view, at the end of the course the student was expected to 

understand the theory behind rule-based, statistical, and hybrid MT systems. The students were 

asked to pass several theoretical tests to demonstrate their skills. From a practical point of view, 

at the end of the course the student should be able to build a rule- and a statistical-based MT 

system. Students were also asked to build parts of the systems during the course. 

Key references for the course included the Statistical Machine Translation book (Koehn, 2010) 

and the survey of Linguistics applied to Statistical Machine Translation (Costa-Jussà & Farrús, 

2014). Other references included slides from Adam Lopez3 and corresponding activities (Lopez et 

al., 2013). Finally, it should be mentioned that the course was compiled solely from the teachers’ 

experience and in cooperation with other top researchers while running courses on the same topic 

in the RUSSIR 2012 Summer School4, Universidade de São Paulo, Universitat Politècnica de 

Catalunya, ESSLLI 2013 Summer School5 as well as giving talks and tutorials around the world 

including ESWC 20136 and NAACL 2013 (Costa-jussà, 2013). 

The course activities constituted the main differential linchpin of the MOOC while they 

contributed to its work-flow identity. In addition, they made up the set of tools needed in order to 

obtain qualitative and quantitative metrics to further understand what was taking place within 

the student learning process. 

However, when designing activities, it was important to take into account the fact that not all 

MOOC content may be inclusive to all participants. Specifically, people coming from areas such as 

linguistics, humanities, fine-arts, or translation and interpretation may not have a solid 

mathematical background. Thus, two non-exclusionary profiles were established to achieve the 

certificate of accomplishment based on the syllabus. The mt-developer profile was oriented 

towards candidates with a strong mathematical background, and the mt-manager profile 

oriented towards candidates with a linguistic background and an interest in abstractly 

understanding several concepts and being able to interact with them. 

                                                 
3 http://mt-class.org 
4 http://videolectures.net/russir2012_yaroslavl/ 
5 http://esslli2013.de/schedule/ 
6 http://webmining.barcelonamedia.org/lambert/crosslingmind/eswc2013-tutorial/ 

http://mt-class.org/
http://videolectures.net/russir2012_yaroslavl/
http://esslli2013.de/schedule/
http://webmining.barcelonamedia.org/lambert/crosslingmind/eswc2013-tutorial/


A MOOC on Approaches to Machine Translation 
Costa-jussà, Formiga, Torrillas, Petit and Fonollosa 

180 

 

From the first day, teachers and collaborators aimed to identify the roles of leader and follower 

among the participants based on different variables: i) participation in the forums; ii) test 

grading; iii) behavioral patterns both in taking the lessons in the form of slides and video lectures. 

Leaders were publicly reputed, and their motivation was augmented using techniques learned 

from social networks through authority, popularity, and typical metrics such as like, dislike, 

mentions, and badges. 

Nevertheless, we set the focus of collective work beyond the scope of a forum or informal social 

interaction, including the activities. The working plan was not limited to programming 

assignments and weekly quizzes, but also explored other skills the students may have in order to 

encourage peer cooperation and make the learning process become more of a shared journey than 

an individual achievement. 

For this reason, we designed the scientific assignment to require student complicity; students 

must cooperate to solve several challenges that they may encounter during the course by mutually 

correcting scientific-paper reviews or by competitively brainstorming ideas to guide the MT 

research community. In addition, we worked from a PBL perspective. The purpose of the 

programming assignment was not only to provide a challenge for the mt-advanced candidates 

through programming the core lines of source code but also for the mt-manager students, to be 

able to build a bash script for training a completely ad-hoc MT-system based on freely available 

tools. 

PBL and surfing the internet share similar qualities, for example the process of learning in PBL 

teams is interactive, non-sequential, random, and often seems rather chaotic. Furthermore, as 

with students undertaking face-to-face PBL, those students doing online PBL seem to need less 

facilitator support and guidance as they become more familiar and skilled with managing the 

learning approach. For example, in face-to-face PBL, students have often reported feeling out of 

control, fragmented, and ill at ease because the experience of learning through PBL is markedly 

different from prior learning experiences (see for example Savin-Baden, 2000). Online PBL offers 

the students greater autonomy to learn for themselves and opportunities to develop independence 

in inquiry, opportunities many of them may not have encountered in lecture-based learning. To 

accomplish PBL, the programming assignments were automatically evaluated using the Jutge.org 

platform (Petit, Giménez, & Roura, 2012). Jutge.org is an open access educational on-line 

programming judge that students can use to try to solve a broad range of programming problems 

using several programming languages. The verdict on their solutions is computed using 

exhaustive test sets run under time, memory, and security restrictions. Further details of this 

platform are explained in Section 5. The detailed structure of the activities, following a PBL 

design, was: 

 Weekly Quizzes - Trial-and-error tests with random questions and answers to measure 

the how well the student had understood content of the syllabus. 

 Elementary Programming Assignments - These were based on bash scripting evaluating 

the appropriate calls to freely available toolkits such as SRILM, Moses or Asiya (Giménez 



A MOOC on Approaches to Machine Translation 
Costa-jussà, Formiga, Torrillas, Petit and Fonollosa 

181 

 

& Màrquez, 2010) in terms of argument passing and coherence. The student not only 

learns how to build a script that performs all the parts of the process but they can also 

check the correctness of each outcome by uploading it to the server and make sure they 

understand it by means of a simple quiz. 

 Advanced Programming Assignment - An automatic software evaluator based on a 

DreaMT of a student’s code. 

 Scientific Assignment - The students had to review a state-of-the-art MT paper and 

provide some dissemination alongside future research ideas. They were peer-evaluated. 

 Final Exam: -The final exam gave the student a global perspective. However, it only had a 

marginal effect on the final grading. 

It is worth mentioning that the majority of the course’s success is due to the flexibility and re-

usability of the Canvas platform thanks to its LTI7 interfaces and applications. This is explained in 

more detail in Section 5. 

 

Building the MOOC: Technical and Practical Procedures 
This section describes several details on the procedures of creating the MOOC. The section 

includes details on recording, platform, team and promotion. 

Recording Set 

The video recording sessions for the MOOC posed various challenges. The most important aspect 

involved grabbing the student’s attention in order to transfer the course content efficiently. A 

MOOC has certain characteristics that differ from a normal class-based lecture. For example, it is 

necessary to avoid long sessions involving a great deal of mathematical or conceptual 

development. For this reason the communication is more direct and requires a delivery structured 

in bite-sized chunks where each chunk transmits very few concepts but is very well prepared. 

For this reason the aesthetics and means of obtaining audio and video were much more important 

than in a master class at the faculty. It is important to bear in mind that the overall quality of the 

video session was evaluated as much as its ability to transmit specific knowledge in an affordable 

way, as was the ability to unlock a student from a jamming situation, which could be caused by a 

misunderstanding of the slides or the fact that they are not self-explanatory enough. 

                                                 
7 http://www.imsglobal.org/toolsinteroperability2.cfm 

http://www.imsglobal.org/toolsinteroperability2.cfm


A MOOC on Approaches to Machine Translation 
Costa-jussà, Formiga, Torrillas, Petit and Fonollosa 

182 

 

 

Figure 1.  Screen showing a recording of the teacher and the presentation slides 

 

In this section we detail the design decisions made for the MOOC video recordings in order to 

increase the success of the course. In order to make these decisions, we followed advises from 

well-known sources8. First the maximum length of the videos was set as between 10 and 15 

minutes. Moreover, sound quality was prioritized using a directional lapel microphone: this was 

the main means of communication between teacher and student. The sessions were held on a 

minimalist set: a flat white background and a waist up close-up of the sitting teacher, capturing 

her facial expressions and body language. The main display for the student consisted of the 

presentation slides, occupying most of the area of the screen, with the teacher in a discreet corner, 

and a corporate background (see Figure 1). 

On the recording set, the teacher could view the presentation in two places, first on a touch screen 

device on the table such as a Wacom tablet or iPad9 that allowed them to delete, write, annotate, 

or make clarifications of any kind on the student’s screen in order to focus on specific aspects. The 

presentation could also be seen on the off-camera teleprompter allowing the teacher to focus their 

eyes on the target, avoiding the student feeling the teacher was only interested in the table device. 

This minimized the possibility of the student getting distracted. 

Finally, the practical sessions were developed through screen-casting technology. More precisely, 

the teacher’s computer screen is captured and the student can see all the actions made by the 

teacher while she simultaneously records her voice and explaining everything that is taking place. 

For this kind of session a good microphone is also essential. 

                                                 

8 https://www.edx.org/blog/how-mooc-video-production-affects 
9 Using an application like ExplainEverything 



A MOOC on Approaches to Machine Translation 
Costa-jussà, Formiga, Torrillas, Petit and Fonollosa 

183 

 

Platform 

As has already been mentioned, the course was deployed on the CANVAS10 ’11 platform. Canvas is 

a new, open-source Learning Management System (LMS) that has several interesting properties 

aligned with our interests. Firstly, it is fully open-source making it suitable for installation on the 

university servers, allowing full control over course activity, as well as the ability to define new 

metrics for assessing the course. In addition, it has a strong social-network focus as it borrows a 

number of features from, for example, Facebook, Twitter, and Youtube (Godwin-Jones, 2012). 

Furthermore, it allows you to develop your own modules (3rd API tools) with Learning Tools 

Interoperability (LTI) standard or specific canvas APIs. In terms of development, it has a “dev & 

friends” site which is a great resource for getting started in developing on Canvas itself as it 

contains forums and documentation indexed by a search engine. 

We implemented two different 3rd-party apps: i) a customized video streaming server and a ii) 

software grading tool based on DreaMT12 and Jutge.org (Petit, 2012) in a similar way to that 

developed by (Staubitz, Renz, Willems, Jasper, & Meinel, 2014). 

As mentioned, the Jutge.org platform is used to automatically evaluate programming 

assignments. Jutge.org is an online programming judge mainly used at UPC to assist students and 

instructors in massive regular courses in the Computer Science and Mathematics schools. It 

currently offers more than 1500 problems and has corrected more than one million submissions 

so far. Its average response time is six seconds per submission. 

The architecture of Jutge.org offers a web front-end that exposes all its capacities for its users, 

and a back-end that handles client submissions. As this MOOC used the Canvas platform in order 

to deliver its content and administrate its courses, only the back-end of Jutge.org was required. In 

our case, the integration between this back-end and Canvas was solved using LTI13. 

Internally, Jutge.org's back-end is designed as a distributed master-slave system, with a master 

server that offers a queue into which clients post submissions and retrieve corrections, and 

several slave servers that host the different virtual machines that perform the actual correction 

tasks in a secure environment (Petit, 2012). In order to correct a submission, a virtual machine 

receives the problem description (including the solution written by the problem setter), the 

candidate solution and a driver module, which guides the compilation, execution, and checking 

process to produce a correction. 

Note that executing arbitrary code submitted by arbitrary users is an important security concern. 

In order to isolate possible threads, see (Forisek, 2006) for a clear summary, the correction 

system of Jutge.org uses virtual machines with immutable drives that continually reboot and are 

placed behind a network firewall. 

                                                 
10 http://www.instructure.com 
11 https://github.com/instructure/canvas-lms/wiki 
12 http://alopez.github.io/dreamt/ 
13 http://www.imsglobal.org/toolsinteroperability2.cfm 

http://www.instructure.com/
https://github.com/instructure/canvas-lms/wiki
http://alopez.github.io/dreamt/
http://www.imsglobal.org/toolsinteroperability2.cfm


A MOOC on Approaches to Machine Translation 
Costa-jussà, Formiga, Torrillas, Petit and Fonollosa 

184 

 

Thanks to the modular architecture and the secure environment that Jutge.org offers, handling 

problems for this MOOC were solved easily; it was only necessary to create a new driver to guide 

the correction of MT problems. Since this driver shares many similar capacities to the already-

existing ones in Jutge.org, developing it took only a couple of days. 

 

Team and Promotion 

As follows we explain the details on the course's team, the call for participation, and the 

motivational strategies. 

Team. The course was developed in the context of the MOOCs 2013 contract with the 

AGAUR. The core team comprised people with PhDs with different profiles. The course was 

taught by Marta R. Costa-jussà (NLP) and Lluís Formiga (Speech Processing). Internal 

collaborators included Prof. José A. R. Fonollosa and Assoc. Prof. Francesc Vallverdú; our 

external collaborators were Meritxell González (MT Evaluation and Dialog Systems) and Jordi 

Petit (Software Engineering and Code Evaluation). In addition, Oriol Torrillas was one intern 

student involved part-time. Other very valuable support came from the Institut de Ciències de 

l’Educació (ICE) and MediaTic Terrassa. 

Promotion. This MOOC was promoted using a low-resource strategy. We followed, to 

some extent, similar procedures to the announcement of Workshops and Conferences. Before any 

marketing took place, we set up a web page14 to house the promotional video. Basically, this video 

showed a dialog between the MOOC lecturers and a selection of images presenting the university 

and the course content to motivate students to enroll. The dialog between the teachers was 

recorded under the same conditions as the video-lectures. In addition to the promotional video, 

the web page presented the structure of the course and the experiences of some students that had 

completed the course before its launch. Using the web page as the central reference point, the 

course was promoted via social media, including LinkedIn, Facebook, and Twitter, in addition to 

well-known distribution lists in the field, including corpora@uib.no, mt-list@eamt.org, and 

moses-support@mit.edu.. An announcement was placed on the NLPPeople web page for jobs in 

artificial intelligence, personal invitations were extended to universities and institutes, such as the 

Instituto Politécnico Nacional (Mexico), Universidade de São Paulo, and the Institute for 

Infocomm Research (Singapore), and the course was promoted in the Spanish University system, 

including paid leaflets at the SEPLN15 conference. Additionally, a video teaser was available on 

YouTube16. 

Motivation. During the MOOC we developed strategies to keep students motivated and 

active. The main actions consisted of: (1) email announcements at the beginning of each week 

giving the content, at the deadlines for quizzes and assignments, and to enable participants to 

gain the certification for the course. The former and the second one followed MOOC's protocols 

                                                 
14 Please, visit http://www.mt-mooc.upc.edu 
15 Sociedad Española para el Procesamiento del Lenguaje Natural, http://www.sepln.org 
16 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6XS1oP9gKV4 

http://www.mt-mooc.upc.edu/
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6XS1oP9gKV4


A MOOC on Approaches to Machine Translation 
Costa-jussà, Formiga, Torrillas, Petit and Fonollosa 

185 

 

from large platforms such as Coursera; (2) revitalization of discussions; and (3) uploading of 

interesting and related links for each week’s topics. 

 

Student Details 
Students in the course were from all over the world. Prior to week one,, we offered a pre-course 

survey that remained open throughout the duration of the course. A total of 348 students 

completed this survey. Questions were related to motivation, demographic details, background, 

and previous experience with MOOCs. The questions asked are reported in Table 2. Most of the 

questions were influenced by previous MOOCs taken by the professors of this course from 

popular platforms such as Coursera. The answers to these questions allowed the researchers to 

adapt the course to the MOOC audience. For example, questions about the background were 

really important to make on-the-fly, from which we could slightly adapt activities or modules, and 

give extra bibliography for example to really low programmer profiles.  In the following 

subsections we carefully describe the answers to these questions. Although we had a short 

reaction time between the collection of answers and the starting of the course, we explain in most 

of the cases how we took advantage of this valuable data. 

Table 2  

Pre-Course Survey Questions and Corresponding Figures 

Topic Question Figure 

Motivation 
How did you hear about this course? 2 

Why are you taking this course? 3 

 Year of Birth 4 

Demographic Gender - 

Country of Birth 5 

 In which country do you currently live? 6 

Background What kind of background do you have? 8 

 What kind of programming background do you have? 9 

Studies What is your background in MT? 10 

 Highest level of education completed? 7 

 Which is your professional situation? 11 

Work In what type of organization are you? 12 

 Teacher/lecturer? - 

 What type of courses have you participated in? 13 

 How many free on-line courses have you participated in over the last two years? 14 

 How many MOOCs have you participated in? 15 

 How many MOOCs have you finished? 16 



A MOOC on Approaches to Machine Translation 
Costa-jussà, Formiga, Torrillas, Petit and Fonollosa 

186 

 

 In the cases where you finished the course, did you ask for a certificate? - 

 Have you ever paid to get a certificate? - 

MOOC If you have not been able to finish a MOOC, how do you feel about that? 17 

 What is the main motivational reason that led you to enroll in this kind of course? 18 

 Which aspects convinced you to select a course? 19 

 Was the content of the course related to your previous studies? - 

 In which platform(s) were the course(s) offered? 20 

 In which language were the courses taught? - 

 Do you plan to take more MOOCs in the future? - 

 
 

Motivational Details 

The main two motivational questions asked to the students were about how they found out about 

the course and why they were taking it. Results are shown in Figure 2 and 3, respectively. Around 

50% of students found out about the course through a colleague or a friend. Around 50% of 

students did the course for educational reasons and 30% for working reasons. From the very 

beginning, the course was designed to cover both theoretical and practical issues. Therefore, from 

the motivational side, students were exactly as expected.  

 

 

Figure 2. How did you hear about this course? 

 

 



A MOOC on Approaches to Machine Translation 
Costa-jussà, Formiga, Torrillas, Petit and Fonollosa 

187 

 

 

Figure 3. Why are you taking this course? 

 

Demographic Details 

Figure 4 shows the distribution of the students in relation to their year of birth. The variance is 

quite large, but most students were between 25 and 35 years old; 42% were women and 58% were 

men. Young people have higher flexibility in learning as supported by many different studies 

(Chang, Shibata, Andersen, Sasaki, & Watanabe, 2014), which is a nice advantage for our group of 

students.   

 

Figure 4. Year of Birth  

Figure 5. Shows the distribution of the students in relation to their countries of birth. Figure 6 

shows the distribution of the students according to the country they currently live in.  Among 

most predominant countries we found Spain and Germany. Given that the course was promoted 

from a Spanish University, it makes sense that the course has a larger number of students from 

this country. However, we cannot give an explanation of the large number of German students. 

The group of other countries include: Algeria, Argentina, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, 

Belarus, Belgium, Bosnia, Brunei, Bulgaria, Cambodia, Canada, China, Colombia, Croatia, Czech 

Republic, Caribeean, Egypt, Hungary, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Japan, Jordan, 

Kazakhstan, Latvia, Morocco, Netherlands, Norway, Palestine, Paraguay, Perú, Philippines, 

Poland, Portugal, Romania, Arabia Saudi, Serbia, Singapore, Slovenia, Somalia, South Africa, 

South Korea, Srilanka, Switzerland, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, Uzbekistan, Venezuela, and 

Vietnam. 

 



A MOOC on Approaches to Machine Translation 
Costa-jussà, Formiga, Torrillas, Petit and Fonollosa 

188 

 

   

 

          Figure 5. Country of Birth                    Figure 6. Country of Living 

 

As for these demographic details, we were pleased to have such a variation on the country of 

living, because it gave a higher international dimension to the course. We can consider that we 

did a nice promotion given the coverage of most continents. In further editions, we have to make 

sure that we cover Australia properly as well. 

Background 

We asked several background questions to better comprehend what students expected from the 

course. 

Studies. Figure 7 shows the distribution of the students according to the highest level of 

education completed. Figure 8 shows the range of the students’ backgrounds. Around 50% of 

students have a master degree, achieving the desired student profile. The kind of backgrounds is 

mostly between linguists and computer scientists, which was what we expected when designing 

the course. The variability between these two profiles points out a challenging issue in our course. 

We have to adapt to people with different programming skills, as we show in the following 

questions. 



A MOOC on Approaches to Machine Translation 
Costa-jussà, Formiga, Torrillas, Petit and Fonollosa 

189 

 

 

Figure 7. Highest level of education 

 

Figure 8. Kind of background. 

Figures 9 and 10 show the students’ background in programming and MT, respectively. Most 

students were programming beginners and without MT experience. This allowed us to expect 

more questions in the programming assignments and put more effort on explaining further 

details on each of them. 

 

 

Figure 9.  Programming background. 



A MOOC on Approaches to Machine Translation 
Costa-jussà, Formiga, Torrillas, Petit and Fonollosa 

190 

 

 

Figure 10. MT background 

 

Work. Figure 11 shows the distribution of the students related to their professional 

situation. Figure 12 shows the distribution of the students according to the type of organization 

they work in. Student professional situations are shared between private and public sectors, while 

the type of organization students affiliate with vary between educational and industrial. Again, 

this also motivated us towards balancing theory, practice, and applications during the entire 

course.  

 

Figure 11. Professional situation 

 

Figure 12. Type of organization. 

 



A MOOC on Approaches to Machine Translation 
Costa-jussà, Formiga, Torrillas, Petit and Fonollosa 

191 

 

Finally, the percentage of teachers/lecturers was 22% compared to 78% non-teaching 

participants. This is not a course where we expected a large number of teachers/lecturers given its 

nature. However, we had quite a high percentage. 

Experience with MOOCs 

Figure 13 shows the distribution of the students in relation to the type of courses they have 

participated in. Figure 14 shows the distribution of the students according to the number of free 

on-line courses they have participated in over the last two years. Figure 15 shows the distribution 

of the students in relation to the number of MOOC courses they have participated in. Figure 16 

shows the distribution of the students according to the number of MOOC courses they have 

finished. Surprisingly, this was the first MOOC for a lot of the students. This last finding is kind of 

positive and negative at the same time. On the one hand, students would not compare to other 

courses. On the other hand, students would not be used to the procedures of on-line courses. 

 

 

 

Figure 13. Type of courses been involved. 

 

Figure 14. Free on-line courses taken. 



A MOOC on Approaches to Machine Translation 
Costa-jussà, Formiga, Torrillas, Petit and Fonollosa 

192 

 

 

Figure 15. Number of MOOC courses that students have participated. 

 

 

Figure 16.  Number of MOOC courses that students have finished 

In the 44% of cases, students did not finish the courses, and in 82% of cases, students have never 

paid to get a certificate. Statistics of not finishing the course does not favor us. However, the high 

number of students who did not pay for a certificate supported our decision for a 100% open and 

free course, which was advertised from the very beginning on the promotional video. Figure 17 

shows the distribution of students in relation to how they would have felt if they had not been able 

to finish the MOOC. Figure 18 shows the distribution of the students according to how the 

students are motivated to enroll in this kind of course. 

 

Figure 17. Feelings about not being able to finish the MOOCs. 



A MOOC on Approaches to Machine Translation 
Costa-jussà, Formiga, Torrillas, Petit and Fonollosa 

193 

 

 

Figure 18.  Motivation to enroll in this kind of courses 

Figure 19 shows the distribution of the students in relation to the aspects that convinced them to 

select a certain course. In almost 75% of cases the students stated that the courses they chose was 

related to their previous studies. Figure 20 shows the distribution of the students according to the 

MOOC platforms they have used, Coursera being the most prevalent in this case. 

 

Figure 19. Aspects to select a course. 

 

 

 



A MOOC on Approaches to Machine Translation 
Costa-jussà, Formiga, Torrillas, Petit and Fonollosa 

194 

 

Figure 20. Experience with MOOC platforms. 

 

In 77% of cases, the MOOC courses were in English, and in 1% of the cases, the MOOC courses 

were in Spanish. Although, large platforms such as Coursera are offering more and more courses 

in languages other than English, English continues to be the most widely used. In our case, given 

the nature of our subject, which was quite advanced, we considered it adequate to use English 

which is the language most used for this type of research. Little by little, new technologies such as 

Speech Recognition and, precisely, MT, will make automatic subtitles easier to implement for 

MOOCs17. Finally, 61% of the students stated that they would take further MOOCs in the near 

future.  

 

Participation, Feedback and Correlations 
In this section we report the participation of students during the MOOC, as well as the feedback 

received by means of a post-course survey. Finally, we analyze several characteristics of successful 

students and show the corresponding correlations with the entire group of students. 

Participation 

As expected, participation was quite high during the first week of the MOOC and started to 

decrease as the weeks progressed. This is a fairly standard pattern in MOOCs that we tried to 

prevent by using the motivational actions mentioned in Section 6. Table 3 shows the statistics of 

video-lecture views. Note that views decreased from the first week onwards; however, this 

stabilized over the final fortnight. The average views per week are reflected in Figure 21.  

                                                 

17 https://support.google.com/youtube/answer/3038280?hl=en 



A MOOC on Approaches to Machine Translation 
Costa-jussà, Formiga, Torrillas, Petit and Fonollosa 

195 

 

Table 3  

Statistics of Video Lectures Including Week Number, Duration in Minutes and Number of Views. 

Video-Lectures in Italics were Optional. 

W Topic Min Views 

0 Forthcoming MOOC on Approaches to Machine Translation 2:50 1,342 

 Introduction: Motivation, history and applications of MT 8:30 627 

1 Introduction: MT Approaches 11:40 535 

 Introduction: SMT Challenges 8:02 404 

 Rule-based MT 11:46 424 

 Alignment (I): Introduction 13:44 449 

 Alignment (II): IBM Model 1 and EM 15:34 333 

 Alignment (III): IBM Model 2 and HMM 12:49 265 

2 Alignment (IV): IBM Higher Models 17:26 127 

 Alignment (V): Applications, Quality and Problems of Word Alignment 11:08 108 

 Growing Heuristics, Symmetrization and Phrase-Models 12:33 190 

 Phrase-Extraction and Scoring 19:55 176 

 Reordering 4:55 139 

 Language Modeling (I): Introduction 17:34 118 

 Language Modeling (II): Modeling 11:36 107 

 Language Modeling (III): Modeling 12:00 88 

3 Language Modeling (IV): Applications to MT 9:04 86 

 Tuning parameters 16:02 80 

 Domain Adaptation 7:56 78 

 Decoding (I) 5:24 90 

 Decoding (II) 4:57 95 

 Evaluation (I): Intro 9:07 101 

 Evaluation (II): Automatic Metrics 12:53 81 

 Evaluation (III): Human Metrics 6:16 64 

 Evaluation (IV): Advanced Metrics 11:52 70 

4 Asiya: an Open Framework for MT Evaluation and Output Analysis 11:35 85 

 Asiya Online + Demo 6:35 77 

 Asiya tSearch + Demo 10:01 98 

 Toolkits 9:27 53 

 Asiya: Web Service 2:35 53 

 Hybrid MT: Orthography and Lexis 7:00 76 

 Hybrid MT: Morphology (I) 10:17 62 

 Hybrid MT: Morphology (II) 9:20 59 

 Hybrid MT: Syntax (I) 6:30 50 

5 Hybrid MT: Syntax (II) 7:23 51 

Hybrid MT: Syntax (III) 6:37 54 



A MOOC on Approaches to Machine Translation 
Costa-jussà, Formiga, Torrillas, Petit and Fonollosa 

196 

 

 Hybrid MT: Semantics (I) 5:30 49 

 Hybrid MT: Semantics (II) 10:50 47 

 Case study: Computer Aided Translation 24:23 45 

 Conclusions 1:59 44 
 

 

 

Figure 21.  Average video views per week. 

 

Table 4 shows the statistics of quizzes, assignments, and the final exam including participation, 

minimum, maximum, and mean scores. 

Table 4 

Statistics of Participation for Quizzes, Assignments and Final Exam Including Minimum, 

Maximum and Average Scores. 

Activity Participant

s 

Min 

Score 

Max Score Average 

Quiz 1 235 0 5 3.6 

Quiz 2 91 0 6 4.3 

Quiz 3 78 0 4 3.0 

Quiz 4 49 1.6 8 6.6 

Quiz 5 48 1 5 4.1 

APA 31 0.0 6.1 4.0 

EPA-LM 34 0.0 8.5 3.0 

EPA-Asiya 42 2 18 13.5 

Final 

Exam 

40 0 15 9.5 

 

The discussion folder received over the entire course included a total of 87 threads and 287 

replies. The average activity time per student was 16 hours 29 minutes, without counting the 211 

students that never began the course or entered the forums. 



A MOOC on Approaches to Machine Translation 
Costa-jussà, Formiga, Torrillas, Petit and Fonollosa 

197 

 

The course had a total of 34 successful candidates that received the certificate, meaning the 

course achieved an almost 5% completion rate counting all students registered and a more than 

6% completion rate when subtracting from the total number of students those that never began 

the course (211). This result confirms average MOOC completion rates of less than 7% 18. 

Feedback 

As follows, this subsection reviews the responses received in the post-course survey. The survey 

opened five days before the end of the course to find out students’ opinions of the quality of the 

course, the video-lectures and assignments. Table 5 reports the questions posed in this survey. A 

total of 42 students took this survey, which is coherent with students that were actively following 

the course at this stage. 

Figure 22 shows whether students found the course useful. As we can see from the responses, 

most students enjoyed the course (over 88% where on the positive and neutral side). However, we 

cannot ignore the fact that 12% of the students disagreed or strongly disagreed on finding the 

course useful. Looking at the profile of those students, we discovered that they were the students 

with higher backgrounds in research, programming, and MT. In the future, to reduce this 

percentage, we have to further clarify the level of MT that the course aims to achieve. Figure 23 

shows what areas of MT students were most interested in. The highest level of interest was 

divided between hybrid and statistical MT. However, there was a significant percentage of 

students interested in rule-based and evaluation. There was, therefore, no topic that could be 

taken out of the syllabus. 

Table 5 

Post-Course Survey Questions and Corresponding Figures 

 

Question Figure 

Did you find this course useful? 22 

In which type of MT were you most interested? 23 

I enjoyed being a part of this course. - 

What I really missed in the course is... - 

Approximately how many hours per week did you spend on the course? 24 

Approximately how many hours per week did you spend in the forum? 25 

Video-lectures were carefully prepared and well-deployed 26 

Assignments were carefully designed, explained and adequate for the level of the course 27 

 

 

                                                 
18 https://www.insidehighered.com/news/2013/05/10/new-study-low-mooc-completion-rates 

https://www.insidehighered.com/news/2013/05/10/new-study-low-mooc-completion-rates


A MOOC on Approaches to Machine Translation 
Costa-jussà, Formiga, Torrillas, Petit and Fonollosa 

198 

 

     

 

    Figure 22. Did you find this course useful?          Figure 23. More interested type of MT. 

 

More than 72% of the students enjoyed taking part in the course. Figures 24 and 25 show the time 

per week that the students spent on the course and in the forum, respectively. Here, we see that 

the majority of students spent between 2-4 hours per week doing the course. However, there was 

a very significant percentage of students (35%) that had to dedicate more than 4 hours to the 

course. This could be due to the different backgrounds of the course participants and the 

difficulties of adapting study hours to such a variety of profiles. On the other hand, time spent in 

the forum was quite low. 

Figures 26 and 27 show the students’ opinions of the quality of the video-lectures and 

assignments, respectively. Most students agreed the course offered good quality video-lectures 

and assignments. However, while the feedback from the students was positive, it should be noted 

that the 67% of the feedback was received from successful students.  

 

  

 

   Figure 24. Hours per week in the course.       Figure 25. Hours per week in the forum. 

 



A MOOC on Approaches to Machine Translation 
Costa-jussà, Formiga, Torrillas, Petit and Fonollosa 

199 

 

 

Figure 26. Video lectures were carefully prepared. 

 

 

Figure 27. Assignments were carefully designed. 

 

Correlations 

We have previously described the global statistics relating to the students who took the course. In 

this section we analyze the successful students in correlation with the total number of students in 

the most relevant demographic groups. 

For the successful students, the motivation for doing the course tended to lean towards 

educational reasons (70%) as compared with the total number of students that were more 

inclined to take the course for work-related reasons. 

Figure 28 shows the distribution of the students in relation to their year of birth. In green, we 

show the percentage of successful students per year of birth. There were more successful students 

in the younger profiles. 48% of the students were women and 52% were men. Slightly more 

female candidates successfully completed the course than their male counterparts. 



A MOOC on Approaches to Machine Translation 
Costa-jussà, Formiga, Torrillas, Petit and Fonollosa 

200 

 

Figure 29 shows the distribution of the students in relation to their country of birth. Figure 30 

shows the distribution of the students according to the country they currently live in. In both 

figures, green shows the percentage of successful candidates per country of birth/living. Mexico 

had the biggest percentage of successful students. 

 

Figure 28.  Year of Birth of successful students: in green, percentage of successful students. 

 

    

Figure 29. Country of Birth of successful 

students: In green, percentage of successful 

students. 

            Figure 30. Country of Living: In green, 

percentage of successful students. 

 

 

Figure 31 shows the distribution of the students in relation to the highest level of education 

achieved. In this case the distribution is very similar to the case of total number of students. 

Figure 32 shows the range of the students’ backgrounds. In this case, the profile of students 

changes with respect to the profiles of the total number of students. Most successful students had 



A MOOC on Approaches to Machine Translation 
Costa-jussà, Formiga, Torrillas, Petit and Fonollosa 

201 

 

a background in computer science rather than linguistics, which may support some of the 

discussions in the forum around the fact that people with linguistic profiles thought that this 

course was more oriented to computer scientists. The topic of the course may be weighted 

towards computer science, but, we intended to open it up to different profiles, which resulted in a 

54% success rate with students not holding a computer science background. 

 

Figure 31. Highest Level of Education of successful students: in green the percentage of successful 

students. 

 

Figure 32. Kind of background of successful students: in green percentage of successful students. 

The correlation between successful students and a background in programming and MT is almost 

100%. Only 18% of the students were lecturers and equal proportions, 35%, came from the 

education and industry fields. Seventy percent of participants confirmed that this was their first 

MOOC, and about 56% of students confirmed that they would take more MOOCs in the future. 

 



A MOOC on Approaches to Machine Translation 
Costa-jussà, Formiga, Torrillas, Petit and Fonollosa 

202 

 

 

Summary and Conclusions 
This paper reports the details of the first Massive Open On-line Course held at the Universitat 

Politècnica de Catalunya. The efforts involved in setting up this first course of its kind were made 

in many areas including the establishment of a new platform, international promotion, the 

recording of videos, and the definition of activities. Most of the design has been influenced by 

previous works in the MOOC area as cited along the paper. The description, procedures, and 

analysis of the MOOC reported in this paper can be especially useful to professors and/or 

researchers that want to prepare a MOOC on a low-resource basis and a less standardized 

platform. To this end, we show a summary table of what did work, what more or less worked in 

our experience, and the future work. 

Table 6.  

Summary of What Did Work and What Did Not Work in the MOOC Design. 

 Worked More/Less Worked Future Work 

Content Mix Theory and 

Practice 

State-of-the-art 

Research 

Content addressed to 

different backgrounds  -- 

Less mathematical | 

More empirical 

Provide perspective from 

Translation companies 

and professionals 

Activities 

and 

Forum 

Quizzes 

On-line autoevaluated 

coding 

Programming Activities 

Peer2Peer cooperation 

Better social network 

perspective 

Recording 

Set 

Format Slide + 

Professor 

 

Applications for writing 

in the slides vs wacom 

Student-given seminars 

Hangouts 

Platform User-friendly LTI interconnection Deal with other platforms 

Team Multidisciplinary   

Promotion Distribution lists 

Specialized Web Pages 

Personal WebPage 

Paid advertisements 

Geographical impact of 

marketing 

More wide promotion in 

companies environment 



A MOOC on Approaches to Machine Translation 
Costa-jussà, Formiga, Torrillas, Petit and Fonollosa 

203 

 

Pre-

Course 

Survey 

Design Not enough time to reach 

to the type of audience 

Make it mandatory for 

evaluation 

Post-

Course 

Survey 

Design Not enough participants Make it mandatory for 

evaluation 

Do a middle-course survey 

Motivation 

Strategy 

Weekly communication 

with students 

Generic emails to remind 

lectures, activities and 

evaluation 

Failure prediction 

Keeping personalized 

emails with progress track. 

Student-based prediction 

models 

 

The course, which is on the very specific topic of Machine Translation, was well received by the 

international community, and students from all over the world took part. Details on their 

participation were gathered and analyzed throughout the pre-course and demographic surveys. 

The completion rate falls within the standard for this kind of course (below 7%), but the post-

course surveys gave very positive feedback. In the future, we plan to do further editions of this 

course giving special focus on achieving a higher success rate of completion by selecting 

motivated students and making further actions to follow their learning. 

 

Acknowledgments 
This work was partially supported by the AGAUR under the MOOCs 2013 contract, the 

Generalitat de Catalunya under the 2014 SGR 1660, the Spanish Ministry of Economy and 

Competitiveness contract TEC2012-38939-C03-02, as well as, by the European Regional 

Development Fund (ERDF/FEDER) and the Seventh Framework Program of the European 

Commission through the International Outgoing Fellowship Marie Curie Action (IMTraP-2011-

29951). 

 

References 
Abeer, W., & Miri, B. (2014). Students’ preferences and views about learning in a MOOC. 

Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences, 152, 318–323. 

doi:10.1016/j.sbspro.2014.09.203 

Aydemir, M., Özkeskin, E. E., & Akkurt, A. A. (2015). A theoretical framework on open and 

distance learning. Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences, 174(2003), 1750–1757. 

doi:10.1016/j.sbspro.2015.01.833 



A MOOC on Approaches to Machine Translation 
Costa-jussà, Formiga, Torrillas, Petit and Fonollosa 

204 

 

Chang, L.-H., Shibata, K., Andersen, G. J., Sasaki, Y., & Watanabe, T. (2014). Age-related declines 

of stability in visual perceptual learning. Current Biology, 24(24), 2926–2929. 

Costa-jussà, M. R. (2013). Morphological , syntactical and semantic knowledge in statistical 

machine translation. In NAACL HLT 2013 Tutorial Abstracts (pp. 16–18). Atlanta, USA: 

ACL. 

Costa-jussà, M. R., & Farrús, M. (2014). Statistical machine translation enhancements through 

linguistic levels. ACM Computing Surveys, 46, 1–28. doi:10.1145/2518130 

Costa-jussà M., Formiga, L., Petit, J. & Fonollosa, J.A.R. (2014). Detailed description of the 

development of a MOOC in the topic of Statistical Machine Translation Proc. of the 

Mexican Conference on Artificial Intelligence, MICAI, Chiapas. 

Gil, R., Virgili-Gomá, J., García, R., & Mason, C. (2015). Emotions ontology for collaborative 

modelling and learning of emotional responses. Computers in Human Behavior, 0–7. 

doi:10.1016/j.chb.2014.11.100 

Giménez, J., & Màrquez, L. (2010). Asiya: An open toolkit for automatic machine translation 

(meta-) evaluation. The Prague Bulletin of Mathematical Linguistics, 94, 77–86. 

doi:10.2478/v10108-010-0022-6.PBML 

Godwin-jones, R. (2012). Challenging hegemonies in online learning. Language Learning & 

Technology, 16(2), 4–13. 

Harms, R. (2015). Self-regulated learning, team learning and project performance in 

entrepreneurship education: Learning in a lean startup environment. Technological 

Forecasting and Social Change. doi:10.1016/j.techfore.2015.02.007 

Koehn, P. (2010). Statistical Machine Translation. Cambridge University Press. 

Kolp, M., & Wautelet, Y. (2014). Computers in human behavior human organizational patterns 

applied to collaborative learning software systems. Computers in Human Behavior, 1–10. 

doi:10.1016/j.chb.2014.11.094 

Lopez, A., Post, M., Callison-burch, C., Weese, J., Ganitkevitch, J., Ahmidi, N., Buzek, O., Hanson, 

L., Jamil, B., Lee, M., Lin, Y., Pao, H., Rivera, F., Shahriyari, L., Sinha, D., Teichert, A., 

Wampler, S., Weinberger, M., Xu, D., Yang, L.  and Zhao, S. (2013). Learning to translate 

with products of novices : A suite of open-ended challenge problems for teaching MT, 

Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics 1, 165–178. 

Muñoz-Merino, P. J., Ruipérez-Valiente, J. a., Alario-Hoyos, C., Pérez-Sanagustín, M., & Delgado 

Kloos, C. (2015). Precise effectiveness strategy for analyzing the effectiveness of students 

with educational resources and activities in MOOCs. Computers in Human Behavior, 47, 

108–118. doi:10.1016/j.chb.2014.10.003 



A MOOC on Approaches to Machine Translation 
Costa-jussà, Formiga, Torrillas, Petit and Fonollosa 

205 

 

Petit, J., Giménez, O., & Roura, S. (2012). Jutge.org: An educational programming judge. In 

Proceedings of the 43rd ACM technical symposium on Computer Science Education - 

SIGCSE ’12 (p. 445). doi:10.1145/2157136.2157267 

Rendas, Pinto, P. R. and Gamboa (1999), A computer simulation designed for problem-based 

learning. Medical Education, 33: 47–54. doi: 10.1046/j.1365-2923.1999.00261.x 

Savin-Baden, M. (2000). Problem-based learning in higher education: Untold stories. UK: 

McGraw-Hill Education. 

Savin-Baden, M., & Wilkie, K. (2006). Problem-based learning online. UK: McGraw-Hill 

Education. 

Shen, C., & Kuo, C.-J. (2015). Learning in massive open online courses: Evidence from social 

media mining. Computers in Human Behavior. 1, 568–577 

doi:10.1016/j.chb.2015.02.066 

Staubitz, T., Renz, J., Willems, C., Jasper, J., & Meinel, C. (2014). Lightweight ad hoc assessment 

of practical programming skills at scale. In IEEE Global Engineering Education 

Conference, EDUCON (pp. 475–483). doi:10.1109/EDUCON.2014.6826135 

Yang, Z., Liu, Z., Liu, S., Min, L., & Meng, W. (2014). Adaptive multi-view selection for semi-

supervised emotion recognition of posts in online student community. Neurocomputing, 

144, 138–150. doi:10.1016/j.neucom.2014.05.055 

 

 

 
 

 

 


