








































Int. J. Complex Systems in Science
vol.2(1) (2012), pp. 33–36

tweetStimuli: Discovering Social Structure of Influence

Arturo Tejeda-Gómez1,†, Miquel Sànchez-Marrè1 and
Josep M. Pujol2

1 Software Dept., Knowledge Engineering and Machine Learning Group,
Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya-Barcelona Tech,

Jordi Girona 1-3, 08034 Barcelona

2 3scale Networks S.L.,
Nàpols 187, 8th floor, 08013 Barcelona

Abstract. Social influence has become a field of study about how people might
induce effect on others. Diffusion of information in large networks has been studied
to analyze how the information flows over the network producing cascades as a
main proxy of influence. For instance, microblogs such as Twitter has allowed to
identify and rank influencers based on message propagation (retweets). Different
factors of influence on Twitter have been identified such as: audience, interaction,
users’ actions and message content. In this paper, a new web application is
presented. It allows to study these factors in a temporal order based on the
perspective of local influence: given a target user, who influences the user as well
as who has been influenced by the user. This application is able to retrieve all
retweets and favorites to filter and rank them from different perspectives based
on the type of tweets and attributes such as mentions or hashtags, as well as
two kind of visualizations: clusters and networks which are the outcome of user
behavior by retweeting and marking as favorites.

Keywords: Social Structures, Influence, Clustering, Visualization

MSC 2000: 91D30

† Corresponding author: jatejeda@lsi.upc.edu

Received: November 20th, 2012

Published: December 17th, 2012



34 tweetStimuli: Discovering Social Influence Structures based on User Behavior

1. Introduction

Different factors of influence metrics on Twitter have been studied such as
Chat et al. [2] who analyze In-degree, Retweets and Mentions as well as
centrality metrics or PageRank which find influencers [2, 3]. However, most of
these studies found that In-degree or any other factor by itself does not reflect
the influence of a user but a mixing of all of them. Other kind of factors has
to be taken into account such as virality of users and items as well as users
susceptibility [4].

Global influence has been introduced in [6] based on the number of chan-
nels between two individuals in the social network, while more paths exists
between them, the greater is the capacity to influence. Although the global
influence has been also tried to be measured, Bashky et al. [1] claim to focus
on local influence given a target user A. It refers to who influenced A and who
has been influenced by A focusing on diffusion cascades of depth 1 which are
the most informative due to fact that the most non-trivial cascades have that
depth. Some companies have tried to provide measurements in order to rank
users influence on twitter such as: Klout1, PeerIndex2, Twitalyzer3, Twitter
grader4, taking into account different user factors such as: number of follow-
ers, number of people that user influences, number of retweets, content and so
on.

One problem with most of these approaches is that they only focus on
the action of spreading information to find influencers and others influential
effects are not considered. For instance, favorited tweets. They should be also
considered since being favorite means some user A propagates information to
B and B marks it as interesting. Besides, how social structure of influence is
formed based on users behavior over time (retweets and favorites).

2. tweetStimuli

In this way, a new application has been deployed, named tweetStimuli, aimed
to visualize, identify, rank and find the user’s local influence on Twitter. The
tool could also show how social structures of influence are formed and how
they evolve over time. tweetStimuli has five main components: tweets reader,
filtering module, ranking module, clustering and visualization module.

• Tweets reader : When user authenticates through twitter account, it
1http://klout.com
2http://www.peerindex.com/
3http://www.twitalyzer.com/
4http://tweet.grader.com/



A. Tejeda-Gómez et al 35

retrieves the last 100 retweets and favorites, since tweetstimuli acts as
a twitter client. A synchronization policy is applied to keep data up to
date.

• Filtering module: Once tweets are retrieved, it performs a filter pro-
cess based on content type (URLs, mentions) of the tweets (favorites or
retweets).

• Ranking module: After the filtering process, it counts the number of
tweets per user and the tweets are identified if user wants to request
them to verify the content.

• Clustering Module: Before showing the visualization, it retrieves infor-
mation about users followings to build the social network based on who
follows whom and the proper cluster. It has been used the edge repulsion
Linlog model [5] to provide the cluster visualization.

• User search: Any authenticated user is allowed to perform users search
to visualize their influence and who has influenced them.

• Ticket service: This asynchronous service was created to enable users to
analyse who of their followers (up to 1000) has been influenced by them.

The application can reveal valuable insights about user influence. For
example, Figure 1, shows who has influenced the ex-president of Mexico: Felipe
Calderon. Two clusters are observed: the cluster on the left side is mainly
formed by people who presents TV Programs and the cluster on the right side
are mainly formed by government departments and ministries. At this point,
it can be concluded that ex-president of Mexico is mainly influenced by these
two kind of twitter users.

Figure 1: Ex-President of Mexico: Felipe Calderon retweets



36 tweetStimuli: Discovering Social Influence Structures based on User Behavior

3. Conclusions and further work

Through tweetstimuli, a list of users could be studied to analyse who are their
social clusters of influence and how they evolve over time as well as users
interest based on message content which it is hard to achieve, since it has
to manage multiple requests to Twitter. Future efforts will be focused on
modelling local influence in a formal way, studying the clusters from different
type of tweets and users by applying graph measurements to identify possible
patterns of influence and users behavior as well as the user content to develop
a helpful profile recommendation on twitter as well as influence prediction
based on item adoption. Provide a local influence score that allows to identify
the user behavior to other users and message contents.

Acknowledgements

This work has been partially funded by AGAUR through 2009 SGR 1365.

References

[1] Bakshy, Eytan et al., ”Everyone’s an influencer: quantifying influence
on twitter”, fourth ACM international conference on Web search and data
mining, Page(s):65-74 (2011).

[2] Cha, Meeyoung et al., ”Measuring User Influence in Twitter: The
Million Follower Fallacy” International AAAI Conference on Weblogs and
Social Media (2010).

[3] Lee, Changhyun et al., ”Finding influentials based on the temporal
order of information adoption in twitter”, 19th international conference
on World wide web, Page(s):1137-1138 (2010).

[4] Hoang, Tuan-Anh and Lim, Ee-Peng, ”Virality and Susceptibility in
Information Diffusions”, International AAAI Conference on Weblogs and
Social Media, (2012).

[5] Noack, Andreas, ”Energy models for graph clustering”, Journal of
Graph Algorithms and Applications, 11, Page(s):453-480 (2007).

[6] Tang, Jin-Tao, ”Measuring the influence of social networks on informa-
tion diffusion on blogspheres”, 2009 International Conference on Machine
Learning and Cybernetics, 6, Page(s):3492-3498 (2009).


