





















































New instrumentation for human robot interaction assessment based on observational methods


AU
TH

O
R 

 C
O
PY

Journal of Ambient Intelligence and Smart Environments 7 (2015) 397–413 397
DOI 10.3233/AIS-150331
IOS Press

New instrumentation for human robot
interaction assessment based on observational
methods
Amara Andrés a, Diego E. Pardo a,b, Marta Díaz a and Cecilio Angulo a,*,**
a Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya – UPC BarcelonaTech, Spain
E-mails: amara.andres@upc.edu, marta.diaz@upc.edu, cecilio.angulo@upc.edu
b Advanced Robotics Department, Italian Institute of Technology, Italy
E-mail: diego.pardo@iit.it

Abstract. Research studies in Human Robot Interaction (HRI) with social robots usually gather observational data in order to
explore the dynamics of short and long-term interactions. The most common approach for the analysis of observational data is
the proposal of a small number of behavioural units which frequency and/or duration is captured. As a consequence, comparing
results between studies is difficult. The present manuscript proposes a procedure to assess the complete human-robot interactive
activity. Experiences with two different robots were analysed using the novel instrumentation, leading to further considerations.
Finally, general guidelines extracted from experimentation are proposed to assess the interaction quality between social robots
and users. Further studies can be benefited from the proposed instruments, which are expected to be validated in different HRI
contexts (e.g., school, hospitals, home) with different users (e.g., children, elderly, hospitalised people).

Keywords: Human robot interaction, social robot, interaction assessment, observational methods

1. Introduction

Nowadays robots are more often part of everyday
living helping people in diverse tasks, from housework
[20] to emergency situations and catastrophes [40], as
well as in many applied professional fields as Psy-
chology or Medicine as helpful tools for developing
some specific support jobs [17,46]. In particular, social
robots, defined as robotic platforms designed to inter-
act with people in a human-like manner [6,19] have

*Corresponding author. Automatic Control Department, Univer-
sitat Politècnica de Catalunya – UPC BarcelonaTech, Pau Gargallo
5, 08028 Barcelona, Spain. Tel.: +34 93 4016976. Fax: +34 93
4017045. E-mail: cecilio.angulo@upc.edu.

**This research was partly supported by the ACROSS project
(TSI-020301-2009-27), Avanza I+D sub program of Spanish In-
dustry, Tourism, and Trade Ministry (MITYC), the PATRICIA
project (TIN2012-38416-C03-01), Spanish Ministry of Economy
and Competitiveness, and European Found for Regional Develop-
ment (FEDER).

already been proposed as supplementary tools for re-
habilitation [37,47], autism therapy [11,29], treatment
adherence and compliance, as well as to provide enter-
tainment, enjoyment, and comfort [34,41,43].

In contrast with service or industrial robots, effi-
cacy and efficiency, i.e., the quality of social robots
commitment, is difficult to assess, quantify, or mea-
sure. Some well-known metrics are proposed in [35]
for quantifying task effectiveness (TE), defining this
concept as some measure of how well a task is actu-
ally performed. However, TE metrics do not provide
any insight on how to improve the human-robot inter-
face or how such interface might be modified to in-
crease the effectiveness. Moreover, social robots usu-
ally are not task oriented, hence other quantitative met-
rics, as neglect tolerance (NT) or robot attention de-
mand (RAD), are less relevant. In contrast, measurable
criteria about the ability of robots to facilitate engage-
ment with users and to be perceived as social actors
would be more suitable for assessing quality in social

1876-1364/15/$35.00 © 2015 – IOS Press and the authors. All rights reserved

mailto:amara.andres@upc.edu
mailto:marta.diaz@upc.edu
mailto:cecilio.angulo@upc.edu
mailto:diego.pardo@iit.it
mailto:cecilio.angulo@upc.edu


AU
TH

O
R 

 C
O
PY

398 A. Andrés et al. / New instrumentation for human robot interaction assessment based on observational methods

Human Robot Interaction (HRI) [39]. It is suggested in
[45] that, among other technical metrics (e.g., naviga-
tion, management, manipulation), psychological and
sociological metrics would be important for evaluating
performance. Unfortunately, it is also highlighted that
these metrics would differ from one field to another.

According to [4], there exist five main evaluation
methods for HRI: self assessment, behavioural obser-
vation, psychophysiology measures, interviews, and
task performance metrics. The most employed tech-
niques for exploring the extent to which social robots
elicit some desired behaviour are questionnaires and
observational methodology. Regarding observational
methodology, it is considered to be a useful tool to ob-
tain information about the interaction process since it
allows an objective non-intrusive exploration of inter-
active behaviour. Several studies videotape the interac-
tion situation, although there is not a common instru-
ment to define interactive behaviour. For instance, the
number of children interacting with a robot and the av-
erage time of interaction per week to evaluate children-
robot interactive behaviour were defined in [27]. In
[31], interaction between preschoolers and Aibo robots
was videotaped, encoding the number of instances of
treating the robot as an artefact or as a machine (pok-
ing, shaking), instances of affection (hugging, petting,
kissing, stroking), the attempts at reciprocal interac-
tion (offering a ball, talking to, motioning to) and the
instances of apprehension (because children were in-
teracting with unfamiliar objects). It is explained in
[18] how Pleo robot failed to reach long-term interest
of children, which interact with such a robot as a toy.
This study proposes some guidelines in order to build
up long-term interactions that could maintain interest
in the robotic pet for longer periods.

All the analysed studies showed a clear interest for
observational data, although each of them uses a differ-
ent scheme to code interactive behaviour, which was
directly related to their hypotheses. An exception is
found in [10], where an effort was made for obtain-
ing a simple two-category system to compare differ-
ences in eye gazing of autistic children playing with
both a robot and a toy (a truck). Their system consisted
on 14 criteria divided in two general categories, one
related to movement (eye gaze, eye contact, operate,
handling, touch, approach, move away, and attention)
while the other is related to verbal activities (vocalisa-
tion, speech, verbal stereotype, repetition, blank, and
other).

The above mentioned ad-hoc procedures are help-
ful for exploring some specific topics in social HRI

but they do not allow a comprehensive comparison and
generalisation across studies. The aim of the present
work is to propose a set of instruments to facilitate the
description and assessment of social HRI within a gen-
eral framework for the study of the interaction with so-
cial robots.

The rest of the paper is organised as follows: HRI
concepts are introduced in Section 2, as well as some
psychological constructs required to describe the pre-
sented approach. Proposed instruments are presented
in Section 3. Videotaped experiences are analysed in
Section 4 using the proposed set of instruments. These
videotaped sessions helped to complement and refine
the proposal, as exposed in Section 5. Finally, Sec-
tion 6 gives the concluding remarks and future work.

2. Methods for human robot interaction

Human Computer Interaction (HCI) methodologies
offer important insights to understand and evaluate
HRI, however social robots and computers are very
different agents, therefore new knowledge and per-
spectives are required to address the social dimension
of interaction between people and such artificial part-
ners [7]. Whereas the main research focus of HRI is
on the development of specific robotic systems and
applications, some methods for the evaluation of in-
teractive behaviour between people and robots have
been adopted and/or modified from fields as human-
computer interaction, user experience, and Psychology
[4,14,49,50]. These complementary approaches face
the central question of studying whether the manner in
which people interact with a robot is similar either to
interactions between humans and computers or to the
interaction among humans. In this section, these con-
tributions are reviewed since they are the theoretical
basis for the novel proposal for assessment.

Recently, an evaluation framework has been pro-
posed in [53] by considering some of the HRI and
HCI existing evaluation methods [7,13,33]. Specifi-
cally, [33] introduced a theoretical three level design
model for defining the impact that a product can make
on the costumer: visceral, behavioural, and reflective.
The visceral impact is based on appearance, the be-
havioural one is based on use effectiveness, and the re-
flective level involves the meaning of the product and
the after experience feelings. Proposal in [13] is fo-
cused on the awareness that people and robots have
of their social structures and activities within a group.
Finally, [7] focuses on the classification of based on



AU
TH

O
R 

 C
O
PY

A. Andrés et al. / New instrumentation for human robot interaction assessment based on observational methods 399

Table 1

Taxonomy for classification

Criteria Values

shared interaction 1 human – 1 robot, 1 human – 1 robot team,
1 human – multiple robots, 1 human team –
1 robot, multiple humans – 1 robot, human
team – robot team, human team – multiple
robots, multiple humans – robot team

interaction roles supervisor, operator, team-mate,
mechanic/programmer, bystander

physical proximity avoiding, passing, following, approaching,
touching, none

time-space synchronous, asynchronous, collocated,
non-collocated

autonomy level autonomy, intervention

its social characteristics. Based on the key elements
of these three approaches, the work in [53] evaluated
the holistic interaction situation using a set of per-
spectives: The first perspective (P1) was targeted to
the evaluation of the visceral factors during interac-
tion (the initial impression, acceptance, emotions); the
second perspective (P2) focuses on social mechanics
(communication, movements, facial expression, body
gestures); the third perspective (P3) is about social
structures, that is, the influence of human environment
and social structures on the interaction process (how
robot fits into human environment). Such study con-
cludes that these perspectives could contribute to as-
sess the whole interaction experience and they can be
used as a powerful and simple notation and vocabu-
lary for communicating findings. Furthermore, these
authors highlighted that it is necessary to develop more
precise methodologies and tools to facilitate the use of
these perspectives among evaluators.

The work in [52] proposes a general taxonomy for
HRI based on the prior research studies in [16,25,42].
The authors classify the interaction experience based
on the following criteria: level of shared interaction,
interaction roles [42], physical proximity [25], time-
space [16], and autonomy level/amount of interven-
tion. The possible values for each category are sum-
marised in Table 1.

This taxonomy could be useful as general frame-
work for classifying the interaction setting. However,
in social robotics studies, other criteria, recognising
the features for natural communication, must be in-
cluded for assessing and comparing interaction set-
tings.

Regarding psychological and social competences,
interaction characteristics, persuasiveness, trust, en-
gagement, and compliance should be assessed [45].

Specifically, persuasiveness is related with the robot
capacity for changing behaviours, feelings, or attitudes
(e.g., therapy). These authors propose that personality,
dialogue, emotion for capturing attention (acquisition
time) and holding interest (duration) should be consid-
ered for engagement, defined by [44] as the process
by which two (or more) participants establish, main-
tain, and end a connection during interactions. Further-
more, four events are codified in [38], involving speech
and gesture, that contribute to the perceived connection
between humans and maintain engagement: directed
gaze, mutual face gaze, conversational adjacency pairs,
and back channels. Exchange starts with a gaze or a
statement made in a particular tone of voice and when
the other person responds, from that point the inter-
action moves into engagement phase [22]. Therefore,
strictly speaking, there is a directed gaze or a comment
of one participant that elicits an answer from the other
one.

For conversational expressiveness assessment, a set
of items are listed in [24] based on classical feedback
gestures that are often observed in interaction research:
nodding head, shaking head, greeting, lifting shoul-
ders, suddenly moving away, suddenly approaching,
smile, laugh, raise eyebrows, frown. These behaviours
are simple enough to be evaluated by means of obser-
vational methods and should be considered in the con-
text of social HRI assessment.

Proxemics, i.e., the regulation of physical and psy-
chological distance between actors, is a key aspect of
interaction. Humans adjust the distance to their part-
ners in relation to action, that is, the adjustment is dy-
namic and changes over time [23]. This author de-
scribed four types of distances: intimate, personal, so-
cial, and public. These distances are influenced by ex-
ternal factors as gender, status, or culture, among oth-
ers [21]. Proxemics research in social robotics field has
found that there is some evidence of the effect of robot
gaze behaviour and likeability on humans distance reg-
ulation [32]. In a laboratory setting, people who dis-
like the robot compensate the increase of robot’s di-
rect gaze by maintaining a greater physical distance
from the robot and disclosed less personal information
(taken as a measure of psychological distance) to the
robot. This fact suggest that, in a laboratory context,
controlling the like/dislike of robots is important for
explaining some interaction patterns.

They also proposed a category scheme in order to
code and study children spontaneous behaviour. Cate-
gories related to interaction with objects and interper-
sonal relationships are of interest for the present work.



AU
TH

O
R 

 C
O
PY

400 A. Andrés et al. / New instrumentation for human robot interaction assessment based on observational methods

Table 2

Evaluation of context conditions where H, HT, MH, R, RT, and MR corresponds to human, human team, multiple humans, robot, robot team,
and multiple robots, respectively. References taken as a basis to propose categories are indicated beside and new subcategories are bolded

Trait Low level ←− · · · · · · · · · Intensity Level · · · · · · · · · −→ High level
Level of shared
interaction [4]

H-R H-RT H-MR HT-R MH-R HT-RT HT-MR MH-RT

Interaction roles [27] supervisor operator team mate mechanic/
programmer

bystanding companion coaching

Physical proximity [31] avoiding passing following approaching touching none

Time-space [18] Non-collocated-
asynchronous
(asynchronous
distributed interaction)

Non-collocated-
synchronous
(synchronous distributed
interaction)

Asynchronous-
collocated
(asynchronous
interaction)

Synchronous-collocated
(face-to-face interaction)

Autonomy/intervention
level [4]

Non-Autonomous (High intervention) Autonomous (Low intervention)

They will be considered and defined in the next section
for the study of interaction among robots and users.

Finally, attachment is also an important concept in
social HRI studies, especially with children. Attach-
ment Theory describes the dynamic of long-term re-
lationships between humans, mainly in families and
with friends [5]. Infants become attached to adults who
are sensitive and responsive in social interactions with
them and remain as consistent caregivers for some
months during the period from about six months to
two years of age. This relationship with principal care-
givers helps in future social and emotional develop-
ments. Infant behaviour associated with attachment is
the seeking of proximity to an attachment figure. Sev-
eral methods for assessing attachment in children and
adults have been proposed for classifying people in
one of the proposed styles: secure, anxious-avoidable
or anxious-ambivalent for children [1] and secure, pre-
occupied, dismissive or fearful [3]. Evaluation of at-
tachment should be carried out along time and could
be an indicator of quality in long-term relationships.

Considering the HRI and concepts of Psychology
presented above, a global assessment tool is proposed
in order to describe and analyse interactive situations
involving social robots and human users.

3. Global assessment tool:
Scenario-robot-behaviour

The assessment tool presented in this Section cov-
ers specific features of social HRI in order to evaluate
the quality of interaction and its experience. The eval-
uation system focuses on three key points: classifying
scenario features, classifying (current/potential) social

robots features, and assessing of behavioural units dur-
ing (and after) interaction.

3.1. Assessing the setting: How was the scenario?

Considering the theoretical basis presented in [4,18,
27,31], a table with the basic traits of the setting is pro-
posed. This taxonomy allows the evaluation of the ini-
tial conditions of the interaction context (see Table 2).
It also allows an easy assessment of the resemblance
of diverse interaction settings.

The first row indicates the level of shared interac-
tion, that is, the number of actors that interact in the sit-
uation, ranging from the minimum, 1 human – 1 robot,
to the maximum level, multiple humans – robot team.
The second row shows the interaction roles proposed
by [42]. However, there are two new roles for social
robots that are being introduced here, i.e., companion-
ship and coaching.

The companion role has been included since pet-like
robots expected to reproduce the social-emotional ben-
efits associated with the interaction and the emotional
bond between children and companion animals such
as entertainment, relief, support and enjoyment [11].
This social bond is supposed to provide therapy rele-
vant effects to hospitalised children in the way real pets
do. However, animal-assisted activities, that have been
proven to be effective for paediatric purposes [37],
are not possible in hospital environment. The relation-
ship between master and pet is based on hierarchy and
attachment. The social situation defined by the mas-
ter/pet interdependence could naturally produce en-
gaging activities (i.e., teaching new skills, learning to
understand, care giving, playing together) and expres-
sions of affection and concern. In this role, the robot
must be able to deploy (or acquire) social skills for ef-



AU
TH

O
R 

 C
O
PY

A. Andrés et al. / New instrumentation for human robot interaction assessment based on observational methods 401

fective communication (i.e., orientation, attention, re-
sponsiveness), for hierarchy submission (i.e., recogni-
tion, obedience), and to express and generate attach-
ment (i.e., affective expressiveness).

The coaching role is based on the social bond (affec-
tive involvement), tasks, and goals. Obtaining the col-
laboration of the pupil is an essential issue and requires
an agreement about the relevance and usefulness of
tasks and goals. The coach must provide ongoing su-
pervision, encouragement, feedback, counselling, and
support for goal fulfilment. Furthermore, in order to
enhance agreement and compliance to treatment, it is
necessary to create an affective bond. For instance, re-
habilitation is usually hard and motivation must come
from an affective bond of trust and intimacy (alliance)
between pupil and coach. The coach must be respon-
sive to pupil needs and emotions in an empathic way
and find an acceptable balance between goals, commit-
ment, and concern for the pupil’s welfare. Engaging
communication and contingent feedback are required
for task monitoring. For empathic rapport, affective
communication and awareness of child’s psychologi-
cal and physical state are needed [28].

The third row in Table 2 shows five models of phys-
ical proximity between humans and robots defined by
interpersonal distances in case that their interactions
are collocated [25]. The “none” category was defined
by [52] to consider not collocated interactions. They
are ordered in increasing physical proximity. It has
been suggested that, when multiple types of physi-
cal interaction are applicable, the one that involves
the most/highest physical proximity should be chosen.
The fourth row shows the time-space category. It is
based on whether humans and robots are using sys-
tems at the same time (synchronous) or different times
(asynchronous) and while in the same place (collo-
cated) or in different places (non-collocated) [16]. Fi-
nally, the fifth row categorises the autonomy level, as a
continuous value, ranging from tele-operation to fully
autonomous. Quantified by means of the percentage
of time that the robot accomplish a task on his own
or, complementary, the percentage of time that inter-
vention is required. An example of the lowest degree
of robotic autonomy is one which only can be tele-
operated.

3.2. Assessing social robot features: How social is
the robot?

Figure 1 shows a description grid generated accord-
ing to a taxonomy for assessing robots social features

for communication, that is, a specific list of charac-
teristics that social robots should have at the moment
of the use or should be implemented in future devel-
opment. This data sheet allows to compare social fea-
tures of several robots, it also allows a quick assess-
ment of a new platform in terms of its social require-
ments, and could help in the planning of future re-
search guidelines and development. Classification is
divided in three major groups of characteristics: natu-
ral cues, non-natural cues, and computer mediated de-
vices. Natural cues are those human alike traits that
allow a fluent interaction and facilitate mutual aware-
ness, such as the verbal abilities and non-verbal traits.
The non-natural cues refer to those unusual traits in hu-
man interaction that could be present in a HRI context
such as light, colours, sound, or even a virtual agent.
Finally, the third category gathers some computed me-
diated devices that could be a tool to carry out some
specific aspects of interaction, such as writing or read-
ing (screen, keyboard, and mouse).

As shown in Fig. 1, natural cues are divided in two
categories, verbal and non-verbal. The first one deals
with communicative abilities. For the several ways of
reaching this social function, three major possibili-
ties are proposed: conversational, bidirectional no con-
versational, and unidirectional. Conversational mode
involves a joint dialogue where coherent and logical
rules between one sentence and another take place,
as humans usually do. The bidirectional no conversa-
tional pattern takes place when robot is programmed
to recognise and reproduce some limited phrases to ac-
complish a specific task that is verbally mediated, such
as guide costumers in a supermarket. Bi-directionality
is pretended by guiding conversation throughout a
topic and when the dialogue seems highly natural,
although robot was designed to maintain this spe-
cific pseudo-conversation. Finally, unidirectional ver-
bal communication has also been considered since
some platforms are able to process some incoming
verbalisations and emit some others, but they are not
aligned and a dialogue is not really happening. Vocal-
isation has been included under the verbal category in
order to describe sounds that do not constitute a con-
versation (e.g., growling).

No conversational communicational aspects are in-
cluded in the non-verbal category, such aspects are
usually present in interaction contexts allowing to
transmit a message with emotional intensity (e.g., face,
gaze, gesture, body stance, movement). Among non-
natural cues are light, colours, sound, and even virtual
agents that sometimes the robot produce. Finally, com-



AU
TH

O
R 

 C
O
PY

402 A. Andrés et al. / New instrumentation for human robot interaction assessment based on observational methods

Fig. 1. The description grid for the features of social robots.

puter mediated HCI devices also deserve special atten-
tion since in some cases they will guide the whole in-
teraction process, hence its evaluation becomes funda-
mental among the interaction assessment process.

As an instance of the applicability of this assessment
tool for different platforms. Figure 2 shows the pro-
posed grid describing the resources for interactive be-
haviour of the humanoid robot REEM, in addition to
further descriptions to be provided in Section 4.

3.3. Assessing interactive behaviour: What happens
during the HRI session?

During HRI sessions involving social robots, re-
searchers quantify some isolated relational aspects
such as the average time that people interact with the
robot in a social situation or the number of instances
that people behaves towards it as a machine or provide
it affection [27,31]. However, a major drawback when
studying HRI is the lack of an instrument or a proce-

dure for gathering all the behavioural units that take
place during these sessions involving social robots.
Studies demonstrate the purpose of describing the in-
teractive behaviour exploring the interaction process
between humans and social robots. When an observa-
tional method is used to explore a behavioural con-
jecture, specific instruments for obtaining information
about the target behaviour must be built, specially be-
cause these are context dependent and may vary across
situations [2]. In other words, the same social phe-
nomenon could be manifested by means of different
behavioural units due to a context or cultural change.
Consequently, an observational instrument for coding
behaviour must be based in both theoretical an empir-
ical situations in order to guarantee the validity of the
tool. Table 3 summarises the proposal for analysing
situations where social robots are employed as a key
element during the interaction.

A specific research methodology is proposed in the
first column in order to obtain results of the interac-



AU
TH

O
R 

 C
O
PY

A. Andrés et al. / New instrumentation for human robot interaction assessment based on observational methods 403

Fig. 2. Humanoid REEM social features description.

tion situation. Hence, observation would be employed
to gather data during the interaction session and tests,
interviews, and focus groups should be employed to
obtain information about thoughts after the interaction
as well as to capture long term indicators (e.g., persua-
siveness, attachment).

Considering the levels of design proposed in [33],
two points of time have been selected in order to assess
and analyse interactive behaviour: during and after in-
teraction experience. The fundamental basis of inter-
active behaviour is that a first contact happens among
the two actors, from that point it develops along the
session, and some feelings and thoughts remain after
it. Thus, during interaction, systematic observation is
the most appropriate methodology to explore the re-

sponse of the user when interacting with a social plat-
form whereas the after-interaction experience requires
indirect techniques such as focus groups, personal in-
terviews, and questionnaires. In the following lines,
some categories are proposed to provide a scheme to
analyse some components of the interaction between a
social robot and a user.

During the interaction experience some psychologi-
cal constructs can be studied. Specially, the user’s ini-
tial emotions are the intuitive reaction to the presence
of the social robot. Roughly, emotions can be charac-
terised by positive or negative, however a theory is pro-
posed in [15] discriminating a set of basic emotions:
joy, sadness, surprise, disgust, anger, fear, and a neu-
tral state. This is an interesting set of features for eval-



AU
TH

O
R 

 C
O
PY

404 A. Andrés et al. / New instrumentation for human robot interaction assessment based on observational methods

Table 3

Interactive behaviour codification system

Method proposed Interaction moment General categories Specific categories

Observational Methodology During Emotions Joy, sadness, surprise, fear, anger, disgust, neutral

Proxemics Intimate, personal and social, public

Gaze Directed gaze, mutual face gaze, none

Communication Greeting, talking, silence

Facial expression Smile, laugh, raise eyebrows, frown, inexpressive

Body gestures Lifting shoulders, nodding head, shaking head, quiet

Interaction with the robot Exploration of robot characteristics, simple
manipulation, conceptual (thematic) use,
non-conceptual (thematic) use, no interaction

Interpersonal relationships Closeness/physical contact,
attention/observation/maintained gaze, directed
comments/verbal expressions, activity shared, mixed
(combination of two or more of the above
subcategories), no interpersonal relationship

Focus groups/interviews/
questionnaires

After Persuasiveness

Attachment

uating the impact of the robot on the user and consider-
ing changes along the session. As pointed out by [15],
the primary function of emotions is to deal with inter-
personal encounters and, therefore, they are of inter-
est for the assessment of interpersonal exchange in an
interactive situation. Moreover, changes in proxemic
behaviour are a fundamental indicator of perceiving
the robot as a social actor [51]. Proxemic behaviour
can complement or even help the researcher to inter-
pret user emotional response during the session. So-
cial robots should transmit trust and the user should
feel safe and comfortable interacting with the robot.
Four social spaces are defined in [23]: intimate, the
closest “bubble” of space surrounding a person. Enter-
ing this space is acceptable only for the closest friends
and intimates (15–45 cm); personal and social spaces,
the spaces in which people feel comfortable conduct-
ing routine social interactions with acquaintances as
well as strangers (46–120 cm/121–350 cm), and public
space, the area of space beyond which people will per-
ceive interactions as impersonal and relatively anony-
mous (>350 cm). Changes in emotions and proxemics
should be coded along the session, although they could
be a powerful source of information at the beginning
of the session to assess user initial reaction.

Besides emotions and proxemic behaviour, analy-
sis of exchange that takes place between a user and a
social robot becomes fundamental for researchers and
professionals that work with this kind of robots. It is
supposed that engagement starts when there is a feed-
back from the person in response to certain robot be-
haviour such as directed gaze, mutual facial gaze, sud-

denly approaching, suddenly moving away, or greet-
ing. Once the robot has attracted the attention of the
user, a behavioural exchange will start defined by com-
munication, changes in social distance, body gestures
and/or changes in gaze. Some of these behaviours in-
dicate the maintenance of engagement (e.g., directed
gaze, communication) and some others indicate loss
of interest (e.g., maintained or repeated loss of vi-
sual contact). Whether physical interaction with the
robot is allowed, four items can be analysed: the ex-
ploration of robot characteristics, simple manipula-
tion, non-conceptual (thematic) use, and conceptual
(thematic) use. The exploration of robots character-
istics concerns all the behaviours that users execute
in order to discover robots affordances. Simple ma-
nipulation covers non-interactive (non-intentional) be-
haviours (e.g., transportation). The conceptual use in-
cludes user behaviours that correspond with the ex-
pected for its role. Non-conceptual (thematic) use cor-
respond to any other behaviour that do not match with
the user role. Examples for each category should be
proposed using data gathered from observational stud-
ies; some of them are shown for the case of Ugobe’s
Pleo robotic dinosaur. Whether interaction with other
people is allowed, the kind of relationship that people
establish among them can be analysed coding the gen-
eral pattern that takes place: closeness and/or physi-
cal contact, attention/observation/maintained gaze, di-
rected comments or verbal expressions, shared activ-
ity, or mixed, that is, a combination of some of them.

Interaction can be considered finished when the
user breaks engagement by means of a long period



AU
TH

O
R 

 C
O
PY

A. Andrés et al. / New instrumentation for human robot interaction assessment based on observational methods 405

of inactivity, saying good bye or getting into a pub-
lic space, among others. These indicators become fun-
damental whether the aim of a study is exploring the
loss or lack of interest in the social interaction, es-
pecially in HRI long-term studies. However, a com-
plete assessment of human robot relation should in-
clude an after-interaction phase: when users and robots
have been separated, after interaction thoughts and
long-term indicators should be assessed. At this mo-
ment, interviews, focus groups, and questionnaires are
more appropriate for exploring user experience with
the robot. Further explorations of after-interaction ex-
perience can explore in depth the attachment bond
emergence and other goals of the platform such as at-
titudes, behaviours, or feelings modification. In these
cases, more than one interaction session or assessment
point is necessary.

4. Two illustrative case studies

The proposed assessing approach has been applied
in two different contexts in order to evaluate the inter-
action between robots and end users. Some analyses
have been carried out to provide quantitative indicators
of each interactive activity.

4.1. Lab experience with Pleo

The aim of this study was exploring the dynamics
of social bond emergence between children and social
robots (for further details see [12]). A field study with
49 sixth grade scholars (aged 11–12 years) and 4 dif-
ferent robots (Sony’s Aibo, Ugobe’s Pleo, Aldebaran’s
Nao, and Meccano’s Spykee) was carried out at an ele-
mentary school. At the school, researchers focused on
exploring children attribution of robots competences
and skills based on appearance. Two months after the
school experience, a series of play sessions with Pleo
were conducted in the lab to explore the interdepen-
dence dynamics and interactive behaviour in a second
meeting. Pleo is a commercial entertainment robot de-
veloped by Ugobe equipped with different tactile sen-
sors under its skin, touch sensors in the feet, speak-
ers, and microphones. Among its features, it presents a
set of creature-like personalities and develops internal
drives like hunger or sleep, and several mood modes:
happy, extremely scared, curious. The main objective
was to observe children behaviour when they met Pleo
in a second meeting and explore how the previous con-
tact with the robot in the school affects on subsequent
interaction. The play session took place in an observa-

tion laboratory and the instruction given by the con-
ductor was: “You can stay here with Pleo as long as
you want. When you want to give up, just tell me”.

4.1.1. Assessing the setting: How was the scenario?
The laboratory experience can now be described ac-

cording to the proposed taxonomy in Table 2: The con-
text of this study is defined by H-R level of inter-
action, this HRI follows a companion role which in-
volves a high level of physical proximity (approaching,
touching) in a synchronous-collocated situation with
a highly autonomous social robot (Pleo). Highlighting
the main traits of the present context, using Table 2,
allows to assess the interaction setting with a simple
visual inspection.

4.1.2. Describing social robot features: How social is
the robot?

As shown in Fig. 3, Pleo could be defined as a pet-
baby alike robot. Regarding natural cues, non-verbal
features are developed rather than verbal ones, specif-
ically, the use of certain parts of the body such as
mouth, eyes, or head. User identification or face track-
ing would be an improvement for Pleo social skills.

4.1.3. Assessing interactive behaviour: What happens
along the HRI session?

The proposed instrument has been employed to code
the interactive behaviour that took place in the lab con-
sidering the time of the session while children were in-
teracting alone with the robot. It is important to point
out that children have met Pleo in a previous meeting
at the school, so they have previous knowledge about
the robot. A continuous sampling was chosen in or-
der to capture the information during the interaction
experience and a focus group was carried to explore
the after-interaction experience. Focus was put on the
analysis of the interaction experience. Three 11-year-
old children, that had met Pleo at the school, agreed to
participate in the second meeting in the lab. The ses-
sions have different duration since participants could
choose when to stop interacting with Pleo. Total dura-
tions were 21.13, 5.57, and 8.52 minutes for the three
participants, respectively. Table 4 shows the results on
the development of the interaction session, specifically,
percentages of time that participants spent in each cat-
egory proposed in this manuscript.

4.2. Workshop in robotics: School experience with
Nao

A workshop in robotics was carried out in a public
school in order to explore the interaction between non-
expert users and social robots. Furthermore, students



AU
TH

O
R 

 C
O
PY

406 A. Andrés et al. / New instrumentation for human robot interaction assessment based on observational methods

Fig. 3. Pleo social features description.

Table 4

Percentage (observation duration) of time for each category and participant considering activity during interaction for the “Lab experience with
Pleo”

General categories Specific categories Participant 1 Participant 2 Participant 3

Emotions Joy 00.52 100 22.01

Neutral 99.48 – 77.98

Proxemics Intimate 99.48 100 99.41

Personal and social 00.52 – 00.59

Gaze Directed gaze 95.67 93.74 88.38

None 04.33 06.26 11.62

Facial expression Smile – 100 23.90

Laugh – – 24.71

Inexpressive 100 – 51.39

Body gestures Quiet 100 100 100

Interaction with the robot Exploration of robot features 03.48 28.60 00.78

Conceptual (thematic) use 96.00 71.39 89.40

No interaction 00.52 – 09.82



AU
TH

O
R 

 C
O
PY

A. Andrés et al. / New instrumentation for human robot interaction assessment based on observational methods 407

Fig. 4. Nao’s system architecture: computer, server, and robot inter-
connection.

from 9 to 11 years old agreed to participate in some
specific activities with the Nao robot that were video-
taped. Signed consent form was previously requested
from their parents. Nao is a full body humanoid robot
of middle size (58 cm height). Its body has 25 joints
and weights 4.3 kg. It also counts with a powerful mul-
timedia system, which includes 2 speakers, 2 cameras
and a microphone. Incorporating these features, text-
to-speech synthesis, sound localisation, and facial and
shape recognition are feasible.

One of the activities was testing the implementation
of a classic game into Nao platform, specifically, the
20 questions game (20Q) [36]. In this game, the player
thinks of something and the 20Q system asks a series
of questions for guessing what the player is thinking.
Originally, players can answer these questions with:
Yes, No, Unknown, Irrelevant, Sometimes, Probably or
Doubtful. Currently, this game has been implemented
in an automatic system called 20Q (http://20q.net/)
which is available as a hand-held console and as an In-
ternet interactive system, both using an artificial intel-
ligence (AI) software. As it is shown in Fig. 4, the sys-
tem works using a client-server architecture, where a
computer connects with both, the server where the AI
software resides and the robot, that acts as user inter-
face. It is worth to mention that the connection with the
robots is wireless allowing the user to interact within a
non-noise environment. The computer manages the in-
formation flux during the game, transmitting questions
and answers between the server and the user. In both
cases the robot works as the interface with the user. It
uses text-to-speech in order to explain (saying aloud)
the question to the user, while speech recognition has
been used to convert the answers (hearing the voice) to
the system. The Humanoid 20Q implements the same
idea of interaction but using the robot as interface to
communicate the user with the AI software.

4.2.1. Scenario
Following the taxonomy summarised in Fig. 1, this

setting can be described as follows: Several users were

in the interactive situation and one Nao robot was with
them. The interaction role was companion and phys-
ical proximity was not allowed. There was a face-to-
face interaction and no intervention was required once
the game had started.

4.2.2. Robot social features
As it is shown in Fig. 5, Nao social features for

20Q game consisted of verbal interaction by means
of speech recognition and voice synthesis. Regarding
non-verbal features, the robot can detect, recognise,
and follow faces and carry out some movements (e.g.,
to dance, to sit down, to walk). Nao has some non-
natural cues such as light, colours and sound.

4.2.3. The HRI session
Ten children were seated in a semicircle around the

robot to carry out the 20Q game and a volunteer was
chosen to develop the question-answer activity. The
game always started with the same question, requir-
ing the user to think about something (animal, veg-
etable or a thing). The system then initialises the ques-
tion/answer iteration, registering the user responses
and processing the possible solution to the game. After
20 questions, the system makes its guess about the user
initial thought. The facilitator stood near the volunteer
and the robot in order to help in case it would be neces-
sary. Thus, while the volunteer do the answer/question
activity, the rest of the children could see the game
playing and try to guess (mentally) the thing, the ani-
mal or the vegetable the volunteer was thinking about.
In these conditions only a few categories could be reg-
istered and, therefore, emotions, facial expression, and
gaze behaviour were registered following a time sam-
pling with 30 second intervals. The total duration of
the session was approximately 10 minutes.

During the first two minutes, the 20Q game played
by Nao seems to attract the gaze behaviour of the 60%
to 100% of participants. However, from the second
minute onward, only 10% to 40% of participants main-
tained their gaze directed to the robot. Approximately
at about the 9th minute, i.e., near the end of the game,
Nao recovered the gaze of 70% of participants. This
behaviour coincided with the attempt of the robot to
guess the user’s choice. When the play is coming to
its end, 50% of participants were looking at the plat-
form. Regarding facial expression, during the vast ma-
jority of the intervals participants showed an inexpres-
sive facial reaction. Between 10–20% of participants
smiled during the whole session. This percentage in-
creased up to 50 at one of the sampling points. More-
over, 100% of participants showed an expectation face

http://20q.net/


AU
TH

O
R 

 C
O
PY

408 A. Andrés et al. / New instrumentation for human robot interaction assessment based on observational methods

Fig. 5. Nao social features description.

when the robot try to guess the object. Finally, regard-
ing emotions, the whole group stays in a neutral or joy
state during the session. Only one participant mani-
fested some disgust when the session was close to the
end.

4.3. Comparison of the two case studies

After analysing the Pleo and Nao cases with the pro-
posed instrument, results can be compared in terms of
scenario, social robot features, and the interactive be-
haviour.

4.3.1. Scenario
In Tables 5 and 6 the traits of the context are being

highlighted. It can be seen that both contexts are sim-
ilar in terms of interaction role, time-space trait, and

autonomy level. They differ at the level of interaction
and physical proximity.

4.3.2. Robot social features
The information in Figs 3 and 5 shows that Nao has

higher verbal skills than Pleo (both current and poten-
tial), since allows to develop bidirectional non conver-
sational interaction. Therefore, Nao shows an advan-
tage in terms of verbal skills. Regarding non-verbal
cues, Nao has more advantages for face recognition.
Both robots are comparable in terms of movement for
the considered experiments. Neither of them is com-
puted mediated.

4.3.3. The HRI session
As a result of the above mentioned scenario and so-

cial features analysis, the comparable features of the



AU
TH

O
R 

 C
O
PY

A. Andrés et al. / New instrumentation for human robot interaction assessment based on observational methods 409

Table 5

Setting assessment using the grid in Table 2 for Pleo

Trait Low level ←− · · · · · · · · · Intensity Level · · · · · · · · · −→ High level
Level of shared
interaction [4]

H-R H-RT H-MR HT-R MH-R HT-RT HT-MR MH-RT

Interaction roles [27] supervisor operator team mate mechanic/
programmer

bystanding companion coaching

Physical proximity [31] avoiding passing following approaching touching none

Time-space [18] Non-collocated-
asynchronous
(asynchronous
distributed interaction)

Non-collocated-
synchronous
(synchronous distributed
interaction)

Asynchronous-
collocated
(asynchronous
interaction)

Synchronous-collocated
(face-to-face
interaction)

Autonomy/intervention
level [4]

Non-Autonomous (High intervention) Autonomous (Low intervention)

Table 6

Setting assessment using the grid in Table 2 for Nao

Trait Low level ←− · · · · · · · · · Intensity Level · · · · · · · · · −→ High level
Level of shared
interaction [4]

H-R H-RT H-MR HT-R MH-R HT-RT HT-MR MH-RT

Interaction roles [27] supervisor operator team mate mechanic/
programmer

bystanding companion coaching

Physical proximity [31] avoiding passing following approaching touching none

Time-space [18] Non-collocated-
asynchronous
(asynchronous
distributed interaction)

Non-collocated-
synchronous
(synchronous distributed
interaction)

Asynchronous-
collocated
(asynchronous
interaction)

Synchronous-collocated
(face-to-face interaction)

Autonomy/intervention
level [4]

Non-Autonomous (High intervention) Autonomous (Low intervention)

interactive behaviour are reduced to the following cat-
egories: emotions, gaze, and facial expression. Both
robots elicit joy and neutral emotions, with a higher
percentage of the latter. Regarding gaze behaviour,
Pleo achieves a higher percentage of directed gaze, al-
though this value is maybe influenced by the physical
proximity limitation in the Nao school situation. Fi-
nally, both robots get smiles and laughs or inexpres-
sive facial expressions, although Pleo reach a slightly
higher percentage of the former. Overall, it seems that
both platforms can reach positive emotions and facial
expressions but Pleo gets more gaze attention from
participants.

5. Discussion

The aim of this manuscript is to propose a scheme
for describing the social features of robots. It also dis-
cusses on the interaction settings and the observational
instrumentation to code behaviours during HRI situ-

ations. With the definition of an observational instru-
ment, several analyses can be carried out in order to
explore possible behaviour patterns during interaction.
For instance, temporal patterns [30] can be analysed
and hidden structures can be described for predict-
ing the loss of interest of users. The use of a com-
mon instrument for the study of HRI (specifically, us-
ing social robots) will facilitate the dissemination of
results and comparison between studies. However, the
manuscript presents a method that is the first step to-
wards a definition of a global tool for the interaction
assessment.

Regarding theoretical implications, different mo-
ments along interaction that takes place between hu-
mans and social robots have been described. More-
over, according with the proposed moments of the
HRI situations (during and post-interaction) differ-
ent methodologies have been recommended (obser-
vational methodology, questionnaires, focus groups,
or interviews). Assessment of some of the proposed
traits requires more than one observation session since



AU
TH

O
R 

 C
O
PY

410 A. Andrés et al. / New instrumentation for human robot interaction assessment based on observational methods

they are related to long-term relationships (e.g., attach-
ment). These specific types of relations between hu-
mans and social robots could be monitored by means
of the proposed observational scheme. Thus, longitu-
dinal studies become particularly relevant for explor-
ing long-term constructs such as attachment or persua-
siveness. Further theoretical development must spec-
ify criteria in interaction achievement, that is, both
desired and undesired interaction patterns in different
scenarios. This definition, together with instruments
for defining behaviour, will help in evaluating quality
of social robots commitment. Further research is nec-
essary to refine the categories proposed above in or-
der to eliminate, modify or increase the number of de-
scribed behavioural units. The application of these in-
struments in other contexts and with other platforms
will help to improve and test the usefulness of these
tools since it is the first step towards a definition of a
complete assessment system.

Regarding the examples presented in this work,
some considerations should be done. Considering the
study performed with Nao robot, results suggest that
the 20Q game implemented in this platform gets a
medium level of engagement in the current state of
development. When analysing results, it is important
to highlight that the time between the volunteer an-
swering a given question and the robot asking the
next ranged from 6 to 30 seconds. Prior research sug-
gests that matching of speech rhythms is related to
perceived quality of interaction and interpersonal at-
tunement. Partners tend to match pause duration both
within and between turns in adult conversation [26]
and pauses during speech that exceed 1 second are per-
ceived as disruptive [8]. Interpersonal timing is a cru-
cial aspect of human communication and, therefore,
the present results could be related with the platform
response time. Further development should address the
improvement of platform response time in order to reg-
ulate conversational turn taking, timing, and contin-
gency. Once the platform can perform in a more nat-
ural conversational timing, HRI should be analysed
again in order to explore the possible changes in users
engagement. Therefore, technological changes in so-
cial platforms entail constant evaluation in order to test
if they influence the interactive behaviour.

Regarding the results obtained with the study of the
interaction with the Pleo robot at the lab, some as-
pects must be discussed. The most expressed emo-
tional states are joy or neutral and all the participants
kept the robot in the lap during approximately all ses-
sion. The participants look at Pleo during the vast ma-

jority of the session. However, it should be point out
that they stop looking at the platform as the session
arrives to its end, that is, they used to look at some-
where else when the end was close. This fact is inter-
esting since it is an indicator of fatigue or boredom.
Although inexpressive faces were predominant, there
were parts of the session were participants showed
smiles and even laughs. Body gestures were mainly in-
existent since participants took the robot in their lap
and stay quiet and seated. Finally, physical contact was
allowed and interaction with the platform was based
on exploration of robot characteristics and conceptual
use. Exploration of robot characteristics included be-
haviours as tail grabbing, lift and shaking in order to
test if they could awake the robot or pass the hand in
front of the face of the robot to test if it can watch.
Conceptual (thematic) use included cuddling, feeding,
or giving affection. The low percentages of time (ap-
proximately between .5% and 10%) that were no in-
teractive behaviours seems to be a good indicator of
robot’s competence to maintain children engaged.

6. Conclusions

A specific procedure has been introduced to de-
scribe and assess HRI when dealing with social robots.
The proposed instruments help to describe the setting
characteristics, the robot features, and allow to study
interactive behaviour. This proposal provides a com-
mon vocabulary for communicating findings and in-
struments to study social interaction between users and
social robots. Based on the patterns studied in [53], the
tools proposed in the present manuscript contribute to
assess the whole interaction experience and serve as a
powerful and simple notation and vocabulary for com-
municating findings. Furthermore, monitoring could
help to properly describe long-term relationships and
the detailed analysis of changes in frequencies (or du-
ration) along time, which will help to predict or avoid
lack of interest and detachment.

Some considerations should be made about the cate-
gories proposed to assess the interactive behaviour be-
tween end users and social robots. Firstly, regarding
emotions, researchers could expect that any of the pro-
posed basic emotions could happen at the beginning
of the interaction and emotional state could change
during the session. However, social robots should not
elicit negative emotions as a final result of the session.
Furthermore, time elapsed until a positive or, at least,
a neutral emotion should be taken into account. Con-



AU
TH

O
R 

 C
O
PY

A. Andrés et al. / New instrumentation for human robot interaction assessment based on observational methods 411

sidering both indicators together, that is, final emotion
and time needed to reach a positive or neutral emo-
tional state, the session could be positively assessed
whether the user final emotion is positive (such as joy
or surprise) or neutral, or time needed for reaching a
positive emotional answer is considerably short.

Secondly, as it has been mentioned before, social
robots should generate trust and the user should feel
safe and comfortable interacting with the robot. A
moving away behaviour may occur at the first moment
since robots could elicit fear to users given that they do
not know so much about the platform. However, it is
unacceptable that these behaviours last the whole ses-
sion or the vast majority of time. Results in [51] show
that, conforming [23] human social distances could
be considered an indicator of perceiving the robot as
a social actor. Thus, sharing personal-intimate space
can be considered an indicator of psychological close-
ness among these actors generating an enjoyable cli-
mate. This fact becomes crucial when social robots are
thought to play the companionship role with, for in-
stance, elderly or hospitalised people.

Thirdly, behavioural units considered for coding and
analysing interactive behaviour (gaze, facial expres-
sion, body gestures, interaction with the robot and in-
terpersonal relationships) are the first attempt to create
a set of categories for studying human robot interac-
tive behaviour. The present proposal has both theoret-
ical and practical basis, that is, it has been built con-
sidering the available frameworks in HRI and Psychol-
ogy and at the same time taking into account the nar-
rative analyses of videotaped sessions. Future studies
should consider to modify the present set of categories
in order to capture another aspects not included in the
current proposal.

Finally, in-depth considerations on the rationale of
the assessment of social robots-human interaction de-
serve to be mentioned. The available theoretical frame-
works in the research areas of HRI and Psychology
assume that HRI should be highly similar to human-
human interaction. This fact implies taking a human
centred perspective to evaluate the interaction process.
In this case, there are expectations for a giving type
of interaction. When this specific kind of interaction
is not found may easily fail the end users’ expecta-
tion about performance. In fact, [9] has previously
pointed out that when robots look like humans this may
elicit strong expectations about the social and cogni-
tive competence of robots. If such expectations are not
met, the user is likely to experience confusion, frustra-
tion and disappointment.

Some questions should be considered by both en-
gineers and developers of the evaluation methods, for
instance, should the interaction between children and
robots be similar to the one developed with a family
member or another child? Is it necessary to implement
major theory-of-mind-like abilities in robots as priority
for software developers? Why HRI should be highly
similar to HHI? A combination of characteristics that
are necessary for building a sociable robot is proposed
in [6]: being there (embodied and socially situated),
life-like quality, human-aware (human social percep-
tion, that is, identification of a person, recognition of
a task and emotive expression), being understood (hu-
man to robot and robot to human, but robot to robot
too), and socially situated learning (to learn throughout
their lifetime). However, these components can be im-
plemented in an innovative way configuring an origi-
nal interaction style. For instance, similarly to an adult-
children interaction, where a specific kind of interac-
tion occurs in a context of differential (cognitive) abil-
ities and which has their own patterns (such as baby
talk consisting on high-pitched voice, sort sentences,
exaggerated intonation, etc.). This specific interaction
style is far from adult (normal) interaction style but is
the most frequent way to interact with children. Hence,
it is possible that HRI could be slightly different from
the prototypical human-human interaction situations.

Similarly, humans engage and attach to inanimate
objects (such as personal belongings) or animals (such
as pets) that have not human interactive abilities. These
are some of the deep questions that should be ad-
dressed in future studies and they may guide the ratio-
nale for implementing behaviour patterns or building
instruments for coding and quantifying interaction in
human-robot settings. Consequently, as pointed out in
[48], there are some ethical aspects that must be con-
sidered when designing behaviour patterns whether
they could affect attachment ties. Analysing human-
social robot interaction will help in understanding the
emergence and maintenance of social bonds among
human and robotic actors avoiding the undesirable ef-
fects of discouragement, boredom, or losing interest
about social relationship.

In summary, the present paper reviews the theo-
retical contributions in HRI and Psychology fields in
order to propose a methodology for evaluating qual-
ity of social robots commitment, specifically, the sce-
nario, the features, and the interactive behaviour be-
tween social robots and humans. For this purpose, a
general taxonomy based on three tables has been pro-
posed to combine the theoretical contributions of dif-



AU
TH

O
R 

 C
O
PY

412 A. Andrés et al. / New instrumentation for human robot interaction assessment based on observational methods

ferent frameworks and videotaped experiences in two
different contexts. Further applications of these instru-
ments will improve the proposed method and allow the
description and understanding of social dynamics be-
tween humans and robots, with proper analysis allow-
ing theoretical development in the new area possibly
called the human-machine psychology [48].

References

[1] M.D.S. Ainsworth, Patterns of Attachment: A Psychological
Study of the Strange Situation, Lawrence Erlbaum Associates,
Hillsdale (NJ), 1978.

[2] R. Bakeman and J.M. Gottman, Observing Interaction: An In-
troduction to Sequential Analysis, Cambridge University Press,
1997.

[3] K. Bartholomew and L.M. Horowitz, Attachment styles among
young adults: A test of a four-category model, Journal of Per-
sonality and Social Psychology 61 (1991), 226–244.

[4] C. Bethel and R. Murphy, Review of human studies methods
in HRI and recommendations, International Journal of Social
Robotics 2 (2010), 347–359.

[5] J. Bowlby, The nature of the child’s tie to his mother,
The International Journal of Psycho-Analysis 39 (1958),
350–373.

[6] C. Breazeal, Designing Sociable Robots, MIT Press, Cam-
bridge, MA, USA, 2002.

[7] C. Breazeal, Emotion and sociable humanoid robots, Interna-
tional Journal of Human-Computer Studies 59 (2003), 119–
155.

[8] H.H. Clark, Using Language, Cambridge University Press,
1996.

[9] K. Dautenhahn, Design spaces and niche spaces of believable
social robots, in: Proc. 11th IEEE International Workshop on
Robot and Human Interactive Communication, Berlin, Ger-
many, 2002.

[10] K. Dautenhahn and I. Werry, A quantitative technique for
analysing robot-human interactions, in: IEEE/RSJ Interna-
tional Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, 2002,
pp. 1132–1138.

[11] M. Davis, B. Robins, K. Dautenhahn, C. Nehaniv and S. Pow-
ell, A comparison of interactive and robotic systems in therapy
and education for children with autism, in: Assistive Technol-
ogy: From Virtuality to Reality, Lille, France, A. Pruski and
H. Knops, eds, IOS Press, 2005, pp. 353–357.

[12] M. Díaz, N. Nuno, J. Saez-Pons, D.E. Pardo and C. Angulo,
Building up child-robot relationship for therapeutic purposes:
From initial attraction towards long-term social engagement,
in: Ninth IEEE International Conference on Automatic Face
and Gesture Recognition, FG 2011, IEEE, Lille, France, 2005,
pp. 927–932.

[13] J.L. Drury, J. Scholtz and H.A. Yanco, Awareness in human-
robot interactions, in: Proc. IEEE Conference on Systems,
Man and Cybernetics, IEEE, Washington, D.C., USA, 2003,
pp. 111–119.

[14] S. Eimler, N.C. Krämer and A. von der Pütten, Prerequisites for
human-agent- and human-robot interaction: Towards an inte-
grated theory, in: Proc. European Meetings on Cybernetics and

Systems Research (EMCSR 2010), Vienna, Austria, R. Trappl,
ed., 2010.

[15] P. Ekman, An argument for basic emotions, Cognition & Emo-
tion 6 (1992), 169–200.

[16] C.A. Ellis, S.J. Gibbs and G.L. Rein, Groupware: Some issues
and experiences, Communications of the ACM 34 (1991), 39–
58.

[17] D.J. Feil-Seifer and M.J. Matarić, Robot-assisted therapy for
children with autism spectrum disorders, in: Proc. Confer-
ence on Interaction Design for Children: Children with Special
Needs, Chicago, Il, USA, 2008, pp. 49–52.

[18] Y. Fernaeus, M. Håkansson, M. Jacobsson and S. Ljungblad,
How do you play with a robotic toy animal?: A long-term study
of Pleo, in: Proc. of the 9th International Conference on Inter-
action Design and Children, IDC 2010, N. Parés and M. Oliver,
eds, ACM, Barcelona, Spain, 2010, pp. 39–48.

[19] T. Fong, I.R. Nourbakhsh and K. Dautenhahn, A survey of so-
cially interactive robots, Robotics and Autonomous Systems 42
(2003), 143–166.

[20] J. Forlizzi, How robotic products become social products:
An ethnographic study of cleaning in the home, in: Proc.
ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot Inter-
action, HRI ’07, ACM, New York, NY, USA, 2007, pp. 129–
136.

[21] R. Gifford and J. Price, Personal space in nursery school chil-
dren, Canadian Journal of Behavioural Science 11 (1979),
318–326.

[22] E. Goffman, Behavior in public places. Notes on the social
organization of gatherings, in: Face Engagements, The Free
Press, 1963, pp. 83–111.

[23] E.T. Hall, The Hidden Dimension, Anchor Books, 1969.
[24] M. Heerink, Assessing acceptance of assistive social robots by

aging adults, Ph.D. dissertation, University of Amsterdam, The
Netherlands, 2010.

[25] H. Hüttenrauch and K. Severinsson-Eklundh, Investigating so-
cially interactive robots that give the right cues and make
their presence felt, in: Proc. CHI 2004 Workshop on Shaping
Human-Robot Interaction, Vienna, Austria, 2004.

[26] J. Jaffé and S. Feldstein, Rhythms of Dialogue, Academic
Press, Inc., New York, NY, USA, 1970.

[27] T. Kanda, R. Sato, N. Saiwaki, H. Ishiguro and H. Ishiguro,
A two-month field trial in an elementary school for long-term
human-robot interaction, IEEE Transactions on Robotics 23
(2007), 962–971.

[28] C.D. Kidd and C. Breazeal, Robots at home: Understanding
long-term human-robot interaction, in: IEEE/RSJ International
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, Nice, France,
IEEE, 2008, pp. 3230–3235.

[29] H. Kozima, C. Nakagawa and Y. Yasuda, Interactive robots for
communication-care: A case-study in autism therapy, in: Proc.
IEEE International Workshop on Robot and Human Interactive
Communication, Nashville, TN, USA, IEEE, 2005.

[30] M.S. Magnusson, Temporal configuration analysis: Detection
of an underlying meaningful structure through artificial catego-
rization of a real-time behavioral stream, in: Workshop on Ar-
tificial Intelligence, University of Uppsala, Uppsala, Sweden,
1982.

[31] G.F. Melson, P.H. Kahn, A. Beck and B. Friedman, Robotic
pets in human lives: Implications for the human-animal bond
and for human relationships with personified technologies,
Journal of Social Issues 65 (2009), 545–567.



AU
TH

O
R 

 C
O
PY

A. Andrés et al. / New instrumentation for human robot interaction assessment based on observational methods 413

[32] J. Mumm and B. Mutlu, Human-robot proxemics: Physical and
psychological distancing in human-robot interaction, in: Proc.
International Conference on Human-Robot Interaction (HRI),
HRI ’11, ACM Press, New York, NY, USA, 2011, pp. 331–
338.

[33] D.A. Norman, Emotional Design: Why We Love (or Hate) Ev-
eryday Things, 1st edn, Basic Books, 2003.

[34] A.M. Okamura, M.J. Mataric and H.I. Christensen, Medical
and health-care robotics, IEEE Robotics & Automation Maga-
zine 17 (2010), 26–37.

[35] D. Olsen and M. Goodrich, Metrics for evaluating human-robot
interactions, in: Proc. NIST Performance Metrics for Intelli-
gent Systems Workshop, 2003.

[36] D.E. Pardo, O. Franco, J. Saez-Pons, A. Andrés and C. Angulo,
Human – humanoid robot interaction: The 20q game, in: Ubiq-
uitous Computing and Ambient Intelligence – 6th International
Conference, UCAmI 2012, Vitoria-Gasteiz, J. Bravo, D. López
de Ipiña and F. Moya, eds, Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
Vol. 7656, Springer, 2012, pp. 193–199.

[37] C. Plaisant, A. Druin, C. Lathan, K. Dakhane, K. Edwards,
J.M. Vice and J. Montemayor, A storytelling robot for pediatric
rehabilitation, in: Assets ’00: Proc. Fourth International ACM
Conference on Assistive Technologies, ACM Press, New York,
NY, USA, 2000, pp. 50–55.

[38] C. Rich, B. Ponsler, A. Holroyd and C.L. Sidner, Recogniz-
ing engagement in human-robot interaction, in: 5th ACM/IEEE
International Conference on Human-Robot Interaction (HRI),
IEEE, 2010, pp. 375–382.

[39] S. Sabanovic, Robots in society, society in robots, Interna-
tional Journal of Social Robotics 2 (2010), 439–450.

[40] J. Saez-Pons, L. Alboul, J. Penders and L. Nomdedeu, Multi-
robot team formation control in the GUARDIANS project, In-
dustrial Robot: An International Journal 37 (2010), 372–383.

[41] J. Saldien, K. Goris, B. Vanderborght, B. Verrelst and
D.J. Lefeber, ANTY: The development of an intelligent hug-
gable robot for hospitalized children, in: Proc. CLAWAR, 9th
International Conference on Climbing and Walking Robots,
Brussels, Belgium, 2006.

[42] J. Scholtz, Theory and evaluation of human robot interactions,
in: Proc. 36th Annual Hawaii International Conference on Sys-
tem Sciences (HICSS’03), IEEE Computer Society, Washing-
ton, DC, USA, 2003.

[43] T. Shibata, T. Mitsui, K. Wada, A. Touda, T. Kumasaka,
K. Tagami and K. Tanie, Mental commit robot and its ap-

plication to therapy of children, in: Proc. IEEE/ASME Inter-
national Conference on Advanced Intelligent Mechatronics,
Como, Italy, 2001, pp. 1053–1058.

[44] C.L. Sidner, C. Lee, C.D. Kidd, N. Lesh and C. Rich, Explo-
rations in engagement for humans and robots, Artificial Intelli-
gence 166 (2005), 140–164.

[45] A. Steinfeld, T. Fong, D. Kaber, M. Lewis, J. Scholtz,
A. Schultz and M. Goodrich, Common metrics for human-
robot interaction, in: Proc. 1st ACM SIGCHI/SIGART Confer-
ence on Human-Robot Interaction, HRI ’06, ACM Press, New
York, NY, USA, 2006, pp. 33–40.

[46] I. Stoian, A. Golea, R. Badea, A. Moldovan, O. Dancea
and C. Posteuca, Using the cooperative robots concept in
emergency and catastrophes medicine, in: IEEE International
Conference on Automation, Quality and Testing, Robotics,
2006.

[47] A. Tapus, C. Ţăpuş and M.J. Matarić, User-robot personal-
ity matching and assistive robot behavior adaptation for post-
stroke rehabilitation therapy, Intelligent Service Robotics 1
(2008), 169–183.

[48] C. Torras, Robbie, the pioneer robot nanny: Science fiction
helps develop ethical social opinion, Interaction Studies 11
(2010), 269–273.

[49] A.R. Wagner and R.C. Arkin, Analyzing social situations for
human-robot interaction, Interaction Studies 9 (2008), 277–
300.

[50] A.R. Wagner, The role of trust and relationships in human-
robot social interaction, Ph.D. dissertation, College of Com-
puting, Georgia Institute of Technology, 2009.

[51] M.L. Walters, K. Dautenhahn, K.R. te Boekhorst, C. Kaouri,
S. Woods, C. Nehaniv, D. Lee and I. Werry, The influence
of subjects’ personality traits on personal spatial zones in a
human-robot interaction experiment, in: IEEE International
Workshop on Robot and Human Interactive Communication,
RO-MAN, Nashville, USA, 2005, pp. 347–352.

[52] H.A. Yanco and J.L. Drury, Classifying human-robot interac-
tion: An updated taxonomy, in: Proc. IEEE International Con-
ference on Systems, Man and Cybernetics, The Hague, Nether-
lands, IEEE, 2004.

[53] J.E. Young, J.-Y. Sung, A. Voida, E. Sharlin, T. Igarashi,
H.I. Christensen and R.E. Grinter, Evaluating human-robot in-
teraction – focusing on the holistic interaction experience, In-
ternational Journal of Social Robotics 3 (2011), 53–67.


	Introduction
	Methods for human robot interaction
	Global assessment tool: Scenario-robot-behaviour
	Assessing the setting: How was the scenario?
	Assessing social robot features: How social is the robot?
	Assessing interactive behaviour: What happens during the HRI session?

	Two illustrative case studies
	Lab experience with Pleo
	Assessing the setting: How was the scenario?
	Describing social robot features: How social is the robot?
	Assessing interactive behaviour: What happens along the HRI session?

	Workshop in robotics: School experience with Nao
	Scenario
	Robot social features
	The HRI session

	Comparison of the two case studies
	Scenario
	Robot social features
	The HRI session


	Discussion
	Conclusions
	References

