

























































Integrating clinicians, knowledge and data: expert-based cooperative analysis in healthcare decision support


REVIEW Open Access

Integrating clinicians, knowledge and data:
expert-based cooperative analysis in healthcare
decision support
Karina Gibert1,2*, Carlos García-Alonso3†, Luis Salvador-Carulla4,5†

Abstract

Background: Decision support in health systems is a highly difficult task, due to the inherent complexity of the
process and structures involved.

Method: This paper introduces a new hybrid methodology Expert-based Cooperative Analysis (EbCA), which
incorporates explicit prior expert knowledge in data analysis methods, and elicits implicit or tacit expert knowledge
(IK) to improve decision support in healthcare systems. EbCA has been applied to two different case studies,
showing its usability and versatility: 1) Bench-marking of small mental health areas based on technical efficiency
estimated by EbCA-Data Envelopment Analysis (EbCA-DEA), and 2) Case-mix of schizophrenia based on functional
dependency using Clustering Based on Rules (ClBR). In both cases comparisons towards classical procedures using
qualitative explicit prior knowledge were made. Bayesian predictive validity measures were used for comparison
with expert panels results. Overall agreement was tested by Intraclass Correlation Coefficient in case “1” and kappa
in both cases.

Results: EbCA is a new methodology composed by 6 steps: 1) Data collection and data preparation; 2) acquisition
of “Prior Expert Knowledge” (PEK) and design of the “Prior Knowledge Base” (PKB); 3) PKB-guided analysis;
4) support-interpretation tools to evaluate results and detect inconsistencies (here Implicit Knowledg -IK- might be
elicited); 5) incorporation of elicited IK in PKB and repeat till a satisfactory solution; 6) post-processing results for
decision support. EbCA has been useful for incorporating PEK in two different analysis methods (DEA and
Clustering), applied respectively to assess technical efficiency of small mental health areas and for case-mix of
schizophrenia based on functional dependency. Differences in results obtained with classical approaches were
mainly related to the IK which could be elicited by using EbCA and had major implications for the decision
making in both cases.

Discussion: This paper presents EbCA and shows the convenience of completing classical data analysis with PEK
as a mean to extract relevant knowledge in complex health domains. One of the major benefits of EbCA is
iterative elicitation of IK. Both explicit and tacit or implicit expert knowledge are critical to guide the scientific
analysis of very complex decisional problems as those found in health system research.

Background
Research methods in medicine are mainly based on a
restrictive experimental approach. As an example, exclu-
sion and inclusion criteria are defined in randomized
control trials to reduce the complexity of the phenomena

observed, while expert knowledge is disregarded as it is
considered that using expert opinion introduces subjec-
tivity into a scientific process. This approach has
undoubtly contributed to the development of knowledge
in medicine and it still constitutes the core of evidence-
based healthcare [1], but systematically disregards also
the well established parts of the corpus doctrinae which
do not involve particular opinions, but just well consen-
sued knowledge, which obviously exist. The overall value
of the restrictive experimental approach may decrease as

* Correspondence: karina.gibert@upc.edu
† Contributed equally
1Department of Statistics and Operations Research Universitat Politècnica de
Catalunya, Barcelona, 08034, Spain
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

Gibert et al. Health Research Policy and Systems 2010, 8:28
http://www.health-policy-systems.com/content/8/1/28

© 2010 Gibert et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

mailto:karina.gibert@upc.edu
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0


the levels of complexity of the analysed phenomenon
increases; particularly in highly complex situations as
those occurring when organisations behave as a complex
adaptive system [2].
Healthcare systems involve very complex structures

and high-dimensional interactions among multiple fac-
tors, where the meaning of the measurements becomes
crucial for proper interpretation, and where phenomena
are very difficult to model in their globality under classi-
cal approaches. Paradoxically, the complexity and non-
linearity of health systems has not been acknowledged
until very recently by international organisations such as
WHO [3]. This omission has had major implications to
data-analysis, too often based on techniques and proce-
dures designed for linear phenomena, which should not
be applied to systems characterised by non-linearity,
self-organisation and constant change, fragmented but
highly interconnected, history-dependent and counter-
intuitive [3].
Although very accurate models can be obtained under

classical approaches while restricting the scope of the
model to a particular aspect of the problem, other meth-
ods are needed to model phenomena grasping their
whole complexity. Health care is plenty of examples of
this problem, such as the assessment of system effi-
ciency considering together the performance of hospital,
home-care, day-care, and social services; or the develop-
ment of a case-mix which includes clinical severity,
functioning, burden, support needs and available techni-
cal aids.
Modelling the complexity as a whole is really useful to

provide reliable information to the decision-maker to
improve both understanding of the target phenomena,
and system planning or resource allocation through evi-
dence-informed decision making. The assessment of
complexity in the health sector has been recently for-
warded [4,5]. However references are mainly based on
the qualitative approach [4]; for that reason, advances
on the capacity of modelling complexity from a wider
approach incorporating also quantitative skills is of high
interest in health care systems.
Within healthcare systems, mental health deserves

special attention. First the development of early models
of integrated care started in the mental health sector
and in intellectual disabilities earlier than in most other
areas in Medicine [6]. Complex community care systems
comprising health, social and educational services as
well as a balance across residential, outpatient and day
care were planned in the 1950’s in the UK [7] and in
the early 1960’s in the US [8]. As a matter of fact, the
problems faced by the mental health sector are central
to long term care for chronic medical conditions or for
persons with disabilities [9]. Therefore mental health
care may not be an exception, but the paradigm of

complex integrated healthcare, as it was pointed out by
Leon Eisenberg 35 years ago [10].
Mental health care, regarded as a holistic system,

involves a very complex structure and poses a major
challenge for modelling under the classical approaches,
as occurs with most very complex phenomena.
As said, when a phenomenon is very complex, the

classical modelling methods based on algebraic formal-
ism cannot capture the whole structure of the domain
and poor results are obtained [11]. Recently, some new
approaches are defending the advantages of incorporat-
ing prior expert knowledge into the analysis itself
[12,13]. Generalizing classical data analysis methods to
be guided by prior expert knowledge permits a better
modelling of these phenomena and improves the quality
of the results.
Taking the prior expert knowledge into account is not

necessarily related to a loss of scientific rigour, since,
from the beginnings of the Artificial Intelligence in the
mid 1950 s, there are strictly rigorous frameworks,
based on the logical paradigm, to handle expert knowl-
edge in a formal and automatic way [14].
This paper introduces a new methodological approach

called Expert-based Cooperative Analysis (EbCA) as a
general framework suitable for research in very complex
medical problems, where classical approaches provide
poor results. EbCA is based on formally including expert
knowledge in the analysis. This proposal is, in fact, a
methodology for generalizing any classical analysis
method to incorporate expert knowledge as an essential
part of the data analysis. This approach provides more
powerful tools for better modelling complex phenom-
ena, as those occurring in health systems. EbCA consti-
tutes the main contribution of this paper and it is
intended to contribute to a better understanding of inte-
grated care as a complex adaptative system [2], over-
coming the results obtained with classical approaches
up to now.
The applicability of EbCA to two very different case

studies is introduced as an illustration of both the suit-
ability of the methodology in improving complex model-
ling and supporting complex decision making, and to
illustrate the versatility of the proposal which could be
applied in a wide range of data analysis methods and
study designs.

Methods
The authors have developed the Expert-based Cooperative
Analysis (EbCA), a systematic procedure to incorporate
expert knowledge into data analysis. This methodology
has been applied in two very different cases using two well
established analysis methods: “Clustering (ClBR) and
“Data Envelopment Analysis” (DEA), which are described
below. First, we present two case studies of complex

Gibert et al. Health Research Policy and Systems 2010, 8:28
http://www.health-policy-systems.com/content/8/1/28

Page 2 of 16



mental health care carried out by the PSICOST research
association that will later illustrate the benefits of the
Expert-based Cooperative Analysis (EbCA) approach. Sec-
ond a definition of EbCA is given. Third, we provide a
detailed description of the main components and steps of
this methodology: data preparation, expert knowledge
transfer (including the formalization of this knowledge),
and generalization of classical methods to involve prior
expert knowledge. The EbCA approach is then applied to
the data analysis methods used in the two case studies:
Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA), and Clustering (ClBR)
These two examples come from different environments:
operational research and multivariate statistical analysis,
and they illustrate the suitability of the EbCA methodology
to improve the quality of results using widely different
methods. New data analysis methods are obtained (EbCA-
DEA and Clustering based on rules or ClBR) both includ-
ing hybridation with Artificial Intelligence (AI). EbCA-
DEA has been used to assess technical efficiency of health
care areas (case study 1) and ClBR has been used to gener-
ate a case-mix of schizophrenia based on functional
dependency (case study 2). Finally, we present conclusions
and future work.

Case studies
Case study 1: Benchmark of small mental health care
areas based on technical efficiency
Mental health care is a typical example of a very com-
plex system where finding good global models is quite
difficult under classical approaches. Mental health is
organised in catchment areas comprising hospital care,
residential care in the community, outpatient, emer-
gency and different types of mobile care, as well as day
care including occupational training, employment and
other social services [6]. The assessment of integrated
care systems at local areas may benefit from the identifi-
cation of a benchmark area, and it should incorporate
standard procedures for comparing efficiency across the
different catchment areas. However, it is not always pos-
sible to ground decision making on actual efficiency
based on population outcome indicators, particularly
when information is incomplete, the units of analysis
are complex and the outcomes refer to ill-defined condi-
tions based on constructs such as mental disorders.
Technical efficiency uses proxy measures to assess the
proportion of outputs produced (e.g. hospital bed utili-
sation) related to the resources available (i.e. hospital
bed availability).
We assessed the technical efficiency of 12 widely dif-

ferent small health areas (SHA) in Spain, in order to
provide a new decision support system (DSS) for mental
health planning in Spain. All existing health and social
services for mental health care were mapped in every
local area by an external rater using the European

Service Mapping Schedule (ESMS) [15], as well as an
Expert-driven Model of Basic Mental Health Commu-
nity Care (B-MHCC) [13].
The data for each catchment area were aggregated in

residential care, structured day care, non-acute out
patient care and emergency out patient care, as it is
shown in table 1. The detailed characteristics of the
database have been described in [13].
These data, together with prior expert knowledge,

were used in EbCA-DEA to provide a ranking of the
technical efficiency of the different systems. Separately,
an expert panel made by 6 members provided a ranking
of the small health areas based on full available data at
the 12 areas. This allowed a comparison between both
approaches to the analysis of the same set of data.

Case study 2: Case-mix of schizophrenia based on
functional dependency
In the 1990’s the Council of Europe defined ‘depen-
dency’ as the condition related to the loss of autonomy
and the need of support from a third person due to
impairment of activities of daily living, especially self-
care. Laws and care services for the elderly and for peo-
ple with severe disability including severe mental illness
have been developed following this paradigm in many
European countries, as well as eligibility criteria to dif-
ferent levels of care provision. Unfortunately current
approaches have failed to provide a workable case-mix
related to functional dependency, particularly in severe
mental illness [16]. This is partly due to the complexity
of the concept of functional dependency which has been
described as a meta-construct involving the constructs
functioning/disability, personal support and care needs
[17], the different indicators related to these constructs
(clinical status, functional impairment, quality of life,
objective and subjective burden, service use, care needs,
etc); and the additional complexity of mental disorders
where disabilities are not just related to activities of
daily living but to other aspects of general functioning
such as social isolation, low medication adherence and
behavioral problems that require intensive surveillance
by carers [18].
In 2006 the Catalan Agency of Dependency commis-

sioned a study aimed at improving the elegibility criteria
of patients with severe mental illness to obtain specific
benefits and care services within the context of the Law
for the promotion of personal autonomy and care for
persons with dependency (LPAD 39/2006, 14th decem-
ber), approved by Spanish government in 2006 and
enacting from 2007. This study was carried out by the
PSICOST research association and the DEFDEP (DEFin-
tion of DEPendency) group on a sample of 306 patients
with schizophrenia [19] and it included the development
of a case mix based on functional dependency. Patients

Gibert et al. Health Research Policy and Systems 2010, 8:28
http://www.health-policy-systems.com/content/8/1/28

Page 3 of 16



were described by clinical subtypes and status, quality of
life and functioning measured through the General
Assessment of Functioning (GAF) [20] and the brief
Disability Assessment Schedule (DAS) [21]. The care
burden of family carers (performance in daily activities,
behaviour, time and out-of-pocket expenditures) was
measured using the Subjective and Objective Family
Burden Interview (known by its Spanish acronym
ECFOS) [22]. The utilisation of health and social care
and care needs were also recorded. The database also
contained clinical and demographic characteristics of
the patients. This data, together with some prior expert
knowledge was used for ClBR to model functional
dependency patterns in schizophrenia.

Data analysis method: Expert-based Cooperative
Analysis
Expert-based Cooperative Analysis (EbCA) is a metho-
dology which permits prior expert knowledge to be
included in the data analysis and provides a general
framework to iteratively elicit implicit knowledge from
the experts. Previous independent experiences of the

PSICOST research group [13,23,24] in Spain, based on
different data analysis methods, resulted in successful
modelling of highly complex phenomena related to
health care system assessment. These separate studies
showed a common analytical structure which differed
from classical approaches and enabled a useful analysis
of two complex domains for which classical techniques
didn’t succeed. This common structure has been for-
malized in the general EbCA methodology which
includes both Clustering based on rules (ClBR) [12]
and EbCA-Expert-based Cooperative (EbCA-DEA) [13]
as particular cases. The EbCA is structured by the fol-
lowing steps (see Fig 1.) which are detailed in the next
sections:

1. Data collection and Data preparation: includes
selection of relevant variables to be considered and
inclusion and exclusion criteria, data representation,
missing data analysis, outlier detection and treat-
ment, etc
2. Prior Expert Knowledge (PEK): acquisition and
design of the Prior Knowledge Base (PKB).

Table 1 Operational description of integrated community care in Mental Health according to the European Service
Mapping Schedule (ESMS) code groupings of “Main Types of Care” and technical characteristics of the Expert-driven
Basic Model of Mental Health Community Care (B-MHCC) based on expert knowledge and characteristics of the 12
Small Health Areas (12 variables relevant for integrated community care have been included in the B-MHCC)
(Salvador-Carulla et al, 2007) [9]

Grouping of
services

ESMS Coding
(*)

Description of ESMS
“Main Types Care”

Variables: Types (T)1,
Utilisation (U)2, Places
(P)3

Technical characteristics of the Expert-driven Model of
Community Care (B-MHCC)[rates per 100.000
population]4

Acute Care R2 Residential/hospital/Acute Types: TR2
Places (beds): PR2
Utilisation: UR2

High availability and utilisation by users from the area BUT
avoiding over-use.
1. TR2 within a [1,1.5] range.
2. PR2 within a [9,20] range.
3. UR2 Medium-High to High avoiding over-use. Within a
[10,19] range. T9 0[6], T1 (6,19], T9 (19,100]. Uw[0.10,0.15]

Non-acute
hospital care

R4, R5, R6 and
R7

Residential/Hospital/Non-
acute

Types: TR4R7
Places (beds): PR4R7
Utilisation: UR4R7

Low availability and utilisation BUT not “0”.
4. TR4-R7 Low, within [1,3.1]. T9 [0,1.9], T1 (1.9,3.1], T11
(3.1,15]. Uw[0.20,0.25].
5. PR4-R7 Low, within [3,13]. T9 0[3], T1 (3,13], T7 (13,200].
Uw[0.10,0.15].
6. UR4-R7: Low use, within [3,12]. T9 0[3], T1 (3,13], T9
(13,100]. Uw[0.13,0.17].

Residential
community
care

R8, R9, R10,
R11, R12 and
R13

Residential/Non-hospital Types: TR8R13
Places (beds): PR8R13
Utilisation: UR8R13

High availability and utilisation.
7. TR8-R13: High [>3]. T9 0[3], T2 (3,20]. Uw[0.18,0.23].
8. PR8-R13: High [>10]. T9 0[3], T1 (3,13], T8 (13,20]. Uw
[0.10,0.15].
9. UR8-R13 High avoiding over-use, within [10,40].

Day care D1+D45 D1: Day care/Acute (day
hospitals)
D4: Day care/Non-acute/
Other structured activities

Types: TD1+D4
Places: PD1+D4
Utilisation: UD1+D4

High availability and utilisation
10. TD1+D4 High [> 3]. T9 0[3], T2 (3,20]. Uw[0.25,0.3].
11. PD1+D4 High [> 34]. T12 0[28], T11 (28,100]. Uw
[0.025.0.05].
12. UD1+D4 High [> 33]. T9 0[15], T1 (15,37], T2 (37,100]. Uw
[0.13,0.17].

(*) For an explanation of ESMS service coding system see [26]. (1) T: Number of the ESMS codes or “main type of care” (R2, R4 to R7, R8 to R13 and D1+D4) per
100.000 inhabitants available within a small health area; (2) U: Utilisation per 100.000 inhabitants of the ESMS codes or “main type of care” by patients from the
small health area; (3) P: Places or beds available per 100.000 inhabitants at the small health area; (4) Selected variables, T1, T2,... T12: I/O interpretation in a specific
range, Uw: Uniform statistical distribution of the I/O weight;

(5) Work (D2), work-related (D3) and non-structured care (D5) have not been included in this.

Gibert et al. Health Research Policy and Systems 2010, 8:28
http://www.health-policy-systems.com/content/8/1/28

Page 4 of 16



3. PKB-guided analysis: PKB is used to guide the
analysis in different ways depending on the underly-
ing method selected
4. Support-interpretation: including tools to evaluate
results and detect inconsistencies. In this step new
Implicit Knowledge (IK) is elicited.
5. Incorporation of IK in PKB and repeat from step
3 until a satisfactory solution is found.
6. Post-processing results for decision support.

Direct involvement of the expert is crucial in steps 2
and 4.

Data Preparation
The first step is not exclusive to EbCA, but it is neces-
sary regardless of the analysis method used [25,26]. Data
preparation is critical to decide:

• sample inclusion and exclusion criteria which
determines the analysis units (set of patients, health
areas etc),
• the set of variables to be considered for each analy-
sis unit. Variable selection is an important challenge
to deal with. It is critical to determine the set of
variables that provide a relevant representation of

Figure 1 EbCA-methodology.

Gibert et al. Health Research Policy and Systems 2010, 8:28
http://www.health-policy-systems.com/content/8/1/28

Page 5 of 16



the phenomenon under study. There are many dif-
ferent procedures for selecting relevant or significant
variables, from statistical correlation [13] through
multivariate analysis to artificial intelligence (AI)
techniques like feature selection [27] or neural net-
works [28]. However, it is important to take into
account the variable set the expert proposes to use,
as this will often coincide with what he/she uses in
real-life decision-making,
• the experimental/observational procedure or the
reference data base.

These decisions should be followed by simple descrip-
tive statistics, which [29] are useful to describe data and
to get preliminary information from data.
Next, data cleaning and data preparation are funda-

mental steps to guarantee the quality of the original
data, which is directly related to the quality and applic-
ability of results. These processes include:

• missing data treatment
• outlier detection
• variable redundancy detection
• variable transformation (recodes, creation of indi-
cators, etc)

The data preparation process must be conducted in
close conjunction with the expert in order not to make
false assumptions that can bias final results [30].

Prior Knowledge Acquisition
To be formalized, explicit knowledge and implicit knowl-
edge (IK) require different approaches. Explicit knowl-
edge can be defined as the knowledge which is more or
less directly available and can be explained by experts
through standard tools like books, standard If-Then rules
and so on [31]. On the other hand, IK, sometimes called
expertise comes from people, places, ideas, experiences,
habits or culture and cannot be found in books [32]. It
remains hidden in the human mind and is unconsciously
used in reasoning processes and unconsciously activated
for decision-making, and is therefore extremely difficult
to formalize. It is derived from the experience of the lear-
ner and is not directly available. It can be transferred to a
system by using interactive approaches of knowledge
engineering to help the expert to make his/her implicit
knowledge explicit; machine learning techniques (from
artificial intelligence)s can be used to automatically
induce it from data; or the Knowledge Discovery from
Data approach (KDD) can be used for extracting valuable
knowledge from databases. As domain complexity
increases, so too does the quantity of IK implicitly used
in reasoning and decision-making and more powerful
tools are required for elicitation.

Knowledge acquisition is the process of transferring
expert knowledge from a human to a computing system.
Knowledge Engineering appeared around the mid-1990 s
as a part of the Artificial Intelligence discipline devoted
to improve this process, as it has been seen the difficul-
ties of the knowledge transfer process in complex
phenomena. Knowledge engineering includes: i) transfer-
ring the correct contents to the computer; completeness
and lack of ambiguity are critical here and the existence
of IK must be taken into account, particularly in complex
domains ii) expressing expert knowledge in such a way
that the computer can understand it, a technical trans-
lation is required here and, finally, iii) the formal lan-
guage used because each computer system has its own
requirements and each methodological approach its own
formalisms.
The knowledge that experts have in their minds

-either implicit or explicit- is difficult to access and
communicate, and is not easily shared [13,33]. However,
expert knowledge is highly valuable and interesting to
formalise, mainly for two reasons: i) once formalised,
standard procedures can be established for decision-
making and this facilitates the management of the
domain (which requires knowledge transfer among pro-
fessionals), and ii) once formalised, it can be transferred
to a computer system and Intelligent Decision Support
Systems can be used to provide on-line help in complex
decision-making.
The expert-computer knowledge transfer process

involves both explicit and IK and effective transfer is
crucial for good computer system performance. When
part of the expert knowledge is missing or transferred
incorrectly, incomplete and inconsistent knowledge-
bases (KB) result, which leads to faulty inductions in
reasoning and wrong decision-making. Thus, while diffi-
cult, proper knowledge transfer is critical. If part of IK
cannot be elicited, the computer system will ignore it
and, therefore, the system will be unable to manage the
reasoning involving it. Once elicited, the IK becomes
explicit, and it is important to express this new explicit
knowledge without ambiguities or inconsistencies.
The precise translation process of expert knowledge to

computer systems becomes increasingly complicated
because computer systems must understand the expert
domain from an objective point of view, as they are
unable to interpret informal definitions. Also, computers
need deep expertise of the specific formal language to
be used for modelling the domain knowledge [13]. The
model in the computer system has to interpret expert
knowledge in a dynamic way, using its own formal lan-
guage. In this process knowledge engineers and experts
in computer systems are translators.
Classical knowledge acquisition and transfer is a time

consuming and costly process, mainly based on

Gibert et al. Health Research Policy and Systems 2010, 8:28
http://www.health-policy-systems.com/content/8/1/28

Page 6 of 16



interviewing experts and refining the resulting models
following an interactive knowledge engineering
approach. Although they can miss part of the IK, these
classical methodologies are useful to structure the skele-
ton of the knowledge-based system. Machine learning
techniques provide alternative approaches, such as indu-
cing rules from data, examples or empirical evidence, to
model both explicit and IK using structured methods to
analyse data [34]. These alternatives increase the effi-
ciency of the knowledge acquisition process when data
bases are available or can be designed and developed.
In the last few years, the advantages of using hybrid

methodologies combining visualization, AI and statistical
techniques for KDD and prior explicit knowledge have
been highlighted [26]. This approach allows a well
established explicit knowledge to be obtained from the
experts, to build a partial but incomplete KB under-
standable to both the experts and computer systems, to
combine a knowledge-based system with statistical tech-
niques, to elicit IK, and to combine all into a final KB,
which could be used in, for example, an operational
model to guide technical analysis in specific decisional
situations. Results obtained from these formal models
can be used to improve the formal representation of
expert knowledge in KB to design a new a more useful
domain-model.

Interpretation-support tools and PKB-guided analysis
Very often, when confronting complex phenomena, part
of IK is missing in the first prior knowledge base (PKB)
[7,11,13,23,25]. Since computer systems are not able to
correctly reason with missing knowledge, poor results
are produced. This is evidenced in the interpretation
process. When non-sense results are obtained, the sys-
tem works as an automatic knowledge acquisition tool.
The knowledge engineer must then help the expert to
find explanations for the apparently wrong results. This
permits elicitation of IK and, in consequence new prop-
erties holding in target elements can be formulated, new
relevant rules can be included in the PKB, new weights
for the indicators/variables can be established or new
combinations of inputs and outputs of the system can
be considered. This permits reformulation of the PKB
and improvement in results until they are clinically
meaningful. Interpretation tools must support this pro-
cess. Interpretation depends on the underlying analysis.

Usability of EbCA in research
The EbCA approach has been incorporated in two very
different methods (Data Envelopment Analysis and statis-
tical clustering) in two separate studies of integrated
mental health care: benchmarking and technical efficiency
of integrated mental health care [13], and case-mix for
schizophrenia based on functional dependency [24]. The

units of analysis were small health areas in the first case
and patients with schizophrenia in the second. Subsec-
tions for the main steps are also included. In both cases
we compared the use of EbCA with classical qualitative
approaches which formalised prior explicit knowledge
provided by expert panels in a single run at the pre-
processing phase. In case study 1 the agreement between
the expert rating and the DEA model was estimated
using a consistency model based on the Intra-class Corre-
lation Coefficient (ICC) with a 95% Confidence Interval
(CI) [35,36]. A Bayesian predictive validity analysis
comparing expert judgment and DEA results was also
performed. The 12 small health areas were grouped in
two groups: efficient (efficient and nearly efficient small
health areas) and inefficient (uncertain and inefficient
small health areas). In case study 2 we used Cohen´s
kappa to compare the case-mix developed by the expert
panel and the ClBR, as well as Bayesian predictive
measures.

Results
We describe here the implementation of EbCA metho-
dology in the two case studies mentioned above.

Case 1: Use of EbCA in the analysis of healthcare systems
by means of Expert-based Cooperative Analysis (EbCA-
DEA)
We used Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA) for bench-
marking small mental health areas using technical effi-
ciency. DEA is a non-parametric method that evaluates
the relative technical efficiency of a set of comparable
Decision Making Units (DMU), each using multiple
inputs to produce multiple outputs. DEA has been used
in many decisional situations related to health care
[13,37,38]. However, in these complex stochastic sys-
tems the application of DEA has some relevant draw-
backs, such as: i) results obtained may not agree with
the previous and well established experts’ opinion [13],
ii) inputs and outputs (variables in DEA models) are
always stochastic and the selection of the appropriate
statistical distributions (StDIS) to fit them is not a trivial
matter and iii) the number of observations to be evalu-
ated (relative technical efficiency) in the system is
usually low compared to the number of “inputs and out-
puts” (I/O), which compromises the discriminative
power of DEA models. In spite of these problems, prior
expert knowledge has not been formalised in previous
DEA studies.
EbCA-DEA incorporates explicit knowledge directly

into the analysis by means of a Prior Knowledge Base
(PKB) based, in this case, on standard If-then rules.
Therefore, EbCA-DEA fits into the integral approach of
Knowledge Discovery from Data (KDD), where prior
expert knowledge (PEK) is taken into account at the

Gibert et al. Health Research Policy and Systems 2010, 8:28
http://www.health-policy-systems.com/content/8/1/28

Page 7 of 16



beginning, and post-processing of results at the end, to
lead to new explicit knowledge. Using this procedure
more realistic (less simplified) scenarios can be analyzed
in decisional situations under conditions of uncertainty
and more useful models are obtained.
Data collection and Data preparation
According to our approach [13], the first step was to
identify the decision making units (DMU) -in this case a
series of comparable small health areas- to be analyzed,
and to identify and evaluate the inputs and outputs
(I/O) of service availability and utilisation that describe
these DMU.
Expert-based selection of the stochastic structure of the
variables
In uncertain environments, it is impossible to know the
exact value of the variables because they are all random,
sometimes with an unknown structure. EbC-DEA incor-
porates the uncertainty by using an expert-based statisti-
cal distribution for every I/O [39,40]. For example, beds
in acute units in general hospitals (TR2 input, Table 1)
can be fitted to a uniform distribution U [2,3.5] for a
specific small health area -DMU. Hence the classical
data matrix where cells contain categorical or real values
is modified to include probabilistic models.
Expert-based variable selection: designing variable (I/O)
combinations (scenarios)
Operational models, like classical DEA, can usually
manage a limited number of variables [41,42]. How-
ever, when the number of variables is too large, the
statistical elimination and/or reduction of some of
them is arguable [43]. Nowadays, the analysis of all/
some scenarios defined by different variable combina-
tions -correlated or not- is more appropriate for EbC-
DEA in complex systems [13]. These scenarios can be
expert-based ones (i.e. experts select the I/O to be
analyzed) or they can be automatically designed, (i.e.
using a correlation analysis based on Monte-Carlo
simulation). These two approaches show different tech-
nical views of the same problem and their combination
can be used either to elicit experts’ mental frameworks
or to reach better conclusions about the efficiency of a
specific DMU.
Prior Expert Knowledge (PEK) Acquisition, construction of
Prior Knowledge Base (PKB)
EbCA-DEA needs a PKB to guide the analysis. Accord-
ing to our approach [13], a procedure derived from
KDD is appropriate to assess technical efficiency. In this
example, a consensus based Expert-driven Basic Model
of Mental Health Community Care (B-MHCC) was
designed and developed (Table 1) by an operational
analyst and two experts. A technical report with a
full description of the care system in twelve small
health areas was used for knowledge engineering which

consisted of developing and understanding the domain
and capturing relevant prior and implicit knowledge
from the experts. The resulting B-MHCC includes the
expert-based structure of all the selected inputs and out-
puts (I/O) in each small health area (the decision mak-
ing unit or DMU in this case).
In DEA models, a standard input is a variable such

that the greater the value the lower the efficiency (hold-
ing the rest of the I/O values constant). On the other
hand, a standard output is such that the greater the out-
put the greater the efficiency. However, some I/O in
complex systems may have an opposite meaning, as
their high values are related to system inefficiency.
Examples include non-standard inputs, such as a low
availability of residential beds in the community; and
non-standard outputs such as a high utilisation of inde-
finite-stay psychiatric hospital beds in the small health
area. The B-MHCC contains the expert-based interpre-
tation for all the I/O to determine if they can be consid-
ered standard or not (Table 1). In this framework, the
PKB is based on standard If-then rules that translate
expert knowledge to the computer system. When a non-
standard I/O has to be evaluated, the PKB also includes
information about the appropriate mathematical trans-
formation that uses, in this case, a linear monotone
decreasing transformation [44,45].
PKB-guided analysis
The selection of the appropriate operational model in
EbCA-DEA is a result of a consensus between the
operational modellers and the experts. Both researchers
and modellers have to understand the consequences of
applying a specific procedure and must share the same
language [13,23] to be able to select from different
Monte-Carlo DEA models, such as input oriented, out-
put oriented, those that take into consideration constant
returns to scale, and those that understand variable
returns to scale, among others.
Once the DEA model is selected in the EbCA-DEA,

Monte-Carlo simulation is performed to determine I/O
values based on the probabilistic models provided by
the experts, and a simulated data matrix is obtained.
Then PKB is used to determine which I/O are standard
and which are not, and to apply the corresponding
mathematical transformations. Finally, DEA model is
designed and resolved as standard linear programme.
Each simulation evaluates the relative technical efficien-
cies of each DMU which is then saved in a pool of
results. The process stops when the results converge
and no significant improvements are achieved on DMU
technical efficiencies regarding previous simulation runs.
Therefore, the same DMU has different relative techni-
cal efficiencies depending on the I/O values selected by
the Monte-Carlo engine.

Gibert et al. Health Research Policy and Systems 2010, 8:28
http://www.health-policy-systems.com/content/8/1/28

Page 8 of 16



Support-interpretation tools to evaluate results and detect
inconsistencies: elicitation of implicit knowledge
Obviously, the greater the simulation runs performed by
the Monte-Carlo engine, the larger the database con-
taining the results. Then results are statistically analyzed.
Different techniques can be used such as: agreement
ratios [13], clustering procedures, and data mining.
Potential agreements or disagreements between DEA
results and the experts’ background knowledge are used
again for improving prior expert knowledge in the PKB.
In this iterative process the understanding of the
experts’ mental framework is improved, and IK elicited
to further refinement of the Basic Model of Mental
Health Community Care (B-MHCC).
Even though DEA is useful to identify efficient areas,

both inefficiency levels and the specific I/O related to
inefficiency in every DMU are potentially debatable
from expert’s point of view [13]. This behaviour is
related to the different interpretations of relative techni-
cal efficiency by experts, on one hand, and DEA models,
on the other. DEA only takes into consideration the I/O
values and compares different but comparable DMU. As
it cannot evaluate the appropriateness of specific I/O
profiles, a DMU can be technically efficient (DEA) but
its I/O may be judged inappropriate by the expert.
The expert-driven DEA model produced 7 different

scenarios. IK elicited from the I/O combinations helped
to define these scenarios. Using this IK, now explicit,
the B-MHCC was improved (incorporation of IK in
PKB) and new and better efficiency-based classifications
were obtained (Post-processing results for decision sup-
port). At the end of this iterative process a bench-mark
area was identified and two input and four output indi-
cators were selected out from a set of 74 variables (the
PSICOST-74 indicator set) to assess health system effi-
ciency in a basic model of mental health community
care. Scenario ‘’6’’ was identified as the best option
[ICC: 0.8705; CI (95%): 0.5500; 0.9627]. The full descrip-
tion of these results is provided in [13].
However, when the ranking of small health areas using

the EbCA-DEA model was compared with the rating
obtained by the expert panel, an unexpected disagree-
ment was found. Scenario “6” classified six areas in the
‘’efficiency’’ group, but 3 of these areas were false-posi-
tives according to the experts’ rating which was used as
gold-standard. Six areas were classified in the ‘’ineffi-
ciency’’ group by the EbCA-DEA while the expert panel
identified 7 areas in this group. Therefore the DEA
model agreed in five areas out of 12 with the expert
panel using the best scenario. Compared to the expert
panel rating, DEA showed a high sensibility (100%) and
a low specificity (66.6%). The Positive Predictive Value
(PPV) was 50% (IC: 13.9-86.0%) while the Negative Pre-
dictive Value (NPV) was 100% (IC: 51.6-98.4%). The

Positive Likelihood Ratio was 3.0 (IC: 1.1-7.5) and the
Negative Likelihood Ratio was 0.
Once the study was completed, the core group made a

careful review of the results area by area which revealed
that, in spite of the previous information provided to
experts, their ratings were not based on efficiency but
on adequacy of the small health areas. That is, experts
judged as efficient or nearly efficient, those areas with
high level of provision and resources (high adequacy)
regardless of the fact that these areas were using their
resources less efficiently than other areas with lower
provision. This conceptual disagreement between the
panel and the DEA model explained the poor PPV
found in our study. Therefore the gold standard based
on explicit prior knowledge provided by the expert
panel and tested with regional officers revealed itself
inadequate to rank technical efficiency of small health
areas in comparison with the EbCA-DEA. When con-
fronted to this fact, experts agreed that they had mea-
sured adequacy instead of technical efficiency. This fact
may indicate that adequacy and technical efficiency
should be measured together to avoid this conceptual
bias, and it illustrates the usability of EbCA in Data
Envelopment Analysis for the assessment of benchmark
and technical efficiency of complex healthcare systems.

Case study 2: Use of EbCA in case-mix of schizophrenia
based on functional dependency by means of Clustering
based on rules (ClBR)
In case study 2, we used Clustering Based on Rules
(ClBR) to develop a case-mix of schizophrenia based on
the meta-construct of “functional dependency”. ClBR is
a technique in [12] which provides operational defini-
tions for underlying profiles in a very complex domain.
It guarantees the semantic meaning of the resulting
classes, which is extremely useful for later decision
support. ClBR is a hybrid AI and Statistics technique
that combines some Inductive Learning (from AI)
with clustering (from Statistics) to extract knowledge
from complex domains in the form of typical profiles.
A Knowledge Base (KB) expressing the existent prior
domain knowledge is considered to properly guide the
database clustering. It is important to note that the KB
allows declarative knowledge to be used in a formal
way. ClBR is implemented in the software KLASS [26].
An important property of the method is that quantita-
tive, qualitative and declarative knowledge is processed
and the semantic constraints implied by the KB are held
in final clusters, which guarantees the interpretability of
the resulting classes. It improves classical clustering
because results are semantically consistent and, conse-
quently, easier to interpret [12]. It outperforms pure
inductive learning methods, since it reduces the effects
of missing some IK in the KB.

Gibert et al. Health Research Policy and Systems 2010, 8:28
http://www.health-policy-systems.com/content/8/1/28

Page 9 of 16



ClBR fits into the integral approach of KDD, [46] in
which prior expert knowledge (PEK) and post-proces-
sing of the analysis results are taken into account, pro-
ducing explicit knowledge directly understandable by
the expert [11,47]. As a matter of fact in this approach
the expert is regarded, as part of the methodology itself.
Acquiring prior expert knowledge
After a proper and detailed data preparation, acquisition
of PEK was performed by means of classical knowledge
engineering techniques, following a series of interviews
between experts and knowledge engineers with two
basic goals:

• Identify what is well-known in the domain: for
example, properties of some kinds of patients and
relationships between different variables under some
circumstances, among others. At this stage, classical
knowledge engineering requires a complete descrip-
tion of the domain, without missing any details or
exceptional cases. This is one of the most difficult
tasks, since complex phenomena imply an enormous
amount of IK that requires many iterations to
become explicit. In this approach, a partial descrip-
tion is enough, provided it does not include ambigu-
ities and inherent contradictions. Incremental
elicitation of IK is allowed under a series of iterations
when required. Previous experiences shown very
good results when starting the process by asking the
experts for an a priori description of what is called
the basic extreme antagonism, i.e. the description of a
prototypical worst-case and a prototypical best-case.
For example, as the functional dependency profiles
have to be discovered using a well constructed set of
patients, the starting questions for experts were:

◦ What characterises a person with schizophrenia
and the highest level of dependency?
◦ What characterises a person with schizophrenia
and the highest level of functional autonomy?

Although this is a good practice for using ClBR, basic
extreme antagonism is not the only way to build the
prior expert knowledge base in first iteration. If there are
well-known prototypical cases regarding the target
domain, they may be included in the first PKB as well,
and this can avoid some iterations of the process. How-
ever, it is worth to note that the efficiency of the method
is related to the discriminant power of the PKB rules and
the quality of the results is not monotonically related
with the size of PKB. This means that using a high num-
ber of non-well discriminable prototypes may decrease
the goodness of the results, whereas limiting first PKB to
the basic extreme antagonism guarantees maximum dis-
criminant power of the rules and avoids some risks.

• From the first iteration, experts are able to pro-
vide several rules concerning some clear situa-
tions. Rules corresponding to the extreme
antagonism are: patients with bad levels of func-
tioning (GAF), high needs of family support in
daily activities (ECFOS section A) and beha-
vioural problems (ECFOS section B) can be con-
sidered as severely ill
• patients able to work and with high levels of
functioning (GAF) can be considered as patients
in good condition.

• To formalize the identified knowledge in an initial
knowledge base (a set of rules expressed in formal
logics under the form If <condition> then <prop-
erty> (or <group identifier) >)

◦ r1: If ((GAFCLA < 40) or (GAFSOCIAL < 40))
and((MAXECFOS_A > 15) and(MAXECFOS_B
= Every_Day)) then severely-ill
◦ r2: If (INGRESE = WORK) and (GAFCLA >
70)or(GAFSOCIAL > 70) then good condition

Meetings between experts and knowledge engineers
within the methodological frame of knowledge engineer-
ing produced the first knowledge transfer to the system
by making an initial set of formal logic definitions
which, of course, constituted an incomplete description
of the phenomenon. In the proposed approach, instead
of working hard to arrive at a complete description initi-
ally, an iterative methodology permits incremental
improvements of PKB until only non-relevant gaps are
detected.
Support-interpretation tools
The results are graphically represented in a dendrogram
(a binary tree which visualises how patients have been
successively grouped by the method and permits the
identification of the suitable number of profiles). The
Calinski index [48] is maximized upon the dendrogram
to determine the number of classes on the basis of what
is suggested by the structure of analyzed data itself,
rather than a priori supposing a blind number of classes
as occurs in other clustering methods. Interpretation of
the classes was formerly difficult and time consuming
and required much human guidance, particularly in
cases with many relevant variables or many final classes.
Efforts to assist experts in this task led to the battery of
interpretation-support tools used here [47,49]. First, for
all the variables, the relevance of differences between
classes is assessed using the corresponding statistical
test (ANOVA, Kruskall-Wallis test or chi-2 indepen-
dence test). Then a class panel graph (CPG, Fig. 2) of
significant variables is charted, where conditional distri-
butions of the variables through the classes, displayed
through multiple histograms or barcharts, are shown in

Gibert et al. Health Research Policy and Systems 2010, 8:28
http://www.health-policy-systems.com/content/8/1/28

Page 10 of 16



Figure 2 Class panel graph. Every row shows one of the classes resulting from the ClBR process. In the columns, variables (relevant
characteristics of the patients or items from the assessment scales) are presented. Every cell of the table shows the distribution of a given item
or characteristic in a certain class This permits to identify wich variable have particular behaviour in which classes. Details of the interpretation
iduced from these class panel graphs are presented in [12].

Gibert et al. Health Research Policy and Systems 2010, 8:28
http://www.health-policy-systems.com/content/8/1/28

Page 11 of 16



a compact way [49]. The knowledge engineer marks the
more characteristic cells of the CPG. Experts use the
marked CPG to easily observe why the variables are sig-
nificant and relevant for the description of the profiles;
particularities of the variables in one specific class
regarding the others can be seen and evaluated by the
experts and, as non incoherencies are found, this helps
the expert to develop a conceptualization process which
leads to a class-labelling proposal regarding the semantic
entity represented by each class.
Identifying profiles by ClBR
The Prior Expert Knowledge PEK acquisition phase pro-
duces a first short and incomplete Prior Knowledge Base
PKB (of course we can find other patients in good con-
ditions who do not satisfy the second rule, they may, for
example, not work, just because their family is wealthy).
PKB is used to guide a hierarchical clustering process
(in particular a reciprocal neighbours algorithm with
Ward’s criteria and Gibert’s mixed metrics [50]): it is
evaluated over the sample, and patients satisfying every
rule are identified and pre-processed together; a prototy-
pical description of patients satisfying every rule is auto-
matically induced and used to be clustered with the
remaining patients. This produces a global partition of
target patients, coherent with PEK, including those that
satisfied PEK and the rest.
Support-interpretation tools were used at every itera-

tion to help experts conceptualize the identified groups.
Some iterations are often required to gradually complete
the PKB with relevant elicited IK and to obtain a set of
profiles which can describe the whole set of patients
through homogeneous groups of patients that are distin-
guishable from each other and that provide a set of dis-
tinctive characteristics for each group, thus giving a
semantic explanation of the results. This explanation
contributes to an operational definition of functioning
in schizophrenia and can be used to better understand
dependency patterns in our immediate environment and
to support proper decisions about resource allocation
and planning. For example, in the specific case of Spain,
decisions are related to the implementation of the Span-
ish Law of Dependency and the use of the official
assessment tool for eligibility and classification of per-
sons with dependency.
Resulting profiles
The first PKB contained the two rules presented above.
Some iterations were required to elicit the expert IK
required for completing the analysis. As part of the pro-
cess several contradictions were evidenced, and these
where used to improve the PKB for next iteration. As an
example, in first iteration a class was conformed with
highly dependent persons. However, the family care needs
of the class showed intermediate values with was not intui-
tive at all. Going further on the analysis of the class

composition it could be understood that it contained both
patients living in the community and some staying in insti-
tutions. The former had very high family care needs, while
the later benefit from institution’s resources and registered
very low family care loads, thus producing a non-sensical
intermediate values for family care needs in this class. A
new rule could be introduced to identify institutionalized
patients and then, the meaning of the resulted classes
improved. Five iterations with different improvements
were required to reach final results. Finally, 5 classes with
different patterns of functioning and increasing levels of
functional dependency were identified, these were all clini-
cally understandable from the medical point of view. The
proposed interpretation-process provided a conceptual
interpretation of the classes [24].
The analysis identified a group of patients with miss-

ing information (drop-outs).
A second group of Autonomous persons, without func-

tional dependency in spite of their illness, could perform
activities of daily living (ADLs) without surveillance,
were generally employed; and had a shorter course of
illness than other groups.
Patients with functional impairment were subdivided

into three different profiles according to their depen-
dency level: those who lived alone, those highly impaired
living with their families, and those in long-term resi-
dential care [24]. Particularly interesting for the experts
was the elicitation of a Living Alone group. These
patients did not have high dependency levels and had
no severe impairment for performing strict ADLs, but
did show significant behavioural problems; tended to
have inadequate monitoring/surveillance and poor treat-
ment adherence, and also showed inappropriate use of
services (i.e. missing scheduled visits and using emer-
gency service as their main care resource, some of them
up to 50 times per week). Notably, the parallel expert
panel did not identify the Living Alone profile discovered
by ClBR, although all experts agreed upon the relevance
of this class when presented as part of the ClBR results.
The kappa agreement between both classifications was
low (kappa: 0.12) although it improved after incorporat-
ing the “Living alone” group to the classification of the
final consensus panel (kappa: 0.58). Compared to the
final panel classification, the revised ClBR showed a sen-
sitivity of 67.7%, a specificity of 82%, a Positive Predic-
tive Value (PPV) of 71.9% (IC: 62.6-79.7%), a Negative
Predictive Value (NPV) of 78.9% (IC: 72.1 - 84.4%), a
Positive Likelihood Ratio of 3.7 (IC: 2.6-5.2) and a Nega-
tive Likelihood Ratio of 0.3 (IC: 0.3-0.5).

Discussion
This paper proposes a new methodological approach,
named Expert-based Cooperative Analysis (EbCA),
which provides a new paradigm where expert knowledge

Gibert et al. Health Research Policy and Systems 2010, 8:28
http://www.health-policy-systems.com/content/8/1/28

Page 12 of 16



can be formally included in any data analysis method to
obtain high quality results.
Modelling very complex phenomena, as healthcare

systems, is a very difficult task, especially if resulting
models have to provide proper support to real decision-
making.
Until recently, there were no formal tools to analyze

the knowledge in its declarative form, and the restrictive
experimental approach was the most rigorous and
powerful method for scientific research. However, the
classical experimental approach, strictly based on col-
lected data and techniques relying on algebraic funda-
mentals may not capture the whole complexity of the
intricate phenomena found in real practice. Some trials
to include prior expert knowledge provided some
advances in this topic:
Operational models, which are based on more or less

specific mathematical and/or statistical procedures, as well
as other analysis techniques which use prior knowledge
try to solve decisional situations that can be modelled
using formal procedures and well-known algorithms.
Stevens and O’Hagan [51] state that, “submissions of
evidence... using the Bayesian approach must include sup-
porting documentation that demonstrates clearly that a
formal process of elicitation has been followed if the prior
information is to be accepted as credible.” The importance
of incorporating both explicit and tacit knowledge has also
being stated when using structural equation modelling
[52]. However, none of those techniques can treat the
prior knowledge in its declarative form. Some of them
transform into distribution probabilities (bayessian
approaches) or into algebraic equations, what represents a
serious limitation on the kind of knowledge that can be
expressed and incorporated into the analysis. On the other
hand, owing to this translation required between the
knowledge expressed by the experts and their introduction
into the analysis, those techniques usually gather prior
knowledge just at the pre-processing phase and a separa-
tion persists between the expert knowledge transmission
to the system and formalisation and data analysis itself.
EbCA, as initially structured by our group [13], consti-

tutes a new possibility of including prior knowledge into
the analysis, more powerful and flexible than other pre-
vious alternatives because it takes advantage of the new
formal frameworks provided by Artificial Intelligence to
deal with declarative knowledge under symbolic para-
digms, and permits to take advantage of the high value of
existing expert knowledge, under his natural form. EbCA
is suitable to evaluate the complexity of health care
systems. Incorporating this knowledge into data analysis
contributes to improve complex decision-making, rather
than decrease the scientific rigour in research, provided
this knowledge is included in the analysis using proper
formalism.

On the other hand, the use of formalisms which do
not require hard formalizations of expert knowledge
(such as to transform them into probability distributions
or algebraic equations) permits to eliminate one of the
strongest limitations of classical knowledge-based meth-
ods and other prior knowledge based methods (such as
bayessian methods or structural equations). All those
approached seriously depended on the completeness of
the prior knowledge transmitted to the system, at the
beginning of the data analysis process. It is obvious that
as implicit knowledge was not included in those prior
knowledge descriptions the performance of the methods
were seriously damaged.
EbCA is dealing with prior knowledge without hard

transformations, it keeps in declarative form and do not
require hard pre-processing of the prior knowledge to
include in the data analysis. This makes possible to use
an iterative scheme where, the completeness assumption
for the prior knowledge can be eliminated. Partial prior
knowledge can be considered at the beginning of the
process and a sequential dialogue between experts and
knowledge engineers is established that guides the coop-
erative incremental generation of new knowledge as well
as elicitation of implicit knowledge along the whole pro-
cess. Under this approach, expert knowledge can be
included formally and incrementally in the analysis
improving quality of results. The underlying mechanism
is simple, but highly effective: cooperation between
automatic PKB evaluation (relationships between vari-
ables or individuals in ClBR or rule evaluation in EbC-
DEA) and blind analysis (hierarchical clustering- in
ClBR or DEA in EbC-DEA) permits the completion of
an initialy partial description of the domain provided by
the experts to get good models for complex phenomena.
Whatever the data analysis technique being used,

EbCA may provide the frame for generalizing it in such
a way that experts can introduce their explicit knowl-
edge into the analysis and, using the suitable interpreta-
tion support tools, elicit implicit knowledge which was
previously disregarded, learning from the results of the
analysis, and permit its immediate incorporation into
the model. Finally, the relevant knowledge for the deci-
sional problem to be solved is elicited, extracted and
formalized. Being supported by an analytical method,
this new knowledge can be used to improve decision
making process based on informed-evidence.
EbCA methodology fits into the general framework of

KDD where both the prior knowledge and the post-pro-
cessing of results are as important as the analysis itself
to produce useful and understandable models [46,53].
A significant contribution of EbCA is the use of stan-
dard strategies to improve knowledge transfer from
experts and decision makers to the knowledge engineers
and vice versa, using a common language. As a matter

Gibert et al. Health Research Policy and Systems 2010, 8:28
http://www.health-policy-systems.com/content/8/1/28

Page 13 of 16



of fact, the use of EbCA approach may be regarded as
the first step in the development of ontologies for very
complex domains which may help to structure the doc-
trinae corpus and therefore improve decision making
[54]. In knowledge engineering it is usual to develop
ontologies from scratch, using expert interviews as the
source of expert knowledge. However, the risk of getting
incomplete ontologies due to implicit knowledge
increases significantly with the complexity of the target
phenomenon. The EbCA approach may improve the
development of comprehensive ontologies in fields
where knowledge is disperse and/or incomplete. EbCA-
DEA and ClBR show the feasibility of using EbCA to
incorporate expert knowledge into other data analysis
techniques. Both ClBR and EbCA-DEA may be regarded
as hybrid or mixed qualitative-quantitative techniques
(knowledge management, knowledge engineering and
data analysis) which combine classical data analysis
techniques and AI methods that permit prior knowledge
processing [30]. These two techniques have proven to
be more powerful than the corresponding classical
methods (hierarchical clustering or classical DEA) for
modelling complex domains.
EbCA has been applied to other areas of medicine

relevant to integrated care. Particular methods following
the EbCA approach have been used to identify case-mix
in traumatic brain injury based on the characteristics of
deficit and response to neuro-rehabilitation treatment
[11], to describe patterns of evolution over time of the
Quality of Life (QoL) of patients with spinal cord injury
attended in integrated [55], to the analysis of integrated
home care support system [56], to find profiles of
patients with thyroid dysfunctions [12], to find profiles
of functional disability in elderly patients on the basis of
the information provided by the WHO-DAS [57], or to
identify vulnerability factors to develop comorbid mental
disorder in an intellectually disabled population [58].
Some of these studies had real impact in the integrated
care and decision making. As an example, the use of
ClBR in brain injury [11] identified which kind of
patients shown partial response to the neuro-rehabilita-
tion treatment and which were the non-rehabilitated
neuropsychological functions so that the hospital man-
agers could take decisions regarding the neuro-rehabili-
tation programs for those patients [55]. It also elicited
hypothesis about the reasons why patients develop dis-
tress or depression, thus helping on better coordinated
intervention planning between doctors, psychologists,
social workers and relatives aimed to avoid (or delay)
them and [57] evidenced that functional disability in
ageing patients is not always due to physical impair-
ment, but to emotional problems as well, so treatment
programmes could be designed accordingly.

Conclusions and Future Work
Taking advantage of the well-known prior expert knowl-
edge and adopting an iterative strategy to help the expert
to elicit the extensive implicit knowledge that he or she
uses in daily reasoning and decision-making is a powerful
method which should be considered a new research para-
digm to improve medical doctrinae corpus. This approach
provides an operational method to bridge and transfer
knowledge between clinicians and data analysts when
studying complex entities such as integrated care. Exam-
ples of its applicability in integrated care for persons with
severe disabilities [11,13,24,55,56,58] and ageing [56,57].
In the future, usability of EbCA should be tested to

generalize other analysis methods, as the addition of
implicit knowledge to classical techniques may improve
the quality of results regardless of the underlying
method. Impact assessment studies are required to
explore the usability of this approach in comparison to
classical techniques of data analysis. Further application
of EbCa approach to health service research might pro-
duce significant improvements in better understanding
integrated care systems and in developing evidence-
based policy and planning in this area.

Acknowledgements
This research was partially supported by PRODEP, the Agency of functional
dependency in Catalonia, by the Andalusian Government under the projects
PI08/90752 and PI08/9075, the Ministry of Science and Technology of the
Spanish Government under the projects TIC2000-1011, TIN2004-01368, and
the Executive Agency for Health and Consumers of the European
Commission (eDESDE-LTC project, ref. EAHC- 2007116). Authors want to
thank Carolyn Walsh for the English review and comments, Jose Alberto
Salinas for editing support and the members of the DEFDEP group Susana
Ochoa, Victoria Villalta-Gil, and Margarida Nadal.

Author details
1Department of Statistics and Operations Research Universitat Politècnica de
Catalunya, Barcelona, 08034, Spain. 2Knowledge Engineering and Machine
Learning Group, Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya, Barcelona, 08034,
Spain. 3ETEA Business Administration Faculty, University of Córdoba,
Córdoba, 14004, Spain. 4Department of Neurosciences. University of Cadiz.
Plaza Falla 9 11003 Cadiz, Spain. 5PSICOST Research Association. Plaza San
Marcos 6. Jerez 11403, Spain.

Authors’ contributions
The three authors worked together in the development of the model. CG
and LSC applied it to DEA (case 1), and KG and LSC applied it to ClBR (case
2). The three authors wrote the paper. All authors have read and approved
the final manuscript.

Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.

Received: 7 January 2010 Accepted: 30 September 2010
Published: 30 September 2010

References
1. Montori VM, Guyatt GH: Progress in Evidence-Based Medicine. JAMA 2008,

300(15):1814-1816.
2. Edgren L: The meaning of integrated care: a systems approach. Int J

Integr Care 2008, 8:e68.

Gibert et al. Health Research Policy and Systems 2010, 8:28
http://www.health-policy-systems.com/content/8/1/28

Page 14 of 16

http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18854545?dopt=Abstract
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19008987?dopt=Abstract


3. Savigny D, Adams T: Systems thinking for health systems strengthening.
Geneve: World Health Organization 2009.

4. Iles V, Sutherland K: Organisational Change: A review for health care
managers, professionals and researchers. London: National Co-ordinating
Centre for NHS Service Delivery and Organisation 2001 [http://www.sdo.
nihr.ac.uk/files/adhoc/change-management-review.pdf], (Last access 20th
June 2010).

5. Fretheim A, Munabi-Babigumira S, Oxman AD, Lavis JN, Lewin S: SUPPORT
Tools for Evidence-informed policymaking in health 6: Using research
evidence to address how an option will be implemented. Health Res
Policy Syst 2009, 7(Suppl 1):S6.

6. Salvador-Carulla L, Costa-Font J, Cabases J, McDaid D, Alonso J: Evaluating
Mental Health Care and Policy in Spain. J Ment Health Policy Econ 2010,
13:73-86.

7. Ministry of Health: Report on the Royal Commission on Mental Illness
and Mental Deficiency. London: HMSO 1957.

8. Duncan DF: The Prevention of Primary Prevention, 1960-1994: Notes
Toward a Case Study. The J Prim Prev 1994, 15(1):73-79.

9. Salvador-Carulla L, Haro JM, Ayuso-Mateos JL: A framework for evidence-
based mental health care and policy. Acta Psychiatr Scand 2006,
111(Suppl 432):5-11.

10. Eisenberg L: The future of psychiatry. Lancet 1973, ii:1371-5.
11. Gibert K, García-Rudolph A, García-Molina A, Roig-Rovira T, Bernabeu M,

Tormos JM: Response to traumatic brain injury neurorehabilitation
through an artificial intelligence and statistics hybrid knowledge
discovery from databases methodology. Med Arch 2008, 62(3):132-135.

12. Gibert K, Sonicki Z: Clustering based on rules and medical research.
Applied Stochastic Models in Business and Industry, formerly JASMDA 1999,
15(4):319-324.

13. Salvador-Carulla L, Garcia-Alonso C, Gonzalez-Caballero JL, Garrido-
Cumbrera M: Use of an operational model of community care to assess
technical efficiency and benchmarking of small mental health areas in
Spain. J Ment Health Policy Econ 2007, 10(2):87-100.

14. Russell SJ, Norvig P: Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach Upper Saddle
River, NJ: Prentice Hall 2003.

15. Johnson S, Kuhlmann R, the EPCAT Group: The European Service Mapping
Schedule (ESMS): Development of an instrument for the description and
classification of mental health services. Acta Psychiatr Scand 2000,
102(405):s14-23.

16. Albarrán Lozano I, Alonso González P: [Dependent individuals
classification based on the 1999 Disabilities, Impairments and Health
Status Survey]. Rev Esp Salud Publica 2006, 80(4):349-60, [In Spanish].

17. Salvador-Carulla L, Gasca VI: Defining disability, functioning, autonomy
and dependency in person-centered medicine and integrated care. Int J
Integr Care 2010, 10(Suppl):e025.

18. Salvador-Carulla L, Gibert K, Ochoa S: Definition of functional dependency.
Implications for health and social policy. Aten Primaria 2010, 42(6):344-5.

19. Polo FJ, Negrin M, Cabasés JM, Sanchez E, Haro JM, Salvador-Carulla L: An
analysis of the costs of treating schizophrenia in Spain: a hierarchical
Bayesian approach. J Ment Health Policy Econ 2005, 8(3):153-65.

20. Endicott J, Spitzer RL: The global assessment scale: a procedure for
measuring overall severity of psychiatric disturbances. Arch Gen Psychiatry
1976, 33:766-771.

21. Janca A, Kastrup M, Katschnig H, López-Ibor JJ, Mezzich JJE, Sartorius N: The
World Health Organization Short Disability Assessment Schedule (WHO-
DAS-S): a tool for the assessment of dificulties in selected areas of
functioning of patients with mental disorders. Soc Psychiatry Psychiatr
Epidemiol 1996, 31:349-54.

22. Vilaplana MV, Ochoa S, Martínez A, Villalta V, Martinez-Leal R, Puigdollers E,
Salvador-Carulla L, Martorell A, Muñoz PE, Haro JM: [Validation in Spanish
population of the family objective and subjective burden interview
(ECFOS-II) for relatives of patients with schizophrenia]. Actas Esp Psiquiatr
2007, 35(6):372-81, [In Spanish].

23. Salvador-Carulla L, Saldivia S, Martinez-Leal R, Vicente B, Garcia-Alonso C,
Grandon P, Haro JM: Meso-Level Comparison of Mental Health Service
Availability and Use in Chile and Spain. Psychiatr Serv 2008, 59(4):421-428.

24. Gibert K, Salvador-Carulla L, Martín JC, Ochoa S, Vilalta V, Nadal M: Patterns
on Functional Dependency Discovery in Schizophrenia by using
Clustering based on rules. Procs COMPSTAT Heidelberg, Germany: Physica-
Verlag 2008, 155-163.

25. Gibert K, Aluja T, Cortés U: Knowledge Discovery with Clustering Based
on Rules. Interpreting Results. In Principles of Data Mining and Knowledge
Discovery. Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence. Edited by: Zytkow JM,
Quafafou M. Berlin: Springer-Verlag; 1998:1510:83-92.

26. Gibert K, Nonell R: Pre and post-processing in KLASS. Proc of the DM-
TES’08 Workshop at iEMSs 2008, III:1965-1966.

27. Gibert K, Sánchez-Marrè , Comas J: The impact of feature weighting in
environmental class discovery using GESCONDA. Procs of 17th European
Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Workshop 20: Binding Environmental
Sciences and Artificial Intelligence (BESAI) 2006.

28. Torres M, Hervás-Martínez C, García-Alonso C: Multinomial logistic
regression and product unit neural network models: Application of a
new hybrid methodology for solving a classification problem in the
livestock sector. Expert System with Applications 2009, 36(10):12225-12235.

29. Tukey JW: Exploratory Data Analysis NY, USA: Addison-Wesley 1997.
30. Gibert K, Spate J, Sànchez-Marrè M, Athanasiadis I, Comas J: Data Mining

for Environmental Systems. In Environmental Modeling. Software and
Decision Support. State of the art and New Perspectives. Amsterdam, NL:
IDEA Series (3) Elsevier 2008, 205-228.

31. Gupta JND, Sharma SK: Creating knowledge based organizations Hershey PA:
Idea Group Publishing 2004.

32. Polanyi M: The Tacit Dimension New York: Anchor Books 1967.
33. Nonaka T: The knowledge creating company Oxford: Oxford University Press

1995.
34. Mitchell T: Machine Learning NY, USA: McGraw Hill 1997.
35. Shrout PE, Fleiss JL: Intraclass correlations: uses in assessing rater

reliability. Psychol Bull 1979, 86:420-428.
36. McGraw KO, Wong SP: Forming inferences about some intraclass

correlation coefficients. Psychol Methods 1996, 1:30-46.
37. Ozcan YA, Merwin E, Lee K, Morrissey JP: Benchmarking using DEA: the

case of mental health organizations, in Operations Research and Health
Care. In International Series on Operations Research and Management
Science. Edited by: Brandeau ML, Sainfort F, Pierskalla WP. Dordrecht (NL):
Kluwer; 2004:169-189.

38. O’Neill W, Dexter F: Evaluating the efficiency of hospitals’ perioperative
services using DEA. In International Series on Operations Research and
Management Science. Edited by: Brandeau ML, Sainfort F, Pierskalla WP.
Dordrecht (NL): Kluwer; 2004:147-168.

39. Zhu J: Imprecise data envelopment analysis (IDEA): A review and
improvement with an application. Eur J Oper Res 2003, 144:513-529.

40. García-Alonso CR: Efficiency of selected productive strategies with
imprecise data. Acta Hortic 2004, 659:53-60.

41. Boussofiane A, Dyson RG, Thanassoulis E: Applied Data Envelopment
Analysis. Eur J Oper Res 1991, 52:1-15.

42. Dyson G, Allena R, Camanhob AS, Podinovskia VV, Sarricoa CS, Shale EA:
Pitfalls and protocols in DEA. Eur J Oper Res 2001, 132(2):245-259.

43. Serrano-Cinca C, Mar-Molinero C: Selecting DEA specifications and
ranking units via PCA. J Oper Res Soc 2004, 55:521-528.

44. Scheel H: Undesirable outputs in efficiency valuations. Eur J Oper Res
2001, 132:400-410.

45. Seiford LM, Zhu J: Modeling undesirable factors in efficiency evaluation.
Eur J Oper Res 2002, 142:16-20.

46. Fayyad U, Piatetsky-Shapiro G, Smyth P, Uthurusamy R: Advances in
Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, In From Data Mining to KDD: An
overview Boston: AAAI/MIT Press 1996.

47. Gibert K, García-Rudolph A, Rodríguez-Silva G: The role of KDD Support-
Interpretation tools in the conceptualization of medical profiles:An
application to neurorehabilitation. Acta Informatica Medica 2008,
16(4):178-182.

48. Calinski T, Harabasz J: A Dendrite Method for Cluster Analysis. Commun
Stat 1974, 3(1):1-27.

49. Gibert K, Nonell R, Velarde JM, Colillas MM: Knowledge discovery with
clustering: Impact of metrics and reporting phase by using klass. Neural
Networks World 2005, 15(4):319-326.

50. Gibert K, Cortés U: Weighting quantitative and qualitative variables in
clustering methods. Journal Mathware and Soft Computing 1996,
4(3):251-266.

51. Stevens JW, O’Hagan A: Incorporation of genuine prior information in
cost-effectiveness analysis of clinical trial data. Int J Technol Assess Health
Care 2002, 18:782-790.

Gibert et al. Health Research Policy and Systems 2010, 8:28
http://www.health-policy-systems.com/content/8/1/28

Page 15 of 16

http://www.sdo.nihr.ac.uk/files/adhoc/change-management-review.pdf
http://www.sdo.nihr.ac.uk/files/adhoc/change-management-review.pdf
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20018113?dopt=Abstract
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20018113?dopt=Abstract
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20018113?dopt=Abstract
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17603149?dopt=Abstract
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17603149?dopt=Abstract
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17603149?dopt=Abstract
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16913610?dopt=Abstract
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16913610?dopt=Abstract
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16913610?dopt=Abstract
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20228922?dopt=Abstract
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20228922?dopt=Abstract
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19833414?dopt=Abstract
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19833414?dopt=Abstract
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16278503?dopt=Abstract
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16278503?dopt=Abstract
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16278503?dopt=Abstract
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/938196?dopt=Abstract
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/938196?dopt=Abstract
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8952375?dopt=Abstract
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8952375?dopt=Abstract
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8952375?dopt=Abstract
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8952375?dopt=Abstract
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17597427?dopt=Abstract
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17597427?dopt=Abstract
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17597427?dopt=Abstract
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18378842?dopt=Abstract
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18378842?dopt=Abstract
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18839484?dopt=Abstract
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18839484?dopt=Abstract
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12602079?dopt=Abstract
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12602079?dopt=Abstract


52. Humphris GM: Communication skills knowledge, understanding and
OSCE performance in medical trainees: a multivariate prospective study
using structural equation modelling. Med Educ 2002, 36(9):842-52.

53. Gibert K, Izquierdo J, Holmes G, Athanasiadis I, Comas J, Sànchez-Marrè M:
On the role of pre and post-processing in Environmental Data Mining.
Proc of the DM-TES’08 Workshop at iEMSs 2008, III:1937-1958.

54. Valls A, Gibert K, Sànchez D, Batet M: Using ontologies for structuring
organizational knowledge in Home Care assistance. Int J Med Inform
2010, 79:370-387.

55. Gibert K, García-Rudolph A, Curcoll L, Soler D, Pla L, Tormos JM: Knowledge
discovery about quality of life changes of spinal cord injury patients:
clustering based on rules by states. Stud Health Technol Inform 2009,
150:579-83.

56. Gibert K, Valls A, Riaño D: Knowledge engineering as a support for
building an actor profile ontology for integrating Home-Care systems.
Stud Health Technol Inform 2008, 136:95-100.

57. Annicchiarico R, Gibert K, Cortés U, Campana F, Caltagirone C: Qualitative
profiles of disability. J Rehabil Res Dev 2004, 41(6A):835-845.

58. Gibert K, Martorell XL, Massanet R, Sánchez-Marrè M, Martín-Sánchez JC,
Martorell A: A Knowledge Discovery methodology for identifying
vulnerability factors of mental 44 disorder in an intellectually disabled
population. Frontiers in Artificial Intelligence and Application 2007,
163:426-435.

doi:10.1186/1478-4505-8-28
Cite this article as: Gibert et al.: Integrating clinicians, knowledge and
data: expert-based cooperative analysis in healthcare decision support.
Health Research Policy and Systems 2010 8:28.

Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of: 

• Convenient online submission

• Thorough peer review

• No space constraints or color figure charges

• Immediate publication on acceptance

• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar

• Research which is freely available for redistribution

Submit your manuscript at 
www.biomedcentral.com/submit

Gibert et al. Health Research Policy and Systems 2010, 8:28
http://www.health-policy-systems.com/content/8/1/28

Page 16 of 16

http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12354247?dopt=Abstract
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12354247?dopt=Abstract
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12354247?dopt=Abstract
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20185360?dopt=Abstract
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20185360?dopt=Abstract
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19745377?dopt=Abstract
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19745377?dopt=Abstract
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19745377?dopt=Abstract
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18487714?dopt=Abstract
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18487714?dopt=Abstract
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15685472?dopt=Abstract
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15685472?dopt=Abstract

	Abstract
	Background
	Method
	Results
	Discussion

	Background
	Methods
	Case studies
	Case study 1: Benchmark of small mental health care areas based on technical efficiency
	Case study 2: Case-mix of schizophrenia based on functional dependency

	Data analysis method: Expert-based Cooperative Analysis
	Data Preparation
	Prior Knowledge Acquisition
	Interpretation-support tools and PKB-guided analysis
	Usability of EbCA in research

	Results
	Case 1: Use of EbCA in the analysis of healthcare systems by means of Expert-based Cooperative Analysis (EbCA-DEA)
	Data collection and Data preparation
	Expert-based selection of the stochastic structure of the variables
	Expert-based variable selection: designing variable (I/O) combinations (scenarios)
	Prior Expert Knowledge (PEK) Acquisition, construction of Prior Knowledge Base (PKB)
	PKB-guided analysis
	Support-interpretation tools to evaluate results and detect inconsistencies: elicitation of implicit knowledge

	Case study 2: Use of EbCA in case-mix of schizophrenia based on functional dependency by means of Clustering based on rules (ClBR)
	Acquiring prior expert knowledge
	Support-interpretation tools
	Identifying profiles by ClBR
	Resulting profiles


	Discussion
	Conclusions and Future Work
	Acknowledgements
	Author details
	Authors' contributions
	Competing interests
	References

