

















































DIALCAT: Diabetes as an Accelerator of Cognitive Impairment and Alzheimer’s Disease, Comprehensive Approach and Adherence to TreatmentRetos


DIALCAT: Diabetes as an Accelerator of Cognitive Impairment and
Alzheimer’s Disease, Comprehensive Approach and Adherence

to Treatment

Cristian Barrué1, Roger Vila1, Antonio B. Martinez1, Mario Martı́n1,Javier Vázquez-Salceda1

Rafael Simó2,4, Marta Barroso1, Ulises Cortés1,3

1 Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya,
Computer Science Department, Barcelona,

Spain

2 Vall d’Hebron Institut de Recerca (VHIR), Barcelona,
Spain

3 Barcelona Supercomputing Center, Barcelona,
Spain

4 CIBERDEM (Instituto de Salud Carlos III), Barcelona,
Spain

{cbarrue, mbarroso}@cs.upc.edu, rafael.simo@vhir.org

Abstract. In this article, we present the design
of an mHealth system to support senior citizens
with chronic diseases in managing their adherence
to pharmacological treatment. The DIALCAT system
consisting of a smart pill dispenser and a mobile
application will be tested in a clinical study for 18
months by patients suffering diabetes with mild cognitive
impairment. The clinical trial aims to study the effect
of diabetes as an accelerator of cognitive impairment
and Alzheimer’s disease and the impact of adherence
to treatment. DIALCAT is a RIS3CAT project co-funded
under the European ERDF programme.

Keywords. eHealth, active and assisted living,
diabetes, mild cognitive impairment, treatment adher-
ence, mHealth.

1 Introduction

According to the World Health Organisation [41],
47M people around the world have some form
of dementia, for which there is no effective
intervention, to halt or reverse the progressive

cognitive impairment. As Europe’s population is
ageing, long-term care for elderly citizens will
become an increasing cost for society. To manage
these transition healthcare policies in the EU and
individual Member States are heavily focused on
extending the independent life of the elderly, with
the dual aim of increasing their quality of life (QoL)
and reducing the costs of care.

At this time exists enough robust epidemiological
data [35] showing that patients with diabetes
mellitus type 2 (DM2) present between 2-3
more prevalence of severe cognitive impairment
and Alzheimer’s disease (AD) than the general
population compared by age. This circumstance
poses a severe social and health problem. This
population generates a bill of approximately 5,500
million euros to Spain’s healthcare system.

The diabetic patients with mild cognitive im-
pairment (MCI) is a group with a particular
predisposition to develop AD and are generally
composed of polymedicated patients. Moreover,
cognitive impairment may imply for this kind of

Computación y Sistemas, Vol. 23, No. 2, 2019, pp. 351–363
doi: 10.13053/CyS-23-2-3198

ISSN 2007-9737



patients, among other things, a lack of treatment
adherence and errors in drug management that
may have serious consequences.

Treatment adherence is understood, as the
measure in which a person’s actions - medicine
intake, to follow a diet, and/or to implement
lifestyle changes - correspond to the health
professionals’ recommendations. It is undeniable
that many patients have difficulties in following
the recommendations of their doctor, severely
compromising the effectiveness of the treatment
and creating a critical problem both from the
health and QoL point of view as well as in
economic terms.

The DM2 patients are the paradigm of polymed-
icated patients and if, also, they present a certain
degree of cognitive decline, forgetfulness and mis-
takes in drug management increase significantly
[37]. Providing the means to facilitate and increase
adherence to the theoretical treatment will have a
tremendous social-sanitary impact.

The DIALCAT project is an initiative funded by
the European ERDF programme that proposes
a comprehensive multidisciplinary approach to
the problem that includes observational clinical
research and a pilot intervention study to improve
metabolic control in DM2 patients with MCI. One
of the objectives of the project is to improve
treatment adherence of these patients and to
detect possible adverse effects that may arise
from polymedication, in particular, a decrease in
metabolic control, through an interventional clinical
trial with the ultimate goal of avoiding or delaying
as much as possible the appearance of the AD.

DIALCAT proposes as an innovative element,
the development and validation of an electronic
drug dispenser that allows for adherence support
and monitoring. This device is integrated with
a mHealth application developed and validated
during the same trial that will facilitate treatment
management by patients and caregivers interacting
directly with other involved stakeholders (clinicians
and pharmacists) in order to increase the
concordance and, consequently, efficiency in the
improvement of metabolic control. This paper will
focus on the description of DIALCAT’s mHealth
system and the interventional pilot study.

1.1 Plan of the Work

The plan for this paper is the following, in Section 2
we will detail the treatment adherence problem, in
Section 3 we will address related work explaining
relevant eHealth platforms implemented to give
support to treatment adherence. Section 4 will
develop the DIALCATarchitecture, deployment and
its goals. In Section 5 we explain the objectives of
the pilot study and give insight information about
the DIALCAT stakeholders.

Section 6 is devoted to discuss our conclusions
and comment the future work.

2 Adherence

Chronic diseases are a significant and growing
problem in the population. They are by far the
leading cause of mortality, representing some 86%
of all deaths in the EU. Adherence to long-term
therapy for chronic illnesses in developed countries
averages 50%. In developing countries, the rates
are even lower. It is undeniable that many
patients experience difficulty in following treatment
recommendations [40]. Individuals suffering from
one (or more) of chronic diseases will receive
complex polypharmacy therapy. High pill burden
decreases adherence to drug therapy, resulting
from the need to take a large number of pills
or other forms of medication on a regular basis.
Adherence rates are typically higher in patients
with acute conditions, as compared to those with
chronic conditions, with adherence dropping most
dramatically after the first six months of therapy
[26] and in prophylaxis.

Poor adherence to long-term therapies severely
compromises the effectiveness of treatment mak-
ing this a critical issue in population health both
from the perspective of quality of life and health
economics. Treatment non-adherence can be
considered a significant health care problem. This
fact is especially true for patients with a chronic
illness where adherence is a crucial factor in
the effectiveness of a therapy [6]. Concordance
and adherence management are of high priority,
having a significant effect on the cost-effectiveness
of therapy.

Computación y Sistemas, Vol. 23, No. 2, 2019, pp. 351–363
doi: 10.13053/CyS-23-2-3198

Cristian Barrué, Roger Vila, Antonio B. Martinez, Mario Martín,Javier Vázquez Salceda, Rafael Simó, et al.352

ISSN 2007-9737



This is especially important where there are
disorders with high healthcare costs, such as
oncological diseases, psychiatric disorders, HIV,
geriatrician disorders or dementia. Initiatives
attempting to address medicine non-adherence
promote patient involvement in treatment deci-
sions, but there is no single intervention strategy
or package of strategies that have been shown
to be effective across all patients, conditions
and settings.

The ability of patients to follow treatment plans
optimally is frequently compromised by more than
one barrier, usually related to different aspects
of the problem. These include the social and
economic factors, the healthcare team/system,
the characteristics of the disease therapies and
patient-related factors [40]. Trosle has defined
non-adherence as ”an unavoidable by-product
of collisions between the clinical world and the
other competing worlds of work, play, friendships
and family life” [39]. Interventions using applied
high-technology show potential for supporting
therapy adherence in patients with diseases
that require a polypharmacological treatment.
Pharmacist care could help to reach optimal
cooperation between patients, the healthcare
professional using high technology interventions,
as one of the main objectives is to improve the
rate of patient adherence in long-term therapy.
Treatment non-adherence is an expensive and
potentially deadly problem, resulting in 89,000
deaths and 100 billion US dollars per year in
unnecessary hospital costs, in the USA.

It has been estimated that there are 194,500
deaths a year in the EU due to miss-dose
and non-adherence of prescribed medication [27].
Non-adherence is estimated to cost the European
Union 125Be annually [27]. Unused medications
returned in the UK are incinerated. In the UK alone
10% of all drug waste is incinerated each year,
valued at about 369.6 Me. Studies consistently
find significant cost-savings and increases in
the effectiveness of health interventions that
are attributable to interventions for improving
adherence [36].

Without a system that addresses the deter-
minants of adherence, advances in biomedical
technology will fail to realise their potential to

reduce the burden of chronic illness. Interventions
that target adherence must be tailored to the
particular illness-related demands experienced by
the patient, mainly because most of the care
needed for chronic conditions is based on patient
self-management (usually requiring complex multi-
therapies) and changes in the lifestyle.

3 Related Work

Despite technical advances in Telehealth, Sensors,
Cognitive Systems and Social Networks, systems
controlling medical non-adherence are still not
integrated and embedded in the care process,
especially for medication adherence fulfilment and
assessment at home.

3.1 Methods of Assessing Adherence

Accurate assessment of adherence behaviour is
necessary for effective and efficient treatment
planning, and for ensuring that changes in health
outcomes can be attributed to the recommended
regimen. Indisputably, there is no gold standard
for measuring adherence behaviour [9]. Traditional
adherence assessment methods that one can find
in standard clinical practice often yield inaccuracies
when used as standalone methods [16]. There are
three main approaches: the patient or caregiver
self-report, review of refill records and pill counts.
Pharmacist assessment using questions would be
included in the self-report method.

1. Self-report: clinicians traditionally rely upon
self-report to assess medication adherence
to treatment. During the visit, the pa-
tient/caregiver is asked a set of direct ques-
tions regarding medication use and treatment
concordance (e.g. diet, physical activity, etc.).
Most of times users answer positively even if it
is false, to avoid alienating their provider and
because of discomfort in sharing difficulties
associated with medication use. This interview
method has proven to be the less reliable [10].
An alternative interviewing method to obtain
more information [33] consists in formulating
open-ended questions like Will you tell me how
you take your medications?. An example of

Computación y Sistemas, Vol. 23, No. 2, 2019, pp. 351–363
doi: 10.13053/CyS-23-2-3198

DIALCAT: Diabetes as an Accelerator of Cognitive Impairment and Alzheimer’s Disease... 353

ISSN 2007-9737



a self-assessment validated clinical screening
tool is the Morisky scale [24].

2. Prescription Refill Methods: Are partially
useful for assessing medication adherence if
the patient purchases their medications from
a single source or an electronic recipe is
available allowing a track of the purchase.
Information obtained like this is generally
inadequate [11] as obtaining information about
refilling, or prescription renewal does not
provide information about real consumption.

3. Pill Counts: Although it was considered
a useful method to assess adherence, it
has proven to be unreliable, tending to
overestimate adherence [31].

3.2 Types of Non-Adherence

Treatment non-adherence causes vary among
patients and are broadly categorised as uninten-
tional or intentional. Unintentional non-adherence
involves intending to take a medication or following
a treatment pattern as instructed but failing to do so
for some reason (e.g. forgetfulness, carelessness).
Unintentional non-adherence is influenced by
patient characteristics, treatment factors and
patient-provider issues. In contrast, intentional
non-adherence involves making a reasoned deci-
sion not to follow treatment as instructed based
on perceptions, feelings or beliefs. Intentional
non-adherence reflects a rational decision-making
process by the patient whereby the benefits
of treatment are weighed against any adverse
effects of the treatment. Broadly characterising
non-adherence may oversimplify the complexities
involved in non-adherence, but it is practical and
illustrates that mitigating non-adherence requires
different interventions.

3.3 Non-ICT Medication Management
Assessment Tools

Several scales and assessment tools have been
designed to evaluate the patient’s medication
management skills. These scales cover different
aspects related to adherence and the medication
process for instance:

— Ability to read and understand labels properly.

— Ability to open, withdraw the proper amount
of medication and close the medication
containers.

— Ability to understand the medication regimens
and requirements.

— Ability to follow the correct timing and
food/liquid co-ingestion indications.

The validation of some of these scales found
that having at least one physical dependency in
activities of daily living or cognitive impairment
was an independent risk factor for poorer
performance [16]. A thorough review study on
tools for assessing of medication management
skills performed over 44 different instruments
(26 invalidated, 18 validated) showed that skills
assessed, and methods for assessment, were
highly variable [8]. Most validated instruments
used a standardised, simulated medication regi-
men, whereas invalidated instruments mostly used
patients’ own medications with inadequate detail or
instructions to enable standardised administration.
To conclude, it can be said that there is no
reliable standard scales or tools to measure patient
adherence or ability to manage their medication
that is widely accepted and recommended in
clinical best-practise guidelines. Many different
measures have been reported in the literature,
and the substantial variations in study design and
definitions reported suggest a need to increase
standardisation in terminology and definitions of
the measure of adherence and persistence to allow
comparisons across studies [1].

3.4 ICT Aids to Adherence Assessment

Several solutions do exist to support medication
adherence; while relatively low technology meth-
ods (e.g. pill boxes, pill counts) for adherence
assessment are most commonly used, newer ICT
tools have been developed.

These include automated pill dispensers,
refill reminders and intake reminders and some
telehealth approaches.

Computación y Sistemas, Vol. 23, No. 2, 2019, pp. 351–363
doi: 10.13053/CyS-23-2-3198

Cristian Barrué, Roger Vila, Antonio B. Martinez, Mario Martín,Javier Vázquez Salceda, Rafael Simó, et al.354

ISSN 2007-9737



Pill Dispensers
Dozens of solutions are available in the market,
from simple and low cost to complex and
expensive. They can be classified into three
categories:

— Passive: passive pill dispensers include the
low technology solutions as pillboxes that
enact a storage role in the adherence process.
There are many solutions in the market, some
of them classifying medications in several
doses, along the week and the day to ease
intake. The storage style can help to remind
which pill corresponds to each intake, but
their contribution to medical adherence is
completely unproven.

— Reminders: In the reminder category we can
find the lowest technology profile pill boxes
that have an attached alarm clock that alerts
the user when to take medication (MEDGlider
[17], MED-Q [20], Med-Time [26])

— Smart: In this category, we can find devices
that have capacities included in the previous
ones, but have some extra element that
provides advanced services. For instance, the
Phillips Medication Dispensing Service [28]
can retire missed doses that have been left in
the tray, provides instructions on how to take
medicines or is resistant to energy failures.
Pillo [30], offers facial recognition, reminders
and the possibility to share dispensing activity
with family and caregivers via the internet.
Other ICT technologies related with adher-
ence support are targeted to pharmacists like
Medical Dispenser [18] that supports them
in the preparation of personalized medication
blisters. In [23] we explored a pill dispenser
associated to a Multi-Agent System able
to provide alerts and interact with different
actors.

The different solutions presented are among the
many technological aids designed to help patients
adhere to medication schedules, currently being
marketed directly to patients and their caregivers.
Designed to be patient friendly and low cost, these
technological aids are not supported by adequate

reliability and validity data [16]. Controlled
trials comparing these systems with conventional
methods are lacking.

A patent search was performed using the
European Patent Office engine using keywords
like treatment adherence or pill dispenser and the
authors got more than 800 hits. The patents can
be grouped as pill caps for medicine bottles (some
with alarms or counters), industrial machines for
the pharmacy industry, protection casings for pill
blisters, manual devices for blister pill extraction,
pill count displays and mechanical pill dispensers.

Mobile apps and Social Networks
In the market, there are many software solutions
oriented to mobile phones. Applications that
provide program reminders and dosage configura-
tions for the medications (Pillboxie [29]), reminders
for appointments with the doctor and incorporate
contact phones (Med O’clock [19]) or include more
complex services regarding health management
(MyQuest for Patients [25]). The study presented
by Dayer [5] about smartphone medication
adherence apps examined 160 adherence apps
and showed that few apps go beyond the
classic reminders providing enhanced services like
complex treatment instructions, online databases
or provider data entry.

Medical Adherence tools are also reaching the
social networks, for instance, the Crohnology
social network gathers together stakeholders that
can contribute to the treatment of the Crohn
disease. CAREGIVERSPRO-MMD [7] is a
social network that supports people living with
dementia and their caregivers, also provides some
treatment adherence support features. Other
works are focusing on evaluating the effect of
medication reminders to young individuals through
the available social networks [21]. OSTEOLINK
[15] is an AAL funded project that explored the
use of social networks to connect patients and care
providers in the osteoporosis context.

Practical social support has been consistently
associated with greater medication adherence
[34], but studies that associate greater adherence
to the use of social networks are needed.

Computación y Sistemas, Vol. 23, No. 2, 2019, pp. 351–363
doi: 10.13053/CyS-23-2-3198

DIALCAT: Diabetes as an Accelerator of Cognitive Impairment and Alzheimer’s Disease... 355

ISSN 2007-9737



Fig. 1. DIALCAT Architecture

EU Funded Projects
Many EU funded projects use telehealth platforms
to monitor specific pathologies, and some offer
medication adherence check through the use of
self-reports (CHRONIUS [3], COMOESTAS [4],
HEARTCYCLE [12], MONARCA [22]).

Other projects were more focused on improving
adherence to treatments, using ICT like the
HIVIND [13] project tried to improve adherence to
HIV treatment through the use of mobile phone
messages or not using ICT and focusing on
developing new best-practices or medical trials
(QUATRO [32], IMPROVINGADHERENCE [14],
ABC [2]).

Only the MEDICATE [38] project included the
use of an ICT based pill dispenser to improve
adherence from all the studied, but the resulting
product never reached the actual standards neither
reached the market.

4 DIALCAT mHealth Platform

The DIALCAT Project proposes the development
of an innovative mHealth platform and well-tailored

personalised services to substantially improve
chronic patients’ medication and treatment adher-
ence (see the architecture in Figure 1). The
DIALCAT platform incorporates two elements: i)
A Smart pill dispenser that has been developed
to provide the medication at the prescribed
times, control missed doses with the included
sensors, control the drug stock and provide the
characteristics of an IoT device; ii) DIALCAT
mobile app empowering users with the ability
to self manage their treatment obtaining tailored
information and feedback depending on their
treatment concordance.

DIALCAT offers the users the opportunity
to self-manage their personalised therapeutic
programme under medical supervision at home
using the DIALCAT platform. This can lead
patients to achieve their treatment goal(s) in
their preferred environment, improving motivation,
and providing an objective assessment of the
personalised protocol and its outcomes during all
the process. Furthermore, it may provide a unique
opportunity to gather a large amount of data on
adherence to therapeutic regimen outcomes for
extended periods of time, that can be shared

Computación y Sistemas, Vol. 23, No. 2, 2019, pp. 351–363
doi: 10.13053/CyS-23-2-3198

Cristian Barrué, Roger Vila, Antonio B. Martinez, Mario Martín,Javier Vázquez Salceda, Rafael Simó, et al.356

ISSN 2007-9737



to increase knowledge on users’ lifestyle and
evolution, to predict potential risks or benefits
and to avoid the cold start effect when new
users start to use the DIALCAT platform. The
DIALCAT platform will be able to provide timely
and precise indicators of patient adherence and
produce relevant reports that will help clinicians to
improve the personalisation of the treatment and
react when necessary.

4.1 DIALCAT Smart Pill Dispenser

DIALCAT ’s smart pill dispenser has a set of
capabilities that make it different from what is
available in the market beyond the fact that is
connected to the DIALCAT system feeding the
users’ adherence data. The dispenser allows
management of the following:

— that drugs that need to be provided at a
specific time are in place.

— that drugs to be provided belong to the user
linked to the dispenser.

— the information on when and how the pills are
removed from a specific cell is recorded.

The device is designed to work in home
environments and needs to be refilled weekly.
Drug refill service can be performed by trained
pharmacists, as they currently do in common
practice in the Spanish health system for instance,
but can also be performed by trained users. The
technological barrier to use the device is very low
to make it usable by all kind of users. The design
of the device has always considered the use of
low-cost materials to make it affordable to as many
people as possible when it reaches the commercial
phase. The main capabilities of the device are:

— Reminders: the device warns the user
about the time of pill in-take along the
day. First it does it with blinking lights and
later on also uses acoustic alarms when
the end of the in-take time slot is getting
closer. Connection with the mHealth platform
provides updated information about the drug
in-take schedule; reminders are dynamically
generated depending on treatment changes.

— 7 × 4 System: the device has 28 pill
cells, seven rows per weekday and four
slots per day for the standard in-take doses
(breakfast, lunch, dinner, night). The device
is uniquely identified for each user and linked
to the DIALCAT mHealth platform to get
information about the treatment. Drugs are
stored following the European standards of
medication containment and isolation.

— Adherence control: the installed sensors
based on IR LED technology to allow to detect
pills with a guaranteed precision of 5mm.
Each cell is controlled by a set of sensors that
control the presence of pills (see Figure 2).
These sensors allow the DIALCAT dispenser
to detect how many times along the day the
user takes pills from the device and when does
that happen.

— Stock Control: the sensorized box allows to
control at every moment which is the status
of the device, controlling which cells have
been emptied and which have not. This can
allow detecting wrong in-takes (empty cells
that should not be at a certain moment) or
the need to refill the device soon, allowing
to alert the user properly or the appointed
service provider.

— Soundness: the device provides means of
continuously offering its services, even when
no electric power is available (thanks to
the included battery) or when the internet
connection is failing. In any case, the
device always allows the user to retrieve the
medication. Information is stored, and it is
sent when the conditions allow it to keep the
mHealth platform updated.

In Figure 3 we can see the firmware flux diagram
for the normal operation of the dispenser.

After the design, prototyping and internal
validation phases, the device is actually in the
production phase.

For the project pilot study, 140 units are being
assembled at the time of writing this paper.

Computación y Sistemas, Vol. 23, No. 2, 2019, pp. 351–363
doi: 10.13053/CyS-23-2-3198

DIALCAT: Diabetes as an Accelerator of Cognitive Impairment and Alzheimer’s Disease... 357

ISSN 2007-9737



Fig. 2. IR Sensors screening a cell

4.2 DIALCAT Mobile app

The mHealth platform allows the integration of
information coming from external devices such as
the smart dispenser or other (e.g. a glucometer)
with the information generated by the platform itself
when interacting with the patient and connecting it
with the different actors of the therapeutic process:
patients, doctors, caregivers and pharmacists. In
order to establish this communication, in addition
to the digital platform that integrates the data
collected automatically, a control panel for doctors
and caregivers has been developed, enabling
the interaction and the information exchange with
regards the therapy. This application allows
doctors to be in contact with their patients and at
the same time be in contact with other doctors
of these patients, allowing a flexible flow of
information between clinics in real time that is not
available today.

Authorised caregivers/relatives connected to the
platform will have information to monitor the
patient’s health, adherence to the treatment and
the evolution of the therapy. At the end of the cycle,
we find the pharmacists who will be connected to
patients and doctors to receive orders to replenish
medication from the dispenser and will validate the
treatment schedule for each specific patient. From
the control panel, they will be able to check all the
medications that should be loaded in the dispenser
for each patient as well as those not contained
in the dispenser (e.g. suppositories, injections,
syrups, etc.). Even if not contained in the
dispenser, the device will remind the user to take

them. In addition to the platform for the doctors,
there is a mobile application that allows patients
and caregivers to give feedback on their follow-up
of the therapy by answering questionnaires on
pharmacological treatment, their lifestyle, diet,
exercise, etc. This information is transparently
integrated into the platform by generating statistics
and reports available to clinicians. The platform
also allows to provide reminders about treatment
and motivating messages to continue adhering to
treatment. The monitoring also reports unexpected
effects (mainly due to the drug-drug interaction
in the polymedication context), where the system
analyses possible action mechanisms that explain
this effect. Special adverse effects related to
a decrease in metabolic control are of particular
importance. The main features of the DIALCAT
digital platform are:

— A communication channel between all the
therapeutic process stakeholders in the format
of a chat system

— A control panel to manage each patient’s
medication

— A reporting system for adherence and health
variables (i.e. glycemia)

— An adherence support system using re-
minders and personalised messages

— A questionnaire system to collect health data
from the patients (i.e. glycemia measures)

— An integration service of external devices like
the smart dispenser or glucometers through
the use of APIs

— An easy and intuitive user experience

5 The DIALCAT Study

The overall objective is to evaluate whether
the improvement of metabolic control and
hypertension by promoting adherence to treatment
and communication between patients and medical
equipment can prevent or delay the process of
cognitive decline and the conversion to AD in a
diabetic patient with MCI. The intervention to be

Computación y Sistemas, Vol. 23, No. 2, 2019, pp. 351–363
doi: 10.13053/CyS-23-2-3198

Cristian Barrué, Roger Vila, Antonio B. Martinez, Mario Martín,Javier Vázquez Salceda, Rafael Simó, et al.358

ISSN 2007-9737



Fig. 3. DIALCAT main algorithm

Computación y Sistemas, Vol. 23, No. 2, 2019, pp. 351–363
doi: 10.13053/CyS-23-2-3198

DIALCAT: Diabetes as an Accelerator of Cognitive Impairment and Alzheimer’s Disease... 359

ISSN 2007-9737



applied in the study is the DIALCAT digital platform
composed of the smart pill dispenser and the
mHealth platform. The study will begin at the
beginning of 2019.

Study Design: Controlled clinical trial,
prospective, randomised with parallel groups.
The study has been registered at clinical
trial.gov.registry.

Primary Objective: To evaluate the effect of
the intervention on the progression of cognitive
impairment 1 in an elderly population (60-79 years)
with DM2 and MCI.

Secondary Objectives:

1. Evaluate if the interventions mentioned above
improve metabolic control.

2. Evaluate the effects of these interventions on
the conversion rate of MCI to AD.

3. Compare the effectiveness of the interventions
by reducing the memory drop and the
conversion rate to AD.

4. Identify the clinical and analytical predictors
(biomarkers) of conversion from MCI to AD.

Participants: Patients with DM2 and MCI (n =
174) that will be followed 18 months. Participants
will be included in the hospitable centers that
participate in the project (Vall d’Hebron Institut
de Recerca, Parc Sanitari Pere Virgili, Fundació
Althaia, Fundació Univesitaria del Bages, Consorci
Sanitari de Terrassa, Fundació Privada Hospital
Asil de Granollers, Consorci Hospitalari de Vic,
Fundació Docencia i Recerca Mutua de Terrassa).

General Clinical Variables Evaluation: The
general clinical variables analyzed will be the
following: age, gender, ethnicity, education,
anthropometric measurements (body mass
index and waist circumference), presence
of cardiovascular risk factors (hypertension,
dyslipidemia, smoking), alcohol consumption,

1Assessed by the memory tests included in the cognitive
battery

pharmacological treatments and family history
of dementia. Related with DM2, the following
variables will also be recorded: type and time
of evolution of diabetes, metabolic control data
(basal glycaemia and HbA1c) and the presence or
absence of complications of diabetes: retinopathy,
nephropathy, neuropathy and cardiovascular
disease (ischemic heart disease, stroke or
peripheral arteriopathy).

Inclusion Criteria: 1) Duration of diabetes of at
least 5 years. 2) Age between 60 and 75 years. 3)
MCI (defined criteria).

Exclusion Criteria: 1) AD antecedents. 2)
Patients with any type of dementia. 3) History
of neurological or psychiatric conditions that
can substantially affect cognition, produce
sensory impairments or mobility limitations
that may prevent or restrict the application or
evaluation of the intervention, as well as other
important health problems (for example, a recent
cardiovascular event clinically relevant, renal
disease, oncological treatment).

Randomization: Patients with eligible DM2 will
be randomised in a 1: 1: 1 ratio in one of the
three branches. The allocation of the treatment
will be based on computer randomly generated
lists linked to a single number of treatments. For
randomisation, a sex-by-sex-swapped sequence
and the ApoE genotype will be used. Given that
several factors are expected to have synergistic
effects, the effectiveness of the cumulative
interventions will be studied in 3 parallel arms in
which the following interventions will be applied:

Group A: DM2 patients (n = 58) with MCI who
will receive treatment recommended by their
primary / endocrinologist.

Group B: DM2 patients (n = 58) with MCI that
apart from the standard treatment will enjoy a
DIALCAT smart dispenser that allows the support
and monitoring of treatment adherence.

Computación y Sistemas, Vol. 23, No. 2, 2019, pp. 351–363
doi: 10.13053/CyS-23-2-3198

Cristian Barrué, Roger Vila, Antonio B. Martinez, Mario Martín,Javier Vázquez Salceda, Rafael Simó, et al.360

ISSN 2007-9737



Group C: DM2 patients (n = 58) with MCI who,
in addition to the dispenser, will receive periodic
feedback on their metabolic control and how to
improve it by a medical device via the DIALCAT
mHealth digital platform.

The ability and possibility of using the necessary
technological support (tablet and platform) will
not be the criterion of exclusion or assignment
to one or the other group. In any case, this will
be taken into account at the level of statistical
analysis, which will mainly be done by intention to
treat. Given that it is expected that the different
factors have an additive or synergistic effect, the
hypothesis is that the cognitive impairment and the
progression of MCI to AD would be: Group 1 >
Group 2 > Group 3.

Informed consent and security monitoring:
Informed consent will be obtained for each subject,
and the centre’s ethics committees will evaluate the
study for approval.

6 Conclusions and Future Work

Seniors with cognitive impairment feel there is
a great need for more public awareness of the
disease and more support for caregivers. While
treatments to reverse or halt disease progression
are not available for most of the dementias, and for
the foreseeable future, treatment and medication
of dementia will remain centred entirely on disease
management. Slowing down the rate of cognitive
decline and early diagnosis is essential in this as
this gives patients the best chance to maintain their
cognitive ability.
DIALCAT offers the potential to solve the patient’s
non-adherence by encouraging self-management
of the treatment and making possible the continuity
of therapeutic regimen, reducing costs to the
patient, the caregivers and the health system.

To improve treatment adherence and to develop
target interventions through the mHealth platform
channels, it is crucial to address the specific
reasons why a patient is not able or willing to
execute the treatment plan. From this perspective,

intervention messages should be personalised or
tailored to address individual needs and beliefs.

The definition of tailoring describes the features
that make tailored health messages different from
other approaches: It is assessment-based, and as
a result, the message can be individual-focused.
In other words, tailoring is based on gathering
and assessing personal data related to health
outcomes or several determinants in order to
determine the most effective strategy to meet that
personâTMs needs.

With these characteristics, a tailored message
can provide personal feedback, commands greater
attention, is processed more deeply, and is
perceived as more likeable by patients than a
general message. Because of these possibilities,
tailored health messages are also more likely than
generic information to be read, remembered, and
viewed as personally relevant. Technologies like
the smart pill dispenser have the potential to be
most useful if the data that generates is processed
by all the actors of the health ecosystem.

Moreover, integrated with other health data
collected by the mHealth applications and the
standard clinical health records, provides a holistic
view of the patient’s treatment concordance and a
support tool to improve decision making.

The next steps in the DIALCAT project are
to finalise the industrial production of 140 smart
dispenser units and the start of the clinical
trial by January 2019. After some months
of data collection, the Consortium will be able
to process it and start using machine learning
techniques to cluster different types of patients
with regards adherence and detect connections
between adherence rates and disease evolution.
The clinical validation of an ICT adherence support
system proposed by DIALCAT is a leap ahead in
the design of these kinds of technologies.

Moreover, the Consortium will be able to
compare adherence rates detected by DIALCAT
platform with the ones generated by typical clinical
adherence scales (e.g. Morisky [24]) included in
DIALCAT ’s clinical trial screening process.

Computación y Sistemas, Vol. 23, No. 2, 2019, pp. 351–363
doi: 10.13053/CyS-23-2-3198

DIALCAT: Diabetes as an Accelerator of Cognitive Impairment and Alzheimer’s Disease... 361

ISSN 2007-9737



Acknowledgements

Authors are partially supported by the project
DIALCAT: Diabetes as an accelerator of cognitive
impairment and Alzheimer’s disease, comprehen-
sive approach and adherence to treatment (DIA)
co-funded by European Regional Development
Fund (ERDF) of the European Union, within the
operative ERDF Catalonian framework 2014-2020.
The views expressed in this paper are not
necessarily those of the consortium CMMD.

Prof. Cortés is a member of Sistema Nacional
de Investigadores (SNI-III), (CONACyT, Mexico).

References

1. Andrade, S. E., Kahler, K. H., Frech, F.,
& Chan, K. A. (2006). Methods for evaluation
of medication adherence and persistence using
automated databases. Pharmacoepidemiology and
drug safety, Vol. 15, No. 8, pp. 565–574.

2. Ascertaining Barriers for Compliance:
policies for safe, effective and cost-effective
use of medicines in Europe (ABC) (2012).
https://cordis.europa.eu/project/rcn/88878/

factsheet/en.

3. Chronius (2012). http://www.chronious.eu/.

4. COMOESTAS (2010). https://cordis.europa.
eu/project/rcn/85409/factsheet/en.

5. Dayer, L., Heldenbrand, S., Anderson, P.,
Gubbins, P. O., & Martin, B. C. (2013).
Smartphone medication adherence apps: potential
benefits to patients and providers. Journal of the
American Pharmacists Association, Vol. 53, No. 2,
pp. 172–181.

6. DiMatteo, M. (2004). Variations in patients’ adher-
ence to medical recommendations: a quantitative
review of 50 years of research. Medical Care,
Vol. 42, No. 3, pp. 200–209.

7. Dunn, R., Zafeiridi, P., Wolverson, E., & Paulson,
K. (2016). Consulting end-users in the design and
usability of CAREGIVERSPRO-MMD: An internet
based support tool designed for people with
dementia and their caregivers. Alzheimer Europa,
pp. PO3.29.

8. Elliott, R. A. & Marriott, J. L. (2010). Review
of instruments used in clinical practice to assess
patients’ ability to manage medications. Journal of
Pharmacy Practice and Research, Vol. 40, No. 1,
pp. 36–42.

9. Farmer, K. C. (1999). Methods for measuring and
monitoring medication regimen adherence in clinical
trials and clinical practice. Clinical Therapeutics,
Vol. 21, No. 6, pp. 1074–1090.

10. Hansen, R. A., Kim, M. M., Song, L., Tu, W., Wu,
J., & Murray, M. D. (2009). Adherence: comparison
of methods to assess medication adherence and
classify nonadherence. Annals of Pharmacotherapy,
Vol. 43, No. 3, pp. 413–422.

11. Haynes, R. B., McDonald, H. P., Garg, A., &
Montague, P. (2002). Interventions for helping
patients to follow prescriptions for medications.
Cochrane database of systematic reviews, , No. 2.

12. Heartcycle (2013). http://www.heartcycle.eu.

13. HIVIND (2014). https://cordis.europa.eu/
project/rcn/90123/factsheet/en.

14. ImprovingAdherence (2015). https://cordis.
europa.eu/project/rcn/105706/factsheet/en.

15. International Osteoporosis Foundation (2010).
Osteolink. http://www.aal-europe.eu/projects/
tbreakosteolink/.

16. MacLaughlin, E. J., Raehl, C. L., Treadway, A. K.,
Sterling, T. L., Zoller, D. P., & Bond, C. A. (2005).
Assessing medication adherence in the elderly.
Drugs & aging, Vol. 22, No. 3, pp. 231–255.

17. MedGlider (2018). https://www.epill.com/
medglider.html.

18. Medical Dispenser (2018). http://
medicaldispenser.cinfa.com.

19. MedOClock (2012). http://www.medoclock.com.

20. MedQ (2018). http://lifesavingpillbox.com.

21. Milton S. Hershey Medical Center (2017). Use
of social media to improve medication adher-
ence in adolescents and young adults with sys-
temic lupus. https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/
show/NCT03218033.

22. MONARCA (2013). https://cordis.europa.eu/
project/rcn/93747/factsheet/en.

23. Moreno, J., Cortés, U., Garcia-Gasulla, D.,
Gómez-Sebastià, I., & Álvarez-Napagao, S.
(2013). Applying COAALAs to SPiDer. Gibert, K.,
Botti, V. J., & Bolaño, R. R., editors, Proc. of

Computación y Sistemas, Vol. 23, No. 2, 2019, pp. 351–363
doi: 10.13053/CyS-23-2-3198

Cristian Barrué, Roger Vila, Antonio B. Martinez, Mario Martín,Javier Vázquez Salceda, Rafael Simó, et al.362

ISSN 2007-9737



the 16th Int. Conf. of the Catalan Association for
Artificial Intelligence, volume 256 of Frontiers in
Artificial Intelligence and Applications, IOS Press,
pp. 326–335.

24. Morisky, D., Green, L., Levine, & D.W. (1986).
Concurrent and predictive validity of a self-reported
measure of medication adherence. Medical Care,
Vol. 24, pp. 67–74.

25. MyQuest for Patients (2018). https://myquest.
questdiagnostics.com.

26. National Council on Patient Information and Ed-
ucation (2007). Enhancing Prescription Medicine
Adherence: A National Plan. National Council on
Patient Information and Education.

27. Pharmaceutical Group of the European Union
(2008). Targeting adherence. https://www.pgeu.
eu/en/policy/5-adherence.html.

28. Phillips (2018). Automated Medication Dispens-
ing Service. https://www.lifeline.philips.com/
pill-dispenser/health-mdp.html.

29. Pillboxie (2012). http://www.pillboxie.com.

30. Pillo (2018). https://www.pillohealth.com/
technology/.

31. Pullar, T., Kumar, S., Tindall, H., & Feely, M.
(1989). Time to stop counting the tablets? Clinical
Pharmacology & Therapeutics, Vol. 46, No. 2,
pp. 163–168.

32. Quality of life following adherence therapy
for people disabled by schizophrenia and
their carers (QUATRO) (2004). https://cordis.
europa.eu/project/rcn/60242/factsheet/en.

33. Raehl, C. L., Bond, C., Woods, T., Patry, R. A.,
& Sleeper, R. B. (2002). Individualized drug use
assessment in the elderly. Pharmacotherapy: The
Journal of Human Pharmacology and Drug Therapy,
Vol. 22, No. 10, pp. 1239–1248.

34. Scheurer, D., Choudhry, N., Swanton, K. A.,
Matlin, O., & Shrank, W. (2012). Association

between different types of social support and
medication adherence. The American journal of
managed care, Vol. 18, No. 12, pp. e461–7.

35. Simó, R., Ciudin, A., Simó-Servat, O., &
Hernández, C. (2017). Cognitive impairment and
dementia: a new emerging complication of type
2 diabetes—the diabetologist’s perspective. Acta
Diabetologica, Vol. 54, No. 5, pp. 417–424.

36. Simon-Tuval, T., Neumann, P. J., & Greenberg, D.
(2016). Cost-effectiveness of adherence-enhancing
interventions: a systematic review. Expert Review
of Pharmacoeconomics & Outcomes Research,
Vol. 16, No. 1, pp. 67–84. PMID: 26732615.

37. Smith, D., Lovell, J., Weller, C., Kennedy, B.,
Winbolt, M., Young, C., & Ibrahim, J. (2017).
A systematic review of medication non-adherence
in persons with dementia or cognitive impairment.
PLOS ONE, Vol. 12, No. 2, pp. 1–19.

38. The control, identification and delivery of
prescribed medication (MEDICATE) (2004).
https://cordis.europa.eu/project/rcn/57782/

factsheet/en.

39. Trostle, J. (1988). Medical compliance as an
ideology. Social Science & Medicine, Vol. 27,
pp. 1299 – 1308.

40. World Health Organisation (2003). Adherence to
long-term therapies. evidence for action. https:
//www.who.int/chp/knowledge/publications/

adherence_report/en/.

41. World Health Organisation
(2016). Dementia fact sheet.
http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs362/en/.

Article received on 20/10/2018; accepted on 10/02/2019.
Corresponding author is Cristian Barrué.

Computación y Sistemas, Vol. 23, No. 2, 2019, pp. 351–363
doi: 10.13053/CyS-23-2-3198

DIALCAT: Diabetes as an Accelerator of Cognitive Impairment and Alzheimer’s Disease... 363

ISSN 2007-9737


