








































Noname manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)

The Strategic Impact of META-NET on the Regional, National and
International Level

Georg Rehm · Hans Uszkoreit · Sophia Ananiadou · Núria Bel · Audronė
Bielevičienė · Lars Borin · António Branco · Gerhard Budin · Nicoletta Calzolari ·
Walter Daelemans · Radovan Garabík · Marko Grobelnik · Carmen García-Mateo ·
Josef van Genabith · Jan Hajič · Inma Hernáez · John Judge · Svetla Koeva ·
Simon Krek · Cvetana Krstev · Krister Lindén · Bernardo Magnini · Joseph
Mariani · John McNaught · Maite Melero · Monica Monachini · Asunción
Moreno · Jan Odijk · Maciej Ogrodniczuk · Piotr Pęzik · Stelios Piperidis ·
Adam Przepiórkowski · Eiríkur Rögnvaldsson · Mike Rosner · Bolette Sandford
Pedersen · Inguna Skadiņa · Koenraad De Smedt · Marko Tadić · Paul Thompson ·
Dan Tufiş · Tamás Váradi · Andrejs Vasiļjevs · Kadri Vider · Jolanta Zabarskaite

the date of receipt and acceptance should be inserted later

G. Rehm · H. Uszkoreit · J. van Genabith
DFKI GmbH, Berlin and Saarbrücken, Germany
E-mail: georg.rehm@dfki.de (corresponding author)

S. Ananiadou · J. McNaught · P. Thompson
University of Manchester, Manchester, UK

N. Bel · M. Melero
Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain

A. Bielevičienė · J. Zabarskaite
Institute of the Lithuanian Language, Vilnius, Lithuania

L. Borin
University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden

A. Branco
University of Lisbon, Lisbon, Portugal

G. Budin
University of Vienna, Austrian Academy of Sciences, Austria

N. Calzolari · M. Monachini
CNR, Pisa, Italy

W. Daelemans
University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium

R. Garabík
Ľ. Štúr Institute of Linguistics, Bratislava, Slovakia

M. Grobelnik · S. Krek
Jožef Stefan Institute, Ljubljana, Slovenia

C. García-Mateo
University of Vigo, Vigo, Spain

J. Hajič
Charles University, Prague, Czech Republic

I. Hernáez
University of the Basque Country, Bilbao, Spain

J. Judge
Dublin City University, CNGL, Dublin, Ireland

S. Koeva

Bulgarian Academy of Sciences, Sofia, Bulgaria

C. Krstev
University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia

K. Lindén
University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland

B. Magnini
FBK, Trento, Italy

J. Mariani
LIMSI-CNRS & IMMI, Orsay, France

A. Moreno
Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya, Barcelona, Spain

J. Odijk
University of Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands

M. Ogrodniczuk · A. Przepiórkowski
Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, Poland

P. Pęzik
University of Łódź, Łódź, Poland

S. Piperidis
R. C. “Athena”, ILSP, Athens, Greece

E. Rögnvaldsson
University of Iceland, Reykjavik, Iceland

M. Rosner
University of Malta, Msida, Malta

B. Sandford Pedersen
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark

I. Skadiņa · A. Vasiļjevs
Tilde, Riga, Latvia

K. De Smedt
University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway

M. Tadić
University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia

ruben pocull
Texto escrito a máquina
“The final publication is available at Springer via http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10579-015-9333-4"

ruben pocull
Texto escrito a máquina

ruben pocull
Texto escrito a máquina



Abstract This article1 provides an overview of the dis-
semination work carried out in META-NET from 2010
until 2015; we describe its impact on the regional, national
and international level, mainly with regard to politics and
the funding situation for LT topics. The article documents
the initiative’s work throughout Europe in order to boost
progress and innovation in our field.

1 Introduction and Overview

The multilingual setup of our European society imposes
grand societal challenges on political, economic and so-
cial integration and inclusion, especially in the creation of
the Digital Single Market (DSM) and unified information
space targeted by the Digital Agenda (EC 2010). Language
Technology (LT) is the missing piece of the puzzle that
will ultimately be able to realise a fully multilingual DSM.
It is the key enabler and solution to boosting growth and
strengthening Europe’s competitiveness.

Recognising Europe’s exceptional demand and opportu-
nities, 60 leading research centres in 34 European countries
joined forces in META-NET, a Network of Excellence ded-
icated to the technological foundations of a multilingual,
inclusive, innovative and reflective European society.2 In
its first funded phase META-NET was partially supported
through the four European projects T4ME (2010–2013;
FP7), CESAR, METANET4U and META-NORD (2011–
2013; ICT-PSP). META-NET is forging the open Multi-
lingual Europe Technology Alliance (META), currently
consisting of ca. 800 organisations and experts represent-
ing multiple stakeholders. In addition, META-NET signed
collaboration agreements and memoranda of understanding
with more than 40 other projects and initiatives in the field
such as CLARIN and FLaReNet.

Our goal is monolingual, crosslingual and multilingual
technology support for all languages spoken by a signif-
icant population in Europe (Rehm and Uszkoreit 2013).
This includes all types of information and communication
technologies such as, for example, general and also domain-
specific machine translation systems, telephone dialogue
systems, automatic subtitling, tourist information systems
etc. For Language Technology we recommend focusing on

D. Tufiş
Romanian Academy, Bucharest, Romania

T. Váradi
Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Budapest, Hungary

K. Vider
University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia

1 This paper was originally published at LREC 2014. This version
has been extended and updated. The authors would like to thank the
reviewers for their helpful comments.

2 http://www.meta-net.eu

three priority research topics connected to innovative ap-
plication scenarios that will provide European R&D in our
field with the ability to compete with other markets and sub-
sequently achieve benefits for European society and citizens
as well as opportunities for our economy and future growth.
We are working towards combining resources provided by
recent EU funding programmes, specifically Horizon 2020
(EC 2012) and Connecting Europe Facility (CEF, EC 2014),
with national and regional funding, in order to accomplish
our joint vision.

The work carried out in META-NET is structured in
three pillars. All aspects concerned with community build-
ing, formulating a shared vision and preparing a strategy
belong to the META-VISION pillar. Additionally, we car-
ried out innovative META-RESEARCH and developed
the open resource exchange infrastructure META-SHARE
(Piperidis et al. 2014). This article primarily discusses the
impact of the work carried out in META-VISION.

The article is meant to serve two main purposes: first, to
document the work carried out throughout Europe in order
to boost progress and innovation in the field of LT; second,
to provide starting or picking-up points for interested parties
who want to become active in the initiative.

The remainder of the article is structured as follows: Sec-
tion 2 provides a description of META-NET’s key commu-
nication instruments, i. e., the Language White Paper Series,
the META-NET Strategic Research Agenda for Multilingual
Europe 2020 as well as conferences and events. Section 3 ex-
plains the impact of META-NET on the international level,
including the visibility of the initiative and the impact on
politics. Section 4 describes, in 29 subsections concentrat-
ing on the different countries, the impact of META-NET on
the national and regional level.

2 Key Communication Instruments

Our communication activities circled around three key in-
struments. The study Europe’s Languages in the Digital
Age describes, for 31 European languages, the level of sup-
port through LT (section 2.1). The META-NET Strategic
Research Agenda for Multilingual Europe 2020 provides
recommendations on how to address the gaps and problems
found in the abovementioned study and specifies priority
research themes for European LT in order to boost growth
and innovation (section 2.2). META-NET also organised
conferences, roadshow events, and workshops (section 2.3).

2.1 Language White Paper Series: Europe’s Languages in
the Digital Age

The META-NET Language White Paper Series “Europe’s
Languages in the Digital Age” (Rehm and Uszkoreit 2012)

http://www.meta-net.eu


The Strategic Impact of META-NET on the Regional, National and International Level 3

describes the current state of LT support for 31 European lan-
guages (including all 24 official EU languages). The study
had been in preparation since mid 2010 and was published in
the summer of 2012. More than 200 experts participated to
the 30 volumes as co-authors and contributors; an additional
volume, on Welsh, was published in early 2014 (Evas 2014).
We also updated and extended the original findings by ca. 15
(mostly minority) languages (Rehm et al. 2014).

The differences in technology support between the var-
ious languages and areas are dramatic and alarming. In all
of the four areas we examined (machine translation, speech
processing, text analytics, language resources), English is
ahead of the other languages but even support for English
is far from being perfect. While there are good quality soft-
ware and resources available for a few larger languages and
application areas, others, usually smaller or very small lan-
guages, have substantial gaps. Many languages lack basic
technologies for text analytics and essential resources. Oth-
ers have basic resources but the implementation of semantic
methods is still far away. Currently no language, not even
English, has the technological support it deserves.

The volumes of this series are primarily meant to be
Europe-wide dissemination materials targeting decision
makers, regional and national journalists, administrators,
politicians, and the public at large. The complete volumes
and the press release “At least 21 European Languages in
Danger of Digital Extinction”, circulated on the occasion
of the European Day of Languages 2012 (Sept. 26), are
available online.3

2.2 The META-NET Strategic Research Agenda for
Multilingual Europe 2020

Working together with several organisations and experts
from a variety of fields, META-NET has developed the
Strategic Research Agenda for Multilingual Europe 2020
(SRA, Rehm and Uszkoreit 2013).4 These recommenda-
tions for Multilingual Europe 2020 are based on a thorough
planning process. We envisage five lines of action for large-
scale research and innovation. First, there are three priority
research themes: Translingual Cloud, Social Intelligence
and e-Participation and Socially Aware Interactive Assis-
tants. The other two themes focus upon Core technologies
and resources for Europe’s languages and a European ser-
vice platform for language technologies. These priority
research themes are meant to turn our joint vision into re-
ality by enabling Europe to benefit from a technological
revolution that will overcome barriers of understanding be-
tween people of different languages, people and technology,

3 http://www.meta-net.eu/whitepapers
4 http://www.meta-net.eu/sra

and people and our digitised knowledge. The SRA is the
first unified strategic plan for the entire European LT sector.

2.3 Conferences and Events

Since 2010 META-NET has been organising annual confer-
ences: META-FORUM 2010 (Brussels), 2011 (Budapest),
2012 (Brussels), 2013 (Berlin). The most recent conference
in the series, META-FORUM 2015, took place in Riga,
Latvia, under the umbrella of the Riga Summit 2015 on the
Multlingual Digital Single Market. Additionally, META-
NET organised Translingual Europe 2010 (Berlin) as well
as many smaller events, primarily with a focus on the re-
gional or national level, for example, in Croatia, Germany,
Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania and Poland. We also partici-
pated actively in multiple scientific, strategic, and political
workshops and meetings.

3 The International Level

Now that the first funded phase of META-NET is over with
a large body of work done in over 30 countries, it appears
to be the right time for an impact assessment. In this section
we present a brief summary with regard to the international
and general level, while section 4 describes the impact on the
national and regional levels.

3.1 Visibility of the Initiative and our Key Topics

The dissemination work carried out by META-NET had sig-
nificant effects on the visibility not only of the initiative itself
in our own research community but also of our key topics
with regard to the public at large.

First and foremost, the impact of the Language White Pa-
per Series and the corresponding press release (“At least 21
European Languages in Danger of Digital Extinction”) pub-
lished in almost 30 languages on occasion of the European
Day of Languages (Sept. 26, 2012) was beyond our imagi-
nation. It resulted in more than 600 pieces of media coverage
internationally (online, print, radio, television). News came
in from 43 countries and in 35 different languages with all
European countries covered. Articles appeared as far away
as Brazil, Costa Rica, Cuba, Australia, New Zealand, Japan,
US, and Canada. The press campaign resulted in 45+ broad-
cast interviews with META-NET representatives (ca. 30
radio interviews, ca. 25 television reports). We had coverage
in outlets such as Der Standard (AT), Politiken, Berlingske
Tidende (DK), Tiede (FI), Heise Newsticker, Süddeutsche
Zeitung (DE), in.gr, Prosilipsis (GR), Wired (IT), Comput-
erworld (NO), Dnevnik, Demokracija (SL), Politika, PTC1
(RS), El Mundo (ES), Huffington Post (UK), NBC News,

http://www.meta-net.eu/whitepapers
http://www.meta-net.eu/sra


4 Georg Rehm et al.

and Reddit (USA). Discussions also took place on message
boards, twitter, and link sharing websites. We noticed a huge
increase of traffic on our website, 65% of which were new
visitors. Of those new visitors, 11% of visits came from
Brussels – the greatest for a single location. Similar trends
could be observed for other European capital cities.

The echo generated by the press campaign shows that
Europe is extremely passionate and concerned about its lan-
guages and that it is also very interested in the idea of es-
tablishing a solid language technology base for overcom-
ing language barriers. As an analysis of our website traffic
shows, we also managed to raise a certain level of attention
and awareness in the European Commission (EC) and in the
European Parliament (EP).

3.2 Forging the Multilingual Europe Technology Alliance
as a Homogeneous Multi-Stakeholder Community

One of the key goals of META-NET is to forge the Mul-
tilingual Europe Technology Alliance (META) as an open
strategic technology alliance around our core goals and top-
ics. This goal was designed to be a measure against the
fragmented set of LT-related communities that we had in
Europe before META-NET. By now (November 2015),
META has 810 members in 70 countries. Together with
META-NET itself, which consists of 60 research centres in
34 European countries, this group constitutes a very large
and strong scientific community that is finally able to speak
with one voice and to present a shared vision and strategy
as demonstrated by the unanimous confirmation and sup-
port of the plans presented in the META-NET SRA. The
SRA’s priority themes are the result of 80+ meetings and
discussions between hundreds of experts from research and
industry. META-NET is now a sustainable Network of Ex-
cellence and established brand with a lifetime beyond that
of its initial funded projects.

Within the European R&D community, META-NET’s
work led to many invited keynote speeches, invited papers,
book chapters and contributions in technology and industry
journals. Our outreach programme led to the drafting and
signing of more than 40 collaboration agreements with other
projects and organisations. We built up strong connections to
other stakeholder communities, most importantly to organ-
isations representing language service providers (GALA,
tekom), bodies representing the language communities (Eu-
ropean Federation of National Institutions for Language,
Network to Promote Linguistic Diversity, Council of Eu-
rope Committee of Experts on the Charter of Regional and
Minority Languages, see META-NET, 2013), many lan-
guage professionals, the Linked Open Data community and
standardisation organisations (W3C, ISO TC37/SC4). Addi-
tionally, we established contacts and exchanged challenges
and strategies with representatives of multilingual language

communities beyond our own continent, most notably those
of South Africa and India.

In addition to academic and applied research, the com-
munity building aspect also involved the LT industry which
represents one third of META’s membership base. The
engagement from industry is demonstrated by our META-
FORUM satellite event META Exhibition which is targeted
at industry and which has always been booked to capacity
throughout all editions of the conference and exhibition.

Our open resource exchange infrastructure, META-
SHARE (Piperidis 2012), has had a significant impact on
the community. Having started out with five nodes in 2011,
META-SHARE consisted of 34 members by 2014, running
and maintaining 29 repository-nodes as several organisa-
tions had joined the network in order to distribute over
2,500 language resources (Piperidis et al. 2014). In 2015,
META-SHARE grew by one additional member which set
up and runs a repository-node, thus increasing the num-
ber of repository nodes to 30, while the overall number of
resources in the network has now exceeded 2,600.

3.3 Impact on Politics and Upcoming Funding Programmes

With regard to our relationship to and impact on politics, ad-
ministration and upcoming funding programmes there have
been several successes in the past few years.

In April 2012, META-NET was invited to present the
initiative and its key goals in the European People’s Party
Working Group on Future Internet at the European Par-
liament (EP) in Strasbourg. The group unites Members of
the EP (MEPs) from different committees to discuss cross-
cutting, Internet-related topics with implications on industry,
culture, civil liberties, and legal affairs. This meeting led to
sustainable contacts with several MEPs.

First steps towards a shared LT programme between the
EC and the Member States as well as Associated Countries
have been taken at META-FORUM 2012, when representa-
tives of several funding agencies (Bulgaria, Czech Repub-
lic, France, Hungary, The Netherlands, Slovenia) who par-
ticipated in a panel discussion, unanimously expressed the
urgent need for such a programme (META-NET 2012). This
formerly unknown openness towards our topic we also see in
discussions with representatives of other funding agencies.

Recently the EC has started two programmes, Connect-
ing Europe Facility (CEF) (EC 2014) and the successor to
Framework Programme 7, i. e., Horizon 2020 (EC 2012).
As anticipated in the META-NET SRA, some aspects of our
suggested European Service Platform for LT will be devel-
oped in CEF while the more concrete and applied research
– the priority research themes (section 2.2) – including inno-
vation, can be taken care of in Horizon 2020.

The Telecommunications component of CEF consists
of five Digital Service Infrastructures (DSI) as essential



The Strategic Impact of META-NET on the Regional, National and International Level 5

building blocks that will serve and enable other DSIs. One
of these core DSIs is Automated Translation (CEF.AT, EC
2013). The inclusion of MT services as one of the five oblig-
atory building blocks clearly is a milestone and important
achievement as it recognises the maturity of some of the
technologies developed in our field. The main objective of
CEF.AT is to make selected DSIs multilingual. The technol-
ogy behind CEF.AT is based on the MT@EC system (itself
based on Moses, see Koehn et al. 2007), which has been in
development and deployed internally at the EC for several
years. In 2015 the EC initiated the service contract European
Language Resource Coordination. 5 This activity supports
the EC in identifying and providing data sets for CEF.AT.

In Dec. 2013 the first calls of Horizon 2020 were pub-
lished. Of specific relevance for multilingual technologies is
ICT-17 (“Cracking the language barrier”) with a budget of
15M€. Even though the spirit of the call goes in the right di-
rection, the budget is rather low. Nevertheless, the call text
references key results of our White Paper Series, asking pro-
posals to focus upon the 21 European digitally endangered
languages.6 Research projects are to focus upon high-quality
translation.

A meeting of the EU National Parliaments was held in
the Lithuanian Parliament in Sept. 2013 (Vilnius-Meeting
2013). The participants encouraged and welcomed initia-
tives which prioritise funding aimed at the reduction of the
digital divide so that all European languages would come
closer to the minimum EU-standard for LT development.

In early Dec. 2013 the workshop “State of the Art of Ma-
chine Translation” took place in the EP, in which two repre-
sentatives of META-NET as well as, among others, the EC
and the EP presented their plans (STOA 2013). In its reso-
lution the participants agree on an urgent need for, among
many other points, “establishing a Translingual Cloud ser-
vices platform for all official EU languages and many addi-
tional languages”.

4 The National and Regional Level

In this section we provide a general description of the im-
pact on the national and regional level, which continues to
generate results and have further positive effects.

4.1 Austria

In Austria, META-NET has been helpful for community
building in pursuing common goals of improving the avail-

5 http://www.lr-coordination.eu.
6 The EC’s decision to exclude French and Spanish (as well as En-

glish) in the 21 European languages being considered for translation in
ICT-17 caused a certain level of criticism in the respective countries.
According to the White Paper Series, these three languages have good
(English) and moderate (Spanish, French) support.

ability of and interoperability among language resources in
research, industry, and eGovernment. META-NET became
a major source of inspiration and encouragement for na-
tional consortium building for the systematic study of the
German language used in Austria. It was also instrumental
in building a national network of research teams in digital
humanities research infrastructures, in conjunction with the
Austrian chapters of CLARIN ERIC and DARIAH ERIC
(i. e., CLARIAH-AT); in this context, the Austrian Centre
for Digital Humanities has been created. More recently,
META-NET has been a point of departure for boosting na-
tional projects for multilingual resource development and
their re-use for economic purposes, for Big Data analytics
research and MT projects at the Centre for Translation Stud-
ies (University of Vienna) by strategically and operationally
combining and intertwining digital humanities, language
industry and multilingualism (Budin 2015).

4.2 Belgium

Flanders, as partner of the Netherlands in the Dutch Lan-
guage Union (Nederlandse Taalunie) has already invested
considerably in LT R&D, among others by co-financing the
STEVIN programme (Spyns and Odijk 2013) which brought
Dutch and Flemish LT R&D to a high level. Although it has
not yet resulted in concrete new programmes, LT is still
on the agenda in Flanders, and EWI (the Flemish govern-
ment, Department for economy, science and innovation)
knows the META-NET documents (Rehm and Uszkoreit
2012, 2013; Odijk 2012) and LT Innovate reports, and uses
them in internal policy documents. EWI is also performing a
Language and Speech Technology Sector Analysis. Recent
developments include limited funding for a Belgian branch
of DARIAH, a new project on semi-automatic subtitling
for the Flemish broadcasting cooperation, and roadmap
activities. Basic and application oriented research is still
going strong with several high-profile projects on MT, text
analytics, and security.

4.3 Bulgaria

The white paper (Blagoeva et al. 2012) was used extensively
to disseminate information about META-NET, the press re-
lease resulted in large amounts of media coverage. The
META-NET roadshow in Sofia (May 2, 2012) was attended
by 150 participants and featured invited speakers from the
EC and the Ministry of Education, Youth and Science. In
total, 34 large-scale or specialised resources, tools and ser-
vices are now available through META-SHARE. The book
Language Resources and Technologies for Bulgarian Lan-
guage was published in 2014 (Koeva 2014), the conference
“Computational Linguistics in Bulgaria” was organised in

http://www.lr-coordination.eu


6 Georg Rehm et al.

the same year – both supported by the Human Resources De-
velopment Operational Programme 2007-2013, co-financed
by the EU.

4.4 Croatia

META-NET enabled the improvement and standardisation
of existing or new resources for Croatian (Tadić et al. 2012),
many of which are available through the national META-
SHARE node which also provides access to the resources
developed in other projects (e. g., XLike, COST-PARSEME
etc.). The local LT community assembled at the META-
NET “Language Technology Day” in Zagreb (November
30, 2012). This conference gathered representatives from all
Croatian research centres involved in computational linguis-
tics. Since this event the Croatian LT community has grown
as can be easily tracked through the rising number of papers
by Croatian authors at the major conferences in 2013 and
2014 (ACL, LREC, COLING, EACL, etc.).

4.5 Czech Republic

The impact of META-NET and similar initiatives in the
Czech Republic is most visible in the area of language re-
sources, where two long-term infrastructural projects have
been established recently: the LINDAT repository and the
Czech National Corpus project at Charles University in
Prague, funded by the Ministry of Education. More than
70 large, specialised resources have been made available
in the LINDAT repository, which is also part of CLARIN
and serves both the humanities research and LT needs; its
metadata structure is compatible with META-SHARE and
CLARIN, it is harvested by both networks. Awareness has
been raised, mainly thanks to the white paper (Bojar et al.
2012), at both Czech research grant agencies, even though
a specialised LT programme has not been constituted yet on
the research side.

4.6 Denmark

The white paper (Pedersen et al. 2012) raised the awareness
within the society regarding LT and the need for actions to
avoid the digital extinction of Danish. The idea of a Danish
LT resource collection has matured and is, by now, a cen-
tral focus area for the Danish Language Council. Recently
funded LT projects include an ERC grant, “Lowlands”,
which aims to develop robust learning algorithms for LT
with a focus on languages and domains for which little
linguistically annotated data exists, as well as “Semantic
Processing [of Danish] across Domains”, funded by the

Danish Research Council. Further, a digital humanities in-
frastructure (including LT elements) is nationally funded
via the DigHumLab project and through CLARIN-ERIC. In
2014, a CLARIN Nordic Network was funded by NORD-
FORSK. This network will organise workshops to address
issues which are central to future joint efforts such as the de-
velopment of Nordic strategies for humanities and language
infrastructures.

4.7 Estonia

The white paper (Liin et al. 2012) generated a lot of im-
pact in the Estonian press, as the Estonian people tend to be
vulnerable about all topics that concern the future of their
language. The Development Plan of the Estonian Language
2011-2017 (Estonian Language Foundation 2011) now con-
tains a chapter on LT and the government has started to
finance the National Programme for Estonian Language
Technology (NPELT) that had been aimed towards sup-
porting Estonian LT starting in 2006 already. Events like
the 5th international conference “Human Language Tech-
nologies – The Baltic Perspective” (October 2012) and
NPELT (October 2012, April 2014) gathered the Estonian
LT community and emphasised the strategic importance of
LT for Estonian (Vider et al. 2012). The Center of Estonian
Language Resources (CELR), the Estonian consortium for
CLARIN ERIC, deposits all NPELT results as resources and
tools in a dedicated META-SHARE node which also serves
as a CLARIN repository.

4.8 Finland

META-NET’s impact is visible in the strengthening of the
Language Bank of Finland and its collection of resources
and technologies provided to industry and academia. These
activities have secured long-term funding from the Ministry
of Education for the collection, development and preserva-
tion of resources and technologies. More than 250 resources
have been made available via META-SHARE and the Lan-
guage Bank, which is also part of CLARIN and serves both
humanities research and LT needs. Awareness of the need for
actions has been raised thanks to the white paper (Kosken-
niemi et al. 2012).

4.9 France

In France, META-NET was introduced to the ministry in
charge of expressing the French position regarding Horizon
2020 – LT appeared high in the ranking of the French prior-
ities. Several widely distributed scientific journals reported



The Strategic Impact of META-NET on the Regional, National and International Level 7

about the white paper (Mariani et al. 2012) (the CNRS Jour-
nal, Minassian, 2013, and La Recherche, Julienne, 2013).
The agency in charge of French and of the languages spo-
ken in France (DGLFLF) created a new position on LT. The
French President asked J. Attali to prepare a report on the
challenge of Francophonie, who recommended to continue
the former national programme Technolangue (Attali 2014).
Accordingly, DGLFLF is now proposing to initiate an inter-
ministerial national programme, with the aim of developing
LTs and producing the necessary LRs not only for French
but also for regional languages. An international UNESCO
meeting in Paris stressed the importance of LTs for allow-
ing multilingualism (October 2014). It was proposed to ex-
tend the UNESCO Atlas of the World’s Languages in Danger
(Moseley 2010) to all languages and to include information
about LTs and LRs.

4.10 Germany

Our work had a significant impact in the R&D community
and the public at large. The white paper (Burchardt et al.
2012) generated a lot of interest in the language topic, espe-
cially with regard to digital language extinction. The German
Language Technology Day (January 2013) was attended by
ca. 300 participants. Representatives of almost all relevant
universities and research centres active in Germany attended
the event, so did several politicians and representatives of
funding agencies. Another result of our dissemination work
were several invited keynote presentations at LT-related
events in Germany between 2010 and 2013. Through our
work in META-NET we have been able to intensify our dis-
cussions with two ministries and several funding agencies
around the topic of LT. Two new funding programmes have
been initiated by the German Federal Ministry of Economics
and Energy (BMWi) and the German Federal Ministry of
Research (BMBF) recently. While Big Data is at the core of
both programmes, LT is included with regard to Text Analyt-
ics. DFKI is involved in the project Smart Data Web (funded
by BMWi) and the Berlin Big Data Center (BBDC, funded
by BMBF), among others. Our close collaboration with
the German Federal Ministry of Economics and Technol-
ogy led to META-FORUM 2013 (Sept. 19/20, 2013) being
organised at the conference centre of this very ministry.

4.11 Greece

META-NET reinforced interest in LT in Greece. The white
paper (Gavrilidou et al. 2012) generated sustainable interest
in the media, as well as in the government, at ministerial
level. Recently, the white paper attracted the interest of the
Athens Field Office of DG Translation and served as input
at the conference “The Future of Language Professions”, an

event of the EU’s Translating Europe initiative. This interest
has led to a substantial improvement of the position of LT in
the Greek research agenda. A new large-scale collaborative
effort has been endorsed by the Ministry of Education aim-
ing to design a research infrastructure as an open framework
for LRs/LTs. The new initiative, “Language and Knowledge
Technologies Enabled Content Access and Services Infras-
tructure”, will provide access to Greek language resources,
digital content and processing services through a distributed
platform, offering to its users (scholars, researchers, indus-
try) services enabling data access, processing and annota-
tion, evaluation as well as application development. The
strategic activities coupled with META-SHARE (Piperidis
2012; Piperidis et al. 2014) have helped in building bridges
with the Greek R&D communities active in linked open
data, open government data and content, as well as public
sector information services.

4.12 Hungary

One instrument devised for raising awareness for LT was a
series of roadshows that took place in Central Europe, in-
volving decision makers, the media and local industry. These
one-day events visited each of the six countries participating
in CESAR. They not only mobilised the whole of the LT
community but received significant media attention. The se-
ries of events culminated in the Budapest roadshow which
found no fewer than six state and government dignitaries
(four of them of ministerial rank) sitting around a table, ad-
dressing the conference one by one. The conference had the
title “The position of the Hungarian language in the Digi-
tal Age” (cf. Simon et al. 2012), thus proving that appealing
to national pride in connection with the mother tongue is an
approach that can have a wide impact.

4.13 Iceland

Almost all basic language resources for Icelandic are now
available through META-SHARE, many of them in standard
formats and under standard CC or GNU licenses. This is a
major achievement since many of them have either been un-
available up to now or only available through personal con-
tacts. Public awareness of the importance, challenges and op-
portunities of LT for Icelandic increased greatly. The white
paper (Rögnvaldsson et al. 2012) received considerable me-
dia attention and was taken up for discussion in the Icelandic
Parliament (Alþingi). In September 2014, The Minister of
Education, Science and Culture appointed a committee of
experts which shall compose an action plan for the develop-
ment and enhancement of LT for Icelandic, with the aim of
making Icelandic as widely usable as possible in the digi-
tal age. This is to follow up on a resolution that was passed



8 Georg Rehm et al.

unanimously in the Parliament in May, and is a direct result
of the white paper. The committee is supposed to deliver its
proposals by the end of 2014. We hope that this will eventu-
ally lead to some governmental funding of LT projects.

4.14 Ireland

The public awareness raised by the white paper (Judge et al.
2012) is still evident even two years after the initial publica-
tions. The Irish government department overseeing the im-
plementation of the 20 Year Strategy for the Irish Language
is currently drafting a technology strategy for the Irish lan-
guage which will run concurrently with and bolster the ex-
isting 20 year strategy. The new LT strategy will address the
shortcomings identified in the white paper and is aimed at
providing the underpinnings needed to ensure that the lan-
guage can thrive in the digital age. The move to consider this
new strategy is a direct result of the white paper and SRA and
the impact they have had at ministerial level – the steering
committee for the new strategy uses both documents to guide
their work. In 2012 the importance of LT for Ireland’s growth
was underlined in the Irish government and industry invest-
ing €19.8 million in CNGL intelligent content research. This
investment directly supports 75 research jobs and indirectly
supports many more and includes an investment of €6.3 mil-
lion from 16 industry partners as well as €1.25 million in
venture capital for CNGL spin out companies employing an
additional 30 people. In 2014 this investment was followed
up with the annuncement of another €29 million from Sci-
ence Foundation Ireland to establish the ADAPT Centre of
Excellence for Digital Content and Media Innovation which
builds upon the existing work of CNGL.

4.15 Italy

As a result of the white paper (Calzolari et al. 2012), the
achievements of META-NET have been presented twice in
conferences and debates organised in the Italian Parliament.
There is now much more awareness of the need of both
research and technology in the LT area. Almost all existing
resources for Italian are now available through META-
SHARE, which has become the natural repository for the
distribution of resources, produced in national or European
projects. EVENTI (Evaluation of Events and Temporal In-
formation), one of the new tasks organised in the Evalita
2014 Evaluation campaign for Italian, has chosen to dis-
tribute training and test data through META-SHARE, which
is also gaining more visibility in the private sector. As a
significant example, SAVAS, a FP7 SME project, focusing
on innovative products and services for multilingual subti-
tling, has chosen to distribute all datasets through their own
META-SHARE node. The project foresees the collection of

large sets of training data from partners in the media sec-
tor; both raw data and their derivatives have a significant
commercial value for the speech recognition community.

4.16 Latvia

The white paper and the conference “Language, Technolo-
gies and the Future of Europe” attracted a lot of interest from
politicians, decision makers, funding agencies, researchers,
developers and users (Skadiņa et al. 2012; Vasiljevs and
Skadiņa 2012). The findings were broadly discussed and led
to practical actions. The Latvian language agency formed
a working group to create a strategy for LT development
and support. The importance of technologies for Latvian has
been recognised in several high-profile state policy docu-
ments such as, e. g., the Guidelines of the State Language
Policy for 2015-2020. Foreseen activities are the develop-
ment of spoken and written corpora, LT for digital content
and usage of Latvian in cyberspace and its integration into
a European language resource infrastructure. Work on the
most critical areas (speech, MT, semantic analysis) is sup-
ported by EU Structural Funds projects. The potential of
LT has been recognised by the planners of the public IT
infrastructure. Tilde has been commissioned to develop and
maintain MT services for Latvia’s e-Government infrastruc-
ture. The Latvian META-SHARE node, hosted by Tilde, is
a managing node, where information about resources from
Nordic and Baltic countries is collected and synchronised
with other nodes. LT was in the spotlight during Latvia’s
Presidency of the Council of Europe in the first half of 2015
with the Riga Summit 2015 (see Section 5).

4.17 Lithuania

META-NET enabled the improvement and standardisation
of resources and their distribution through META-SHARE.
Advanced technologies for Lithuanian requiring more thor-
ough knowledge of linguistic processing and semantics are
still in their developing stage (Vaišnien and Zabarskaitė
2012). The positive efforts with respect to the government,
research and science institutions, have led to the formulation
of an obvious need to be consolidated in a uniform strategy.
The SRA and dissemination campaigns had a great impact
for Lithuania in starting a national LT strategy. Guidelines on
the development of Lithuanian in ICT for the period 2014-
2020, prepared by the State Commission of the Lithuanian
Language are still waiting for their approval. Their objective
is to develop technology support at the level that will enable
Lithuanian to successfully function in the digital age.



The Strategic Impact of META-NET on the Regional, National and International Level 9

4.18 Malta

META-NET has had several positive effects upon the state
of LT in Malta. First, a number of novel and useful resources
for Maltese have been brought into existence. Second, thanks
to META-SHARE, these resources are now easy to discover
and available for download under licenced conditions. These
two factors alone have succeeded in raising the profile of
LT, thus opening the way to better exploitation in the public
and private sectors. In addition, there is a third impact re-
sulting from the white paper (Rosner and Joachimsen 2012),
which was widely quoted in the press. A new awareness of
the role of resources in the eye of the Council for the Mal-
tese Language seems to have emerged. Its IT subgroup is ac-
tively developing a roadmap to elevate the current resource
server into a National Resource for the Languages of Malta
(NRLM). If this status is accepted, support for Maltese lan-
guage resources will acquire a hitherto unseen level of con-
tinuity.

4.19 Netherlands

The white paper (Odijk 2012) has generated a lot of at-
tention in the Netherlands and Flanders, the major results
were also presented at industry events. The awareness of the
importance of LT for consolidating the position of Dutch
in the information society, which was already high through
the Dutch-Flemish STEVIN programme, has been further
increased. The white paper has been brought to the attention
of the interparliamentary committee for the Dutch Lan-
guage Union, so that it can contribute to the policy for the
Dutch language. With the white paper the importance of
national and international LT R&D programmes was re-
emphasised. Though the organisation of funding schemes in
the Netherlands is currently prohibitive of such programmes,
LT R&D is further explored and exploited in projects such
as CLARIN-NL, CLARIAH-SEED, and various projects
financed by the national funding agency’s Creative Industry
programme.

4.20 Norway

The white papers (Smedt et al. 2012a,b), together with na-
tional workshops and media coverage, were well received.
The LT Resource Collection for Norwegian (Språkbanken),
etablished by the government before META-NET started,
received increased visibility thanks to its close cooperation
with the META-NET member University of Bergen. This
cooperation has led to an increased number of resources and
their availability through META-SHARE. These resources
have also been useful input to the Norwegian CLARINO

project which, starting in 2012, has received national fund-
ing and is continuing best practice for making even more
resources available in Norway. The Marie Curie project
CLARA has also made some of its results available through
META-SHARE.

4.21 Poland

The white paper (Miłkowski 2012) and META-NET’s ef-
forts to promote LT through synergies with the European
Federation of National Institutions for Language (EFNIL)
were very well received in Poland. In 2012 representatives
of the Council for the Polish Language participated in the
EFNIL conference in Budapest and reported their interest
in META-NET. The Polish LT community was mobilised
through the META-NET event “Human Language Technol-
ogy Days” held in Warsaw (September 2012). The event
attracted a lot of media attention and helped promote knowl-
edge about LT and its potential. Since the end of the first
funded phase of META-NET several new members have
joined META-NET and META, updates of resources are
regularly published via META-SHARE and many new tools
and resources have been developed using methodologies and
guidelines put forward by META-NET. A notable example
is the cooperation between several research institutions in
CLARIN-PL, the national CLARIN consortium in Poland.

4.22 Portugal

META-NET represents a major landmark in LT for Por-
tuguese. A significant set of resources and tools developed
in Portugal and Brazil was made available through META-
SHARE. The publication of the white paper (Branco et al.
2012) created a wave of dissemination and awareness raising
actions: the workshop where the white paper was launched,
and its core message, had a widespread and significant me-
dia impact; it was a key factor in community building and
strengthening; it has served, and is still serving, as the key
to meetings with top-ranking decision makers. The raised
awareness helped in forming the positive decision by the
Portuguese funding agency to create a national research
infrastructure to support the science and technology of hu-
man language, affiliated with CLARIN since November 26,
2014. The white paper was very instrumental in lobbying
for having Portuguese as one of the strategic challenges in
the national plans for the period 2014-2020. The document
supporting the Partnership Agreement between Portugal and
the EC for the implementation of the European Structural
and Investment Funds (Portuguese Government 2014) in-
dicates that the “scientific and technological preparation
[of Portuguese], and the innovative exploitation of business



10 Georg Rehm et al.

opportunities based in its computational processing repre-
sent important opportunities” that should be explored in this
upcoming period.

4.23 Romania

META-NET helped to make available more than 70 re-
sources and tools for Romanian on two Romanian META-
SHARE nodes (cf. Trandabăț et al. 2012) which helped to
initiate several university projects. In 2014, the Romanian
Academy approved an ambitious project on building a very
large (more than 300 million words), heavily annotated ref-
erence corpus of contemporary Romanian (COROLA). It is
a common project between the two IT institutes in the Roma-
nian Academy (Research Institute for Artificial Intelligence
in Bucharest, Institute of Computer Science in Iasi) and it
brings together publishing houses, news agencies, radio and
TV broadcasting companies, and bloggers. The project has
been officially launched on February 3, 2014, in the pres-
ence of an audience of text and speech resources holders,
members of the Academy, researchers and the language in-
dustry. Its first stage will run until 2017 when access to the
first version of the corpus will be opened to the public.

4.24 Serbia

META-NET enabled the development of new resources for
Serbian as well as improvement and standardisation of ex-
isting resources, made available through a national META-
SHARE node. The Serbian LT community was mobilised
through the META-NET “Human Language Technology
Day” held in Belgrade on October 29, 2012 (cf. Vitas et al.
2012). The conference gathered representatives from all
Serbian research centers involved in language processing,
as well as many representatives from academia and industry.
A follow-up event was organised in Belgrade in November
2013, “35 years of Computational Linguistics in Serbia”.
In September 2014 the Serbian community established the
Association for Language Resources and Technology with
the aim of further promoting META-NET’s goals.

4.25 Slovakia

The collection of Slovak resources included in META-
SHARE signified a major boost – best exemplified by the
Slovak National Corpus, which went up from 770 mil-
lion tokens (2011) to 2500 million (2013). The white pa-
per (Šimková et al. 2012) increased general awareness of
language-related research and, eventually, contributed to
the government’s decision to set up a special government
programme “Budovanie Slovenského národného korpusu

a elektronizácia jazykovedného výskumu na Slovensku –
III. etapa” (Building Slovak National Corpus and Digi-
talization of Language Research in Slovakia, 3rd period),
funded by the Ministry of Education, Ministry of Culture
and Slovak Academy of Sciences. This continuation of the
Slovak National Corpus project lasts from 2012 to 2016. It
is also used for training secondary education teachers of Slo-
vak Language and Literature (Gajdošová and Ľos Ivoríková
2013). Increased interest in large corpora led to several
terminological projects, for which new corpora have been
compiled. Resources are used for terminological activities
in collaboration with terminological committees of all the
Ministries of the Slovak Republic.

4.26 Slovenia

The key results of the White Paper Series had a major impact
on language policy activities and ultimately led to the inclu-
sion of LT in the Resolution on the National Programme for
Language Policy 2014–2018 which was passed in the Parlia-
ment in July 2013; some of the white paper findings (Krek
2012) were directly included in the LT part of the Resolu-
tion. Through various META-NET activities the need for a
more systematic support of LT for Slovene was recognised
by the government which is now in the process of adopt-
ing a five-year action plan on language infrastructure de-
velopment. The results of a major LT project (Communica-
tion in Slovene) funded by the European Social Fund and
the Ministry of Education, Science and Sports were included
in META-SHARE and, therefore, made available to the LT
community. META-NET-related activities also led to the in-
clusion of the topic of Slovene resources and technologies
development into the Partnership Agreement between the
EC and Slovenia for 2014-2020.

4.27 Spain

META-NET raised the interest in technologies for lan-
guages spoken in Spain. Results from the white papers
(García-Mateo and Arza 2012; Melero et al. 2012; Hernáez
et al. 2012; Moreno et al. 2012) were presented at the
event Català, llengua digital a l’empresa (“Catalan, dig-
ital language at industry”), organised by the Generalitat
de Catalunya (March 2014). The LANGUNE Association
of Basque Country Language Industry companies selected
the META-NET SRA as a reference for its Strategic Plan
(2014–2017). The white papers were also acknowledged
by the Secretary of State for Telecommunications and In-
formation Society of the Spanish Ministry of Industry, En-
ergy and Tourism, which is studying to align their Spanish
support programmes related to the Digital Agenda to the
META-NET SRA. The warm reaction of the private sector



The Strategic Impact of META-NET on the Regional, National and International Level 11

towards the Spanish resources available resources to the
four META-SHARE nodes has also been noticeable. The
nodes are now supported by the Spanish national projects
Speech Tech4All and the IULA-UPF CLARIN Competence
Center, co-funded by the EU Regional Structural Funds and
the Generalitat de Catalunya. In 2014, the Regional Council
of Aquitaine organised workshops to prepare a roadmap for
the development of technologies and resources for Occitan.
Participants were briefed about what has been done for other
languages. Specifically, experts in Basque and Catalan were
chosen to present the status of LT/LR in these two languages,
including META-NET and the SRA.

4.28 Sweden

META-NET helped to increase the awareness of technolo-
gies for the future of Swedish and the realisation that LT for
Swedish will be developed only in Sweden, if at all. The
white paper (Borin et al. 2012) played a central role in the
preparation of a report, commissioned by the Department of
Culture, on present and future societal needs for LT (ISOF
2012). META-NET’s key results served as a powerful rein-
forcement of the report’s message. In a follow-up move, the
Swedish government has launched a pilot project – to be car-
ried out by the Swedish Post and Telecom Authority – with
the aim of stimulating the construction of a national infras-
tructure capable of supporting speech-based services, such
as online subtitling of public-service television program-
ming, text-to-speech conversion of public-office web pages,
etc. A large number of Swedish resources is now available
through META-SHARE. META-NET helped to reduce the
fragmentation in the Swedish LT community, instilling a
sense of common cause on the national level, as evidenced
by a number of joint funding proposals and awarded grants.
In 2013 the Swedish Research Council approved a proposal
coordinated by the University of Gothenburg for Swedish
membership in the CLARIN ERIC, where Sweden is now
the tenth member as of October 2014. Negotiations are
underway towards setting up SWE-CLARIN, a national in-
frastructure consisting of nine CLARIN centers, including
universities, a national data archive, and two public offices
charged with coordinating the safeguarding of Sweden’s
linguistic and cultural heritage. Sweden participated in a
successful proposal to the Nordic research funding agency
NORDFORSK for setting up a Nordic CLARIN network
(2014–2017). The network is coordinated by the Danish
CLARIN node and includes all five Nordic countries (Den-
mark, Finland, Iceland, Norway and Sweden). This reflects
a long history of fruitful interaction and collaboration across
national borders in the Nordic area in the field of LT.

4.29 United Kingdom

The white paper (Ananiadou et al. 2012) helped to raise the
awareness about the importance of LT in the UK Govern-
ment. It has led to endorsements from the House of Com-
mons (David Willetts MP, Minister of State for Universities
and Science) and the House of Lords (Baroness Coussins,
Chair, All-Party Parliamentary Modern Languages Group).
Further evidence of the recognition by the UK Government
of the benefits of LT has been demonstrated by two amend-
ments to the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, both
of which have come into force during 2014. The first means
that it is no longer an infringement of copyright for a per-
son who already has a lawful right to access a copyrighted
work to copy the work as part of a technological process of
analysis and synthesis of the content of the work (e. g., text
mining) for the sole purpose of non-commercial research.
The second change allows researchers with lawful access
to copyrighted texts to show short quotations from these
texts; publicly accessible text mining systems can now dis-
play short snippets of copyrighted material to which NLP
analysis has been applied, as long as appropriate permis-
sion to access these texts has been sought by the researcher.
These changes in legislation have been made according to
the earlier recommendations of the Hargreaves Review of
Intellectual Property and Growth, and following numerous
discussions at consultation events in which the University of
Manchester (member of META-NET) participated. Regard-
ing the future of research funding, the UK’s Engineering and
Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC) conducted a
review of which subject areas to retain for funding, which to
increase and which to reduce. A decision was made to main-
tain funding for NLP research. Amongst the evidence cited
by EPSRC for this decision was the META-NET Strategic
Research Agenda. A survey of the benefits of text mining to
the UK’s further and higher education community, conclud-
ing that text mining can encourage innovation and growth,
has been carried out by JISC, which funds research into
digital technologies in the UK.

5 Conclusions and Future Activities

The intense communication and dissemination work carried
out by META-NET had a significant impact on the Euro-
pean Language Technology scene, helped to provide focus
and to shape several national language policy and develop-
ment strategies. We have also been able to provide input to
CEF and Horizon 2020.

While the first funded phase of META-NET is over, the
initiative itself is continuing its work and established brand
under the umbrella of new projects. One of the several ac-
tivities in which META-NET participated was an open letter



12 Georg Rehm et al.

campaign to gather support for the recommendation of in-
cluding multilingual technologies in the EC’s Digital Single
Market strategy.7 At the core of this new set of projects is
CRACKER, which started in January 2015 and organised
META-FORUM 2015 in Riga.8 This Coordination and Sup-
port Action (CSA) is funded through the Horizon 2020 ICT-
17 Call “Cracking the Language Barrier”, which revolves
around the Machine Translation topic. ICT-17 also supports
the research action QT219 and three innovation actions.
Together with a second CSA, LT_Observatory, and collab-
orating initiatives we are currently preparing the Strategic
Agenda for the Multilingual Digital Single Market (SRIA),
a first public version10 was unveiled at the Riga Summit
on the Multilingual Digital Single Market11 in April 2015.
The goal of the SRIA is to present recommendations and
solutions regarding the question how to make the EU’s Dig-
ital Single Market flagship initiative multilingual through
language technologies.

In addition to META-FORUM 2015 (April 27), the
Riga Summit was the umbrella for a plenary day (April
28), the Multilingual Web Workshop and the first CEF.AT
conference (both on April 29). The summit produced two
significant results, the “Declaration of Common Interests”
and the “Resolution of the Riga Summit 2015 on the Multi-
lingual Digital Single Market”. In the Declaration, 12 major
stakeholders, community organisations, associations and
networks that organised or participated in META-FORUM
2015 or the other Riga Summit events declare that they stand
united in their goal and interest to support multilingualism
in Europe by employing language technology. The Resolu-
tion of the Riga Summit provides more details and insights
around the actual topics. The document concludes that we
need to combine and aggregate our language technology
solutions on a pan-European level.

As an immediate next step following from the Riga Sum-
mit 2015 we have started forming a new umbrella initiative
in order to streamline coordination as well as internal and ex-
ternal communication activities among all related communi-
ties. This initiative, called Cracking the Language Barrier, is
a federation of European organisations and projects working
on technologies for a multilingual Europe.12 The new fed-
eration and the next version of the SRIA will be presented,
among others, at META-FORUM 2016 in Lisbon, Portugal,
on July 4/5, 2016.

7 http://www.multilingualeurope.eu
8 http://www.cracker-project.eu
9 http://www.qt21.eu

10 The SRIA is available on the websites of META-FORUM 2015
and CRACKER, among others (Rehm 2015).

11 http://rigasummit2015.eu
12 http://www.cracking-the-language-barrier.eu

Further Information

The interested reader is invited to contact the respective
co-authors, responsible for a certain country or region, in
order to engage into a bilateral discussion to get a more
detailed, up-to-date and regionally focussed description of
META-NET’s impact (such as, for example, new resources
or technologies produced, newly emerging funding pro-
grammes etc.). Due to space limitations we are unable to list
all language resources curated, updated or produced through
META-NET or related activities; the interested reader is in-
vited to explore the META-SHARE catalogue which makes
available more than 2,600 resources.13 Specific information
on the countries and languages can be found in the more
than 30 volumes of the META-NET White Paper Series
(Rehm and Uszkoreit 2012), fully available online14 (see
Rehm et al. 2014, for an update and extension). The META-
NET SRA (Rehm and Uszkoreit 2013)15 and the emerging
Strategic Agenda for the Multilingual Digital Single Market
(Rehm 2015)16 are also available online.

Acknowledgements

The first phase of the META-NET initiative was co-funded
by FP7 and the ICT-PSP programme of the European
Commission through the contracts T4ME (grant agree-
ment no. 249 119), CESAR (no. 271 022), METANET4U
(no. 270 893) and META-NORD (no. 270 899). CRACKER
has received funding from the EU’s Horizon 2020 research
and innovation programme (no. 645 357).

References

Sophia Ananiadou, John McNaught, and Paul Thompson. The English
Language in the Digital Age. META-NET White Paper Series.
Springer, Heidelberg etc., September 2012. URL http://www.
meta-net.eu/whitepapers/volumes/english.

Jacques Attali. La francophonie et la francophilie, mo-
teurs de croissance durable, rapport à françois hollande,
président de la république française. http://www.
ladocumentationfrancaise.fr/rapports-publics/
144000511/, August 2014.

Diana Blagoeva, Svetla Koeva, and Vladko Murdarov. Българският
език в дигиталната епоха – The Bulgarian Language in the
Digital Age. META-NET White Paper Series. Springer, Heidel-
berg etc., September 2012. URL http://www.meta-net.eu/
whitepapers/volumes/bulgarian.

Ondřej Bojar, Silvie Cinková, Jan Hajič, Barbora Hladká, Vladislav
Kuboň, Jiří Mírovský, Jarmila Panevová, Nino Peterek, Johanka
Spoustová, and Zdeněk Žabokrtský. Čeština v digitálním věku –
The Czech Language in the Digital Age. META-NET White Paper

13 http://www.meta-share.eu
14 http://www.meta-net.eu/whitepapers
15 http://www.meta-net.eu/sra
16 http://www.cracker-project.eu

http://www.multilingualeurope.eu
http://www.cracker-project.eu
http://www.qt21.eu
http://rigasummit2015.eu
http://www.cracking-the-language-barrier.eu
http://www.meta-net.eu/whitepapers/volumes/english
http://www.meta-net.eu/whitepapers/volumes/english
http://www.ladocumentationfrancaise.fr/rapports-publics/144000511/
http://www.ladocumentationfrancaise.fr/rapports-publics/144000511/
http://www.ladocumentationfrancaise.fr/rapports-publics/144000511/
http://www.meta-net.eu/whitepapers/volumes/bulgarian
http://www.meta-net.eu/whitepapers/volumes/bulgarian
http://www.meta-share.eu
http://www.meta-net.eu/whitepapers
http://www.meta-net.eu/sra
http://www.cracker-project.eu


The Strategic Impact of META-NET on the Regional, National and International Level 13

Series. Springer, Heidelberg etc., September 2012. URL http:
//www.meta-net.eu/whitepapers/volumes/czech.

Lars Borin, Martha D. Brandt, Jens Edlund, Jonas Lindh, and Mikael
Parkvall. Svenska språket i den digitala tidsåldern – The Swedish
Language in the Digital Age. META-NET White Paper Series.
Springer, Heidelberg etc., September 2012. URL http://www.
meta-net.eu/whitepapers/volumes/swedish.

António Branco, Amália Mendes, Sílvia Pereira, Paulo Henriques,
Thomas Pellegrini, Hugo Meinedo, Isabel Trancoso, Paulo
Quaresma, Vera Lúcia Strube de Lima, and Fernanda Bacelar. A
língua portuguesa na era digital – The Portuguese Language in
the Digital Age. META-NET White Paper Series. Springer, Hei-
delberg etc., September 2012. URL http://www.meta-net.eu/
whitepapers/volumes/portuguese.

Gerhard Budin. Digital Humanities, Language Industry, and Mul-
tilingualism – Global Networking and Innovation in Collabora-
tive Methods. In Martin Forstner and Hannelore Lee-Jahnke, edi-
tors, Pooling Academic Excellence with Entrepreneurship for New
Partnerships. Proceedings of the CIUTI Forum 2014, Geneva,
January 2014. Peter Lang Verlag, 2015. In print.

Aljoscha Burchardt, Markus Egg, Kathrin Eichler, Brigitte Krenn,
Jörn Kreutel, Annette Leßmöllmann, Georg Rehm, Manfred Stede,
Hans Uszkoreit, and Martin Volk. Die Deutsche Sprache im dig-
italen Zeitalter – German in the Digital Age. META-NET White
Paper Series. Springer, Heidelberg etc., September 2012. URL
http://www.meta-net.eu/whitepapers/volumes/german.

Nicoletta Calzolari, Bernardo Magnini, Claudia Soria, and Manuela
Speranza. La Lingua Italiana nell’Era Digitale – The Italian
Language in the Digital Age. META-NET White Paper Series.
Springer, Heidelberg etc., September 2012. URL http://www.
meta-net.eu/whitepapers/volumes/italian.

EC. A Digital Agenda for Europe, 2010. European Commis-
sion. http://ec.europa.eu/information_society/
digital-agenda/publications/.

EC. Horizon 2020: The Framework Programme for Research and In-
novation, 2012. European Commission. http://ec.europa.eu/
research/horizon2020/.

EC. Amended proposal for a Regulation of the European
Parliament and of the Council on guidelines for trans-
European telecommunications networks and repealing De-
cision No 1336/97/EC, 2013. European Commission.
http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.
do?uri=COM:2013:0329:FIN:EN:PDF.

EC. Connecting Europe Facility, 2014. European Commis-
sion. https://ec.europa.eu/digital-agenda/sites/
digital-agenda/files/cef.pdf.

Estonian Language Foundation. Development Plan of the Estonian
Language 2011–2017. http://ekn.hm.ee/system/files/
Eesti+keele+arengukava+inglise.indd_.pdf, 2011.
Tallinn; funded by the Ministry of Education and Research.

Jeremy Evas. Y Gymraeg yn yr Oes Ddigidol – The Welsh Language in
the Digital Age. META-NET White Paper Series. Springer, Hei-
delberg etc., January 2014. URL http://www.meta-net.eu/
whitepapers/volumes/welsh. Georg Rehm and Hans Uszkor-
eit (series editors). Buy this book at springer.com.

Katarína Gajdošová and Helena Ľos Ivoríková. Slovenský národný
korpus a možnosti jeho využitia v školskej praxi. Slovenčinár. Ča-
sopis Slovenskej asociácie učiteľov slovenčiny, 1(1):44–60, 2013.

Carmen García-Mateo and Montserrat Arza. O idioma galego na era
dixital – The Galician Language in the Digital Age. META-
NET White Paper Series. Springer, Heidelberg etc., Septem-
ber 2012. URL http://www.meta-net.eu/whitepapers/
volumes/galician.

Maria Gavrilidou, Maria Koutsombogera, Anastasios Patrikakos, and
Stelios Piperidis. Η Ελληνικη Γλωσσα στην Ψηφιακη Εποχη – The
Greek Language in the Digital Age. META-NET White Paper

Series. Springer, Heidelberg etc., September 2012. URL http:
//www.meta-net.eu/whitepapers/volumes/greek.

Inmaculada Hernáez, Eva Navas, Igor Odriozola, Kepa Sarasola,
Arantza Diaz de Ilarraza, Igor Leturia, Araceli Diaz de Lezana,
Beñat Oihartzabal, and Jasone Salaberria. Euskara Aro Digi-
talean – Basque in the Digital Age. META-NET White Paper
Series. Springer, Heidelberg etc., September 2012. URL http:
//www.meta-net.eu/whitepapers/volumes/basque.

ISOF. Infrastruktur för språken i Sverige. Förslag till nationell språk-
infrastruktur för det digitala samhället. Infrastructure for Sweden’s
languages. A proposed national language infrastructure for the dig-
ital society, 2012. Report commissioned from the Swedish Lan-
guage Council by the Swedish Department of Culture.

John Judge, Ailbhe Ní Chasaide, Rose Ní Dhubhda, Kevin P. Scan-
nell, and Elaine Uí Dhonnchadha. An Ghaeilge sa Ré Dhigiteach
– The Irish Language in the Digital Age. META-NET White
Paper Series. Springer, Heidelberg etc., September 2012. URL
http://www.meta-net.eu/whitepapers/volumes/irish.

Marina Julienne. Le web sera-t-il polyglotte ? La Recherche,
Octobre 2013. http://www.larecherche.fr/savoirs/
web-sera-t-il-polyglotte-01-10-2013-136059.

Philipp Koehn, Hieu Hoang, Alexandra Birch, Chris Callison-Burch,
Marcello Federico, Nicola Bertoldi, Brooke Cowan, Wade Shen,
Christine Moran, Richard Zens, Chris Dyer, Ondrej Bojar, Alexan-
dra Constantin, and Evan Herbst. Moses: Open Source Toolkit for
Statistical Machine Translation. In Annual Meeting of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics (ACL), demonstration session,
Prague, Czech Republic, June 2007.

Svetla Koeva, editor. Language Resources and Technologies for Bul-
garian Language. Bulgarian Academy, 2014.

Kimmo Koskenniemi, Krister Lindén, Lauri Carlson, Martti Vainio,
Antti Arppe, Mietta Lennes, Hanna Westerlund, Mirka Hyväri-
nen, Imre Bartis, Pirkko Nuolijärvi, and Aino Piehl. Suomen
kieli digitaalisella aikakaudella – The Finnish Language in the
Digital Age. META-NET White Paper Series. Springer, Heidel-
berg etc., September 2012. URL http://www.meta-net.eu/
whitepapers/volumes/finnish.

Simon Krek. Slovenski jezik v digitalni dobi – The Slovene Language
in the Digital Age. META-NET White Paper Series. Springer, Hei-
delberg etc., September 2012. URL http://www.meta-net.eu/
whitepapers/volumes/slovene.

Kristra Liin, Kadri Muischnek, Kaili Müürisep, and Kadri Vider.
Eesti keel digiajastul – The Estonian Language in the Digi-
tal Age. META-NET White Paper Series. Springer, Heidel-
berg etc., September 2012. URL http://www.meta-net.eu/
whitepapers/volumes/estonian.

Joseph Mariani, Patrick Paroubek, Gil Francopoulo, Aurélien Max,
François Yvon, and Pierre Zweigenbaum. La langue française
à l’ Ère du numérique – The French Language in the Digi-
tal Age. META-NET White Paper Series. Springer, Heidel-
berg etc., September 2012. URL http://www.meta-net.eu/
whitepapers/volumes/french.

Maite Melero, Toni Badia, and Asunción Moreno. La lengua es-
pañola en la era digital – The Spanish Language in the Dig-
ital Age. META-NET White Paper Series. Springer, Heidel-
berg etc., September 2012. URL http://www.meta-net.eu/
whitepapers/volumes/spanish.

META-NET. META-FORUM 2012: A Strategy for Multilingual
Europe. Panel discussion “Plans for LT Research and Innovation
in Member States and Regions”, June 2012. Videos available
at http://www.meta-net.eu/events/meta-forum-2012/
programme.

META-NET. META-FORUM 2013: Connecting Europe for New
Horizons. Panel discussion “Connecting Towards New Horizons”,
September 2013. Videos available at http://www.meta-net.
eu/events/meta-forum-2013/programme.

http://www.meta-net.eu/whitepapers/volumes/czech
http://www.meta-net.eu/whitepapers/volumes/czech
http://www.meta-net.eu/whitepapers/volumes/swedish
http://www.meta-net.eu/whitepapers/volumes/swedish
http://www.meta-net.eu/whitepapers/volumes/portuguese
http://www.meta-net.eu/whitepapers/volumes/portuguese
http://www.meta-net.eu/whitepapers/volumes/german
http://www.meta-net.eu/whitepapers/volumes/italian
http://www.meta-net.eu/whitepapers/volumes/italian
http://ec.europa.eu/information_society/digital-agenda/publications/
http://ec.europa.eu/information_society/digital-agenda/publications/
http://ec.europa.eu/research/horizon2020/
http://ec.europa.eu/research/horizon2020/
http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=COM:2013:0329:FIN:EN:PDF
http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=COM:2013:0329:FIN:EN:PDF
https://ec.europa.eu/digital-agenda/sites/digital-agenda/files/cef.pdf
https://ec.europa.eu/digital-agenda/sites/digital-agenda/files/cef.pdf
http://ekn.hm.ee/system/files/Eesti+keele+arengukava+inglise.indd_.pdf
http://ekn.hm.ee/system/files/Eesti+keele+arengukava+inglise.indd_.pdf
http://www.meta-net.eu/whitepapers/volumes/welsh
http://www.meta-net.eu/whitepapers/volumes/welsh
http://www.springer.com/computer/ai/book/978-3-642-45371-7
http://www.meta-net.eu/whitepapers/volumes/galician
http://www.meta-net.eu/whitepapers/volumes/galician
http://www.meta-net.eu/whitepapers/volumes/greek
http://www.meta-net.eu/whitepapers/volumes/greek
http://www.meta-net.eu/whitepapers/volumes/basque
http://www.meta-net.eu/whitepapers/volumes/basque
http://www.meta-net.eu/whitepapers/volumes/irish
http://www.larecherche.fr/savoirs/web-sera-t-il-polyglotte-01-10-2013-136059
http://www.larecherche.fr/savoirs/web-sera-t-il-polyglotte-01-10-2013-136059
http://www.meta-net.eu/whitepapers/volumes/finnish
http://www.meta-net.eu/whitepapers/volumes/finnish
http://www.meta-net.eu/whitepapers/volumes/slovene
http://www.meta-net.eu/whitepapers/volumes/slovene
http://www.meta-net.eu/whitepapers/volumes/estonian
http://www.meta-net.eu/whitepapers/volumes/estonian
http://www.meta-net.eu/whitepapers/volumes/french
http://www.meta-net.eu/whitepapers/volumes/french
http://www.meta-net.eu/whitepapers/volumes/spanish
http://www.meta-net.eu/whitepapers/volumes/spanish
http://www.meta-net.eu/events/meta-forum-2012/programme
http://www.meta-net.eu/events/meta-forum-2012/programme
http://www.meta-net.eu/events/meta-forum-2013/programme
http://www.meta-net.eu/events/meta-forum-2013/programme


14 Georg Rehm et al.

Vahé Ter Minassian. 21 langues menacées d’extinction numérique.
Journal du CNRS, (270):12, Janvier-février 2013.

Marcin Miłkowski. Język polski w erze cyfrowej – The Polish Language
in the Digital Age. META-NET White Paper Series. Springer, Hei-
delberg etc., September 2012. URL http://www.meta-net.eu/
whitepapers/volumes/polish.

Asunción Moreno, Núria Bel, Eva Revilla, Emília Garcia, and Sisco
Vallverdú. La llengua catalana a l’era digital – The Catalan
Language in the Digital Age. META-NET White Paper Series.
Springer, Heidelberg etc., September 2012. URL http://www.
meta-net.eu/whitepapers/volumes/catalan.

Christopher Moseley, editor. Atlas of the World’s Languages in
Danger. UNESCO Publishing, 2010. http://www.unesco.
org/new/en/culture/themes/endangered-languages/
atlas-of-languages-in-danger/.

Jan Odijk. Het Nederlands in het Digitale Tijdperk – The Dutch
Language in the Digital Age. META-NET White Paper Series.
Springer, Heidelberg etc., September 2012. URL http://www.
meta-net.eu/whitepapers/volumes/dutch.

Bolette Sandford Pedersen, Jürgen Wedekind, Steen Bøhm-Andersen,
Peter Juel Henrichsen, Sanne Hoffensetz-Andresen, Sabine
Kirchmeier-Andersen, Jens Otto Kjærum, Louise Bie Larsen,
Bente Maegaard, Sanni Nimb, Jens-Erik Rasmussen, Peter Revs-
bech, and Hanne Erdman Thomsen. Det danske sprog i den digi-
tale tidsalder – The Danish Language in the Digital Age. META-
NET White Paper Series. Springer, Heidelberg etc., Septem-
ber 2012. URL http://www.meta-net.eu/whitepapers/
volumes/danish.

Stelios Piperidis. The META-SHARE Language Resources Sharing
Infrastructure: Principles, Challenges, Solutions. InProceedings of
the Eighth International Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC 2012), Istanbul, Turkey, May 2012.

Stelios Piperidis, Harris Papageorgiou, Christian Spurk, Georg Rehm,
Khalid Choukri, Olivier Hamon, Nicoletta Calzolari, Riccardo del
Gratta, Bernardo Magnini, and Christian Girardi. META-SHARE:
One year after. In Proceedings of the 9th Language Resources and
Evaluation Conference (LREC 2014), Reykjavik, Iceland, May
2014.

Portuguese Government. Portugal 2020 – acordo de parceria 2014-
2020, July 2014.

Georg Rehm, editor. Strategic Agenda for the Multilingual Dig-
ital Single Market – Technologies for Overcoming Language
Barriers towards a truly integrated European Online Mar-
ket. CRACKER, LT_Observatory, April 2015. Version 0.5.
April 22, 2015. Prepared by the EU-funded projects CRACKER
and LT_Observatory. http://www.meta-net.eu/projects/
cracker/multimedia/mdsm-sria-draft.pdf.

Georg Rehm and Hans Uszkoreit, editors. META-NET White Paper
Series: Europe’s Languages in the Digital Age. Springer, Heidel-
berg etc., 2012. 31 volumes on 30 European languages. http:
//www.meta-net.eu/whitepapers.

Georg Rehm and Hans Uszkoreit, editors. The META-NET Strategic
Research Agenda for Multilingual Europe. Springer, Heidelberg
etc., 2013. Presented by the META Technology Council. http:
//www.meta-net.eu/sra.

Georg Rehm, Hans Uszkoreit, Ido Dagan, Vartkes Goetcherian,
Mehmet Ugur Dogan, Coskun Mermer, Tamás Váradi, Sabine
Kirchmeier-Andersen, Gerhard Stickel, Meirion Prys Jones, Ste-
fan Oeter, and Sigve Gramstad. An Update and Extension of
the META-NET Study “Europe’s Languages in the Digital Age”.
In Proceedings of the Workshop on Collaboration and Comput-
ing for Under-Resourced Languages in the Linked Open Data
Era (CCURL 2014), Reykjavik, Iceland, May 2014. http://
georg-re.hm/pdf/CCURL-2014-META-NET.pdf.

Mike Rosner and Jan Joachimsen. Il-Lingwa Maltija Fl-Era Diġitali –
The Maltese Language in the Digital Age. META-NET White Pa-

per Series. Springer, Heidelberg etc., September 2012. URL http:
//www.meta-net.eu/whitepapers/volumes/maltese.

Eiríkur Rögnvaldsson, Kristín M. Jóhannsdóttir, Sigrún Helgadóttir,
and Steinþór Steingrímsson. Íslensk tunga á stafrænni öld – The
Icelandic Language in the Digital Age. META-NET White Paper
Series. Springer, Heidelberg etc., September 2012. URL http:
//www.meta-net.eu/whitepapers/volumes/icelandic.

Eszter Simon, Piroska Lendvai, Géza Németh, Gábor Olaszy, and
Klára Vicsi. A magyar nyelv a digitális korban – The Hungar-
ian Language in the Digital Age. META-NET White Paper Se-
ries. Springer, Heidelberg etc., September 2012. URL http:
//www.meta-net.eu/whitepapers/volumes/hungarian.

Inguna Skadiņa, Andrejs Veisbergs, Andrejs Vasiļjevs, Tatjana Gornos-
taja, Iveta Keiša, and Alda Rudzīte. Latviešu valoda digitālajā
laikmetā – The Latvian Language in the Digital Age. META-
NET White Paper Series. Springer, Heidelberg etc., Septem-
ber 2012. URL http://www.meta-net.eu/whitepapers/
volumes/latvian.

Koenraad De Smedt, Gunn Inger Lyse, Anje Müller Gjesdal, and
Gyri S. Losnegaard. Norsk i den digitale tidsalderen (bokmålsver-
sjon) – The Norwegian Language in the Digital Age (Bokmål
Version). META-NET White Paper Series. Springer, Heidel-
berg etc., September 2012a. URL http://www.meta-net.eu/
whitepapers/volumes/norwegian-bokmaal.

Koenraad De Smedt, Gunn Inger Lyse, Anje Müller Gjesdal, and
Gyri S. Losnegaard. Norsk i den digitale tidsalderen (nynorskver-
sjon) – The Norwegian Language in the Digital Age (Nynorsk
Version). META-NET White Paper Series. Springer, Heidel-
berg etc., September 2012b. URL http://www.meta-net.eu/
whitepapers/volumes/norwegian-nynorsk.

Peter Spyns and Jan Odijk, editors. Essential Speech and Language
Technology for Dutch. Results by the STEVIN-programme. Theory
and Applications of Natural Language Processing. Springer, 2013.

STOA. European Parliament, Science and Technology Op-
tions Assessment: Workshop “State of the Art of Machine
Translation: Current Challenges and Future Opportunities”,
2013. http://www.europarl.europa.eu/stoa/cms/cache/
offonce/home/events/workshops/translation.

Marko Tadić, Dunja Brozović-Rončević, and Amir Kapetanović.
Hrvatski Jezik u Digitalnom Dobu – The Croatian Language in
the Digital Age. META-NET White Paper Series. Springer, Hei-
delberg etc., September 2012. URL http://www.meta-net.eu/
whitepapers/volumes/croatian.

Diana Trandabăț, Elena Irimia, Verginica Barbu Mititelu, Dan Cristea,
and Dan Tufiș. Limba română în era digitală – The Romanian
Language in the Digital Age. META-NET White Paper Series.
Springer, Heidelberg etc., September 2012. URL http://www.
meta-net.eu/whitepapers/volumes/romanian.

Daiva Vaišnien and Jolanta Zabarskaitė. Lietuvių kalba skaitmeniniame
amžiuje – The Lithuanian Language in the Digital Age. META-
NET White Paper Series. Springer, Heidelberg etc., Septem-
ber 2012. URL http://www.meta-net.eu/whitepapers/
volumes/lithuanian.

Andrejs Vasiljevs and Inguna Skadiņa. Latvian language resources and
tools: Assessment, description and sharing. In Human Language
Technologies – The Baltic Perspective – Proceedings of the Fifth
International Conference Baltic HLT 2012, pages 265–272. IOS
Press, 2012.

Kadri Vider, Krista Liin, and Neeme Kahusk. Strategic importance of
language technology in estoni. In Arvi Tavast, Kadri Muischnek,
and Mare Koit, editors, Baltic HLT, pages 273–279. IOS Press,
2012.

Vilnius-Meeting. Meeting of the chairpersons of the commit-
tees on education, science and culture and the committees
on the development of information society “united in di-
versity: Political and social development aspects of eu lan-

http://www.meta-net.eu/whitepapers/volumes/polish
http://www.meta-net.eu/whitepapers/volumes/polish
http://www.meta-net.eu/whitepapers/volumes/catalan
http://www.meta-net.eu/whitepapers/volumes/catalan
http://www.unesco.org/new/en/culture/themes/endangered-languages/atlas-of-languages-in-danger/
http://www.unesco.org/new/en/culture/themes/endangered-languages/atlas-of-languages-in-danger/
http://www.unesco.org/new/en/culture/themes/endangered-languages/atlas-of-languages-in-danger/
http://www.meta-net.eu/whitepapers/volumes/dutch
http://www.meta-net.eu/whitepapers/volumes/dutch
http://www.meta-net.eu/whitepapers/volumes/danish
http://www.meta-net.eu/whitepapers/volumes/danish
http://www.meta-net.eu/projects/cracker/multimedia/mdsm-sria-draft.pdf
http://www.meta-net.eu/projects/cracker/multimedia/mdsm-sria-draft.pdf
http://www.meta-net.eu/whitepapers
http://www.meta-net.eu/whitepapers
http://www.meta-net.eu/sra
http://www.meta-net.eu/sra
http://georg-re.hm/pdf/CCURL-2014-META-NET.pdf
http://georg-re.hm/pdf/CCURL-2014-META-NET.pdf
http://www.meta-net.eu/whitepapers/volumes/maltese
http://www.meta-net.eu/whitepapers/volumes/maltese
http://www.meta-net.eu/whitepapers/volumes/icelandic
http://www.meta-net.eu/whitepapers/volumes/icelandic
http://www.meta-net.eu/whitepapers/volumes/hungarian
http://www.meta-net.eu/whitepapers/volumes/hungarian
http://www.meta-net.eu/whitepapers/volumes/latvian
http://www.meta-net.eu/whitepapers/volumes/latvian
http://www.meta-net.eu/whitepapers/volumes/norwegian-bokmaal
http://www.meta-net.eu/whitepapers/volumes/norwegian-bokmaal
http://www.meta-net.eu/whitepapers/volumes/norwegian-nynorsk
http://www.meta-net.eu/whitepapers/volumes/norwegian-nynorsk
http://www.europarl.europa.eu/stoa/cms/cache/offonce/home/events/workshops/translation
http://www.europarl.europa.eu/stoa/cms/cache/offonce/home/events/workshops/translation
http://www.meta-net.eu/whitepapers/volumes/croatian
http://www.meta-net.eu/whitepapers/volumes/croatian
http://www.meta-net.eu/whitepapers/volumes/romanian
http://www.meta-net.eu/whitepapers/volumes/romanian
http://www.meta-net.eu/whitepapers/volumes/lithuanian
http://www.meta-net.eu/whitepapers/volumes/lithuanian


The Strategic Impact of META-NET on the Regional, National and International Level 15

guages and cultures”, September 2013. Vilnius, Lithuania.
http://renginiai.lrs.lt/renginiai/EventDocument/
98af77a5-8014-4a6e-afe5-55c3f26fe0bf/Vilnius%
20Conclusions%20-%20Education%20and%20Information%
20Society%20EN.pdf.

Duško Vitas, Ljubomir Popović, Cvetana Krstev, Ivan Obradović,
Gordana Pavlović-Lažetić, and Mladen Stanojević. Српски
језик у дигиталном добу – The Serbian Language in the Dig-
ital Age. META-NET White Paper Series. Springer, Heidel-
berg etc., September 2012. URL http://www.meta-net.eu/
whitepapers/volumes/serbian.

Mária Šimková, Radovan Garabík, Katarína Gajdošová, Michal La-
clavík, Slavomír Ondrejovič, Jozef Juhár, Ján Genči, Karol Fur-
dík, Helena Ivoríková, and Jozef Ivanecký. Slovenský jazyk v dig-
itálnom veku – The Slovak Language in the Digital Age. META-
NET White Paper Series. Springer, Heidelberg etc., Septem-
ber 2012. URL http://www.meta-net.eu/whitepapers/
volumes/slovak.

http://renginiai.lrs.lt/renginiai/EventDocument/98af77a5-8014-4a6e-afe5-55c3f26fe0bf/Vilnius%20Conclusions%20-%20Education%20and%20Information%20Society%20EN.pdf
http://renginiai.lrs.lt/renginiai/EventDocument/98af77a5-8014-4a6e-afe5-55c3f26fe0bf/Vilnius%20Conclusions%20-%20Education%20and%20Information%20Society%20EN.pdf
http://renginiai.lrs.lt/renginiai/EventDocument/98af77a5-8014-4a6e-afe5-55c3f26fe0bf/Vilnius%20Conclusions%20-%20Education%20and%20Information%20Society%20EN.pdf
http://renginiai.lrs.lt/renginiai/EventDocument/98af77a5-8014-4a6e-afe5-55c3f26fe0bf/Vilnius%20Conclusions%20-%20Education%20and%20Information%20Society%20EN.pdf
http://www.meta-net.eu/whitepapers/volumes/serbian
http://www.meta-net.eu/whitepapers/volumes/serbian
http://www.meta-net.eu/whitepapers/volumes/slovak
http://www.meta-net.eu/whitepapers/volumes/slovak

	Introduction and Overview
	Key Communication Instruments
	The International Level
	The National and Regional Level
	Conclusions and Future Activities



