











































Squib

How much hybridization does
machine translation need?

Marta R. Costa-jussà∗
Institute for Infocomm Research,
Singapore

Rule-based and corpus-based Machine Translation (MT) have coexisted for more than 20
years. Recently, boundaries between both paradigms have narrowed and hybrid approaches
are gaining interest from the academic and business point of view. However, since the hybrid
approaches involve the multidisciplinary interaction of linguists, computer scientists, engineers
and informatics, there arise a variety of questions.

While statistical methods currently dominate research work in statistical MT, most commer-
cial MT systems are technically hybrid systems. The research community should more actively
investigate the benefits and questions surrounding hybridization of MT systems. This squib
discusses about different issues related to hybrid MT including the origins, the architectures, the
achievements and frustrations. Understanding hybridization in the wide sense, both rule-based
and corpus-based MT systems have benefited from hybridization when correctly integrated. In
addition and to some extension, most of the current rule/corpus-based MT approaches are already
hybrid since they tend to include some statistics/rules at some stage.

1. Introduction

Hybrid Machine Translation (MT) has gained popularity since the development of first
corpus-based MT systems. Some years from now, most commercial MT developers
claim to have hybrid MT systems (see conferences as AMTA 2004 and MT Summit 2005);
big projects such as EuroMatrix or T4ME develop some research on hybrid MT systems;
and popular shared tasks include system combination of MT systems of different nature.
Moreover, most production statistical MT systems use rule-based components for things
like transliteration and the translation of numbers. So deployed statistical MT systems
are in some sense all hybrid systems, with purely statistical systems really only being
seen in research work.

The very first publications in hybrid MT (involving corpus-based systems) date
from the early 90s with the integration of statistical information in rule-based MT sys-
tems (Doi and Muraki 1992). Other pioneer hybridizations include the combination of
translation memories with rule-based MT (Heyn 1996); combination of example-based
MT with rule-based MT and combination of translation memory with example-based

∗ Currently, visiting Instituto Politécnico Nacional, Centro de Investigación en Computación, Mexico City
E-mail: martaruizcostajussa@gmail.com

Original submission received: 23rd September 2013; Revision received: 19th March 2014; Accepted for publi-
cation: 15th August 2014

© 2014 Association for Computational Linguistics



Computational Linguistics Volume 1, Number 1

MT (Carl and Hansen 1999). More advanced hybrid techniques include the combination
of rule-based and several types of corpus-based approaches (Carl et al. 2008). Finally,
most recent works on hybridization tend to involve statistical systems with linguistic
knowledge (Costa-jussà and Farrús 2014), which reflects that modern statistical MT
may be more rule-based than most people realize. Although most probably it is still
not readily accepted by the statistical MT community, when using significant linguistic
resources, statistical MT systems could be considered hybrid systems (only if broading
the concept of hybridization, as it will be discussed later).

Hybridization tends to be guided by one single approach, which is capable of
borrowing strengths of other approaches that are actually weaknesses for the guiding
one (e.g. a rule-based number translation module can help standard statistical MT to
translate numeric tokens like 1,234,567.89, and solving the weakness that statistical MT
would be only able to translate numbers seen in the training corpus).

In this squib, we review the conceptual foundation underlying hybridization, con-
trasting MT approaches from different nature. We report references to several works
that help to define and exemplify this MT hybridization. Also we examine the successes
and failures of the performance of such systems and propose several future research
lines. At the end of this discussion, we should be able to have a clearer idea of what is
exactly a hybrid MT system and if MT does really need hybridization.

The remainder of this discussion is organized as follows. Next Section reports
the main concepts behind rule-based and statistical MT. Following Section 3 describes
several successful hybrid architectures. Section 4 discusses a variety of relevant prop-
erties of hybridization that will help to characterize it more in detail. In particular, the
properties are degree, effectiveness, complexity, modeling and impact. Final Section 5
reports some interesting hybridization directions that may be explored in the future.

2. Rule-based and Statistical MT main concepts

MT has historically been faced from different perspectives: either following a linguistic
or a data-based approach. As follows, we briefly describe one of the most representative
systems for each branch that are popularly co-existing nowadays (i.e rule-based and
phrase-based statistical systems).

On the one hand, rule-based MT provides a translation based on linguistic knowl-
edge. The translation process is divided in: analysis, transfer and generation. Analysis
and generation cover mainly the morphological variations of the languages, the transfer
phase is in charge of the grammatical aspects (Hutchins and Sommers 1992).

On the other hand, statistical MT uses probabilistic models to learn translations
(Brown et al. 1993). Given a source string s, the goal is to choose the string with the
highest probability among all possible target strings t. Phrase-based translation models
(Koehn, Och, and Marcu 2003), are estimated directly from aligned bilingual corpora by
considering relative frequencies. Modern systems build translations using a decoding
model consisting of the log-linear combination of multiple feature functions (Och 2003).
Decoding models typically use a small number of features, but there has been some
work investigating using a large number of sparse decoding model features, e.g. (Liang
et al. 2006; Chiang, Knight, and Wang 2009; Green et al. 2013). A critical model in
this combination is the translation model, as it defines the scored transfer rules (or
translation units) for converting words and phrases (possibly non-linguistic sequences
of words) from one language into another. In addition to the translation model, sta-
tistical MT systems use a target language model, which is usually formulated as a
probability distribution over strings that attempts to reflect how likely a string occurs

2



Marta R. Costa-jussà How much hybridization does MT need?

inside a language. Additional feature functions are also introduced in the statistical MT
framework to improve the translation, like for instance lexical re-orderings and graphs
(Su et al. 2010). Among other advancements that allow statistical MT systems to model
more complex linguistic phenomenon, there is the popular hierarchical MT approach
(Chiang 2007).

Because rule-based systems explicitly attempt to process every part of the input,
they are not subject to some of the pathological behavior of statistical systems such
as the occasional random deletion of important content words. However, they exhibit
weaknesses in the lexical selection transfer. Differently, statistical MT systems that
require plenty of parallel data are more robust and always produce output, which tends
to be more natural given the role of the language model. But such data-driven MT
systems base their knowledge on bilingual aligned corpora, and the accuracy of their
output depends heavily on the quality and the size of these corpora. Large and reliable
bilingual corpora are unavailable for many language pairs. In addition, translating into
morphologically rich target languages makes the training of data-driven systems even
more difficult (due to data sparseness).

3. Hybrid Rule-based and Statistical MT Architectures

The boundaries between rule-based and statistical MT approaches have narrowed and,
recently, some approaches have been proposed for constructing hybrid MT systems
with a great potential of improvement.

In general terms, hybrid architectures can be defined in the wide sense or in the
restricted-sense. The latter would define a hybrid system, which puts together the rule
and statistical core architectures. For example, one natural way would be to induce sta-
tistical transfer-rules with the corresponding probabilities and integrate them in a rule-
based MT system. We are not aware of such a system. However, if we move towards a
more wide sense definition of hybrid MT system, there is a broad spectrum of proposed
approaches: statistical MT models augmented with linguistic information (including
morphological, syntactic or semantic information); or rule-based MT systems using
corpora to improve results by enriching their lexicons and grammars and applying new
methods for disambiguation.

3.1 Hybrid systems guided by the statistical approach

There is an extensive research regarding statistical MT models augmented with mor-
phological, syntactic and semantic information. Basically, the approaches reported in
this Section are mostly phrase-based with some kind of linguistic information, being
examples of hybrid MT in the wide sense (i.e. they do not specifically integrate any type
of rule-based module into the statistical engine).

Statistical MT models enhanced with morphological information typically include:
(1) segmentation approaches, which tend to make vocabularies from the source and
target language more similar by separating morphemes from the root part of the word
(Habash and Sadat 2006); (2) generation approaches, which assume that not all mor-
phological word forms are present in the training corpus and propose post-processing
techniques to generate new word forms (Clifton and Sarkar 2011); and (3) enriching
approaches, which tend to include additional information to the low inflected language
to make it more similar to the high inflected language (Avramidis and Koehn 2008).

Statistical MT models can also be enhanced with syntactic information. In the
widest sense, we may argue whether statistical MT systems that use syntactic knowl-

3



Computational Linguistics Volume 1, Number 1

edge as parse trees (Quirk, Menezes, and Cherry 2005; Zollmann and Venugopal 2006)
could be moved towards the category of hybrid systems. In fact, given that models are
learned statistically, most of the MT community probably would not agree with this
claim. However, many of the reordering systems introduced into statistical MT have
been actually analogous to older rule-based systems, at least for the ones developed by
sitting down and writing transfer rules over parse trees (e.g. the phrase-based statisti-
cal MT systems extended with some pre-reordering manually-extracted rules (Collins,
Koehn, and Kučerová 2005)).

Finally, there are different studies that enhance statistical MT with semantic infor-
mation. There are systems, which include lexical semantics (España-Bonet, Giménez,
and Màrquez 2010), shallow semantic knowledge (Wu and Fung 2009) and systems that
try to go towards an abstract meaning representation1.

3.2 Hybrid systems guided by the rule-based approach

Rule-based MT systems have successfully integrated statistical models in different
ways. Dove, Loskutova, and de la Fuente (2012) use rule-based MT to produce a first
output and then, refines this output through comparison against a language model.
Tyers, Sánchez-Martínez, and Forcada (2012) use statistical lexical semantics to disam-
biguate translation inputs in the source. Sánchez-Cartagena, Pérez-Ortiz, and Sánchez-
Martínez (2015) generate transfer rules (without probabilities) from a parallel corpus.
These rules can be then used in combination with manually written transfer rules if
available (Costa-jussà and Centelles 2015).

4. Dimensions of hybridization

In this Section, we are defining and discussing: the degree, effectiveness, complexity,
modeling and impact, as general dimensions of hybridization. The objective of such
analysis is to better enclose the concept of hybrid MT.

Degree. Hybridization is quite an open concept. We may discuss to use it in a re-
stricted or wide manner or simply decide to speak of different degrees of hybridization.

One extreme position would be to argue that pure rule-based or statistical MT
systems do not exist. On the one hand, most of the rules, which constitute the core of
rule-based MT systems, are simply some formulation of statistical knowledge (i.e. hu-
man generalization of observations). On the other hand, statistical MT systems always
use rules at some point (i.e. preprocessing as tokenization, translation of numbers or
transliteration).

The other extreme position of viewing things is that all systems are pure because
they are using rules. Some systems are using simplistic rules while others are using
more sophisticated rules. Also, some systems are based on rules that are automatically
learned from corpora using statistical machine learning techniques, while other systems
are based on hand-coded rules. And in the past, machine-learning based systems have
tended to learn rather simplistic rules as compared to handcrafted systems.

In between the two previous positions, there is the option of hybridization degrees.
On the one side, there would be the systems with very low degrees of hybridization,
which would correspond to the standard rule-based and statistical MT systems. On the

1 Refer to the main web page describing the English sentences paired with readable semantic
representations at http://amr.isi.edu/

4



Marta R. Costa-jussà How much hybridization does MT need?

Figure 1: (Left) Impact of using morphological, syntax and semantic linguistic knowl-
edge in a statistical-based MT system in terms of BLEU. (Right) Impact of using statisti-
cal knowledge in a rule-based MT system in terms of BLEU.

other side, there would be the systems with high degrees of hybridization, which would
include a mixture of architectures either at the level of transfer-rules or decoding. In
the middle, there would be a high range of approaches using statistical and linguistic
knowledge or rules and statistics.

Effectiveness. More important than deciding if systems are defined to have a low
or high level of hybridization, it is to determine if hybridization improves translation.
As mentioned in the previous Section, there are a lot of approaches, which prove that
the translation quality improves when using linguistic knowledge in statistical MT, and
the other way round, when using statistics in rule-based MT.

Figure 1 (left) shows how a phrase-based statistical MT can be improved when
enhancing different linguistic levels in the translation task from Arabic-to-English.
The translation measure is percentage BLEU (Papineni et al. 2002). The morphology
approach is the one by Habash and Sadat (2006), which is trained the system on 5
million words and tested using the NIST 2005 evaluation test set. The approach consists
of segmenting the Arabic to make it morphologically more similar to English. The
syntax approach is the one by Carpuat, Marton, and Habash (2010), which is trained
the system on 64 million words and tested on the NIST 2008 evaluation test set. The
approach consists of making a pre-reordering of post-verbal subjects. Finally, the se-
mantic approach is the one by España-Bonet, Giménez, and Màrquez (2010), which is
trained the system on 5 million words and tested on the NIST 2008 evaluation test set.
The approach consists in incorporating a local discriminative phrase selection model to
address the semantic ambiguity of Arabic.

Figure 1 (right) shows some results of using statistical knowledge in rule-based MT
systems. A successful approach is by España-Bonet et al. (2011) were the rule-based
system is enriched with a set of partial candidate translations provided by statistical
MT subsystems. The final translation uses a decoder to choose the most probable
combination. BLEU in Spanish-to-Basque News task improves around 4 points.

Complexity vs. improvement. Up to here, we have shown that hybridization can
benefit both rule-based and statistical MT. Could we generalize the popular sentence of
“there is no data like more data” into “there is no hybridization like more hybridiza-
tion”? Unfortunately, none of the two sentences do seem to be correct. And definitely, it

5



Computational Linguistics Volume 1, Number 1

would not be true that the higher the level of hybridization, the better the system. When
it comes to increasing the amount of training data, there are more parameters that play
their role: the quality and domain of data (Koehn and Haddow 2012), among others.
When it comes to increasing the amount of hybridization, we could cite some cases
where adding linguistic knowledge penalizes the statistical MT system as proven when
limiting translation units (Koehn, Och, and Marcu 2003) or reordering (Costa-jussà et
al. 2007) with linguistic criteria. Also in the case of rule-based MT, using statistical
data can be harmful, i.e. in general manual transfer rules still achieve better results
compared to the automatically extracted ones (Sánchez-Cartagena, Pérez-Ortiz, and
Sánchez-Martínez 2015).

Impact. It is fairly difficult to measure the impact of hybrid MT in terms of works
published. We have used the mt-archive resource2 and we have counted all papers
in statistical, rule-based and hybrid MT just to have a vague idea of the publication
directions. We have seen that since 2010 the proportion is 80%, 5% and 15%, respectively.
These results make hybrid MT slightly more appealing than rule-based MT but still very
far from the interest that statistical MT rises.

5. Future research lines

There is a lot of work to be done towards a higher level of hybridization. On the
one hand, inspired in previous promising works (España-Bonet et al. 2011), we have
identified some ways of building a restricted hybrid architecture given a rule-based MT
system and available parallel and monolingual corpora (see Figure 2). First, starting
with the core of a rule-based system, there is the necessity of extracting transfer-rules
from parallel corpus and computing a translation probability to each rule. This would
allow to building rule-based MT systems by a monolingual human linguist. At the
moment, rule-based MT systems have to be developed by bilingual linguists or at least
people who are proficient in the source and target language. Second, in order to help
rule-based MT systems be more fluent and natural, it would be nice to integrate a
language model in the generation step. The language model could be n-gram-based,
syntax-based or trained using deep learning. In each case, a different decoding would
be required to be integrated in the system. And third, additional feature functions as
the popular lexical ones or others that introduce source context information can be used
together with the above language model.

On the other hand, inspired again by promising techniques (Sánchez-Cartagena,
Pérez-Ortiz, and Sánchez-Martínez 2015), we have identified some ways of building
a restrict hybrid architecture given a statistical-based MT system and some additional
linguistic resources. First, starting with the core of a statistical-based system, there is
the necessity to integrate transfer-rules and find the best way to have them coupled
with the translation model. Deep transfer-rules can be added to deep-statistical systems
like syntax or hierarchical, making sure to adopt some compatible grammar formalism.
In this research line, it is important to identify the best way to make the integration:
giving priority to the transfer-rules over the statistical ones or extracting a score to
make transfer-rules compete in equal conditions to the statistical ones. And second,
widening hybridization, other approaches to improve statistical MT systems at the level
of morphology may go in the direction of works like Clifton and Sarkar (2011) moving

2 Refer to the web page: http://www.mt-archive.info, which aims to cover comprehensively
English-language publications since 1980

6



Marta R. Costa-jussà How much hybridization does MT need?

Figure 2: Block diagram of the hybrid MT architecture.

towards a non-pipelined approach. At the level of syntax, new grammar formalisms
may be experimented as well as alternative extensions of hierarchical systems. Finally,
in the field of semantics, vector-space projections, space reductions and deep learning
open new horizons.

These are encouraging research directions that may lead us to a more natural
coupling of linguistics and statistics. There are a lot of remaining questions to be
solved including the right way of implementing the mentioned research. However, the
perspectives are promising and without doubt great advances in MT may arise from
multidisciplinary collaborations. Ultimately, this is what hybridization is all about.

Acknowledgments
The author wants to thank the valuable
comments of the reviewers and the editor.
This work is supported by the Seventh
Framework Program of the European
Commission through the International
Outgoing Fellowship Marie Curie Action
(IMTraP-2011-29951) and also by the Spanish
Ministerio de Economía y Competitividad,
contract TEC2012-38939-C03-02 as well as
from the European Regional Development
Fund (ERDF/FEDER).

References
Avramidis, Eleftherios and Philipp Koehn.

2008. Enriching morphologically poor
languages for Statistical Machine
Translation. In Proc of the ACL-HLT, pages
763–770, Columbus.

Brown, Peter F., Stephen A. Della Pietra,
Vincent J. Della Pietra, and Robert L.
Mercer. 1993. The mathematics of
Statistical Machine Translation: Parameter

estimation. Computational Linguistics,
19(2):263–311.

Carl, Michael and Silvia Hansen. 1999.
Linking translation memories with
example-based machine translation. In
Proc. of the MT-Summit, pages 617–624,
Singapore.

Carl, Michael, Maite Melero, Toni Badia,
Vincent Vandeghinste, Peter Dirix, Ineke
Schuurman, Stella Markantonatou,
Sokratis Sofianopoulos, Marina Vassiliou,
and Olga Yannoutsou. 2008. METIS-II: low
resource Machine Translation. Machine
Translation, 22(1-2):67–99.

Carpuat, Marine, Yuval Marton, and Nizar
Habash. 2010. Improving
Arabic-to-English Statistical Machine
Translation by reordering post-verbal
subjects for alignment. In Proc of the ACL,
pages 178–183, Uppsala.

Chiang, David. 2007. Hierarchical
Phrase-based Translation. Comput.
Linguist., 33(2):201–228.

7



Computational Linguistics Volume 1, Number 1

Chiang, David, Kevin Knight, and Wei
Wang. 2009. 11,001 new features for
Statistical Machine Translation. In Proc. of
HLT-NAACL, pages 218–226, Boulder.

Clifton, Ann and Anoop Sarkar. 2011.
Combining Morpheme-based Machine
Translation with post-processing
morpheme prediction. In Proceedings of the
ACL HLT, pages 32–42, Portland.

Collins, Michael, Philipp Koehn, and Ivona
Kučerová. 2005. Clause restructuring for
Statistical Machine Translation. In Proc. of
the ACL, pages 531–540, Ann Arbor.

Costa-jussà, Marta R. and Jordi Centelles.
2015. Description of the
Chinese-to-Spanish Rule-based Machine
Translation system developed with a
Hybrid combination of Human
Annotation and Statistical Techniques.
ACM Transactions on Asian Language
Information Processing, Submitted.

Costa-jussà, Marta R., Josep M. Crego, Patrik
Lambert, Maxim Khalilov, José A. R.
Fonollosa, José B. Mariño, and Rafael E.
Banchs. 2007. Ngram-based Statistical
Machine Translation enhanced with
multiple weighted reordering hypotheses.
In Proc of the WMT, pages 167–170, Prague.

Costa-jussà, Marta R. and Mireia Farrús.
2014. Statistical Machine Translation
enhancements through linguistic levels: A
survey. ACM Computing Surveys, 46(3):42.

Doi, Shinichi and Kazunori Muraki. 1992.
Translation ambiguity resolution based on
text corpora of source and target language.
In Proc. of COLING, pages 525–531, Nantes.

Dove, Catherine, Olga Loskutova, and
Ruben de la Fuente. 2012. What’s your
pick: RbMT, SMT or Hybrid? In Proc. of
AMTA, San Diego.

España-Bonet, Cristina, Jesús Giménez, and
Lluís Màrquez. 2010. Discriminative
Phrase-Based Models for Arabic Machine
Translation. ACM Transactions on Asian
Language Information Processing, 8:1–20.

España-Bonet, Cristina, Gorka Labaka, Alicia
Díaz de Ilarraza, Lluís Màrquez, and Kepa
Sarasola. 2011. Hybrid Machine
Translation Guided by a Rule-Based
System. In Proc of the MT-Summit, pages
554–561, Xiamen.

Green, Spence, Sida Wang, Daniel Cer, and
Christopher D. Manning. 2013. Fast and
Adaptive Online Training of Feature-Rich
Translation Models. In Proc. of the ACL,
pages 311–321, Sofia.

Habash, Nizar and Fatiha Sadat. 2006. Arabic
preprocessing schemes for Statistical
Machine Translation. In Proc. of the

HLT-NAACL, pages 49–52, New York.
Heyn, Matthias. 1996. Integrating machine

translation into translation memory
systems. In Proc. of EAMT, pages 113–126,
Vienna.

Hutchins, W. John and Harold L. Sommers.
1992. An introduction to Machine
Translation. Academic Press, 362.

Koehn, Philipp and Barry Haddow. 2012.
Towards effective use of training data in
Statistical Machine Translation. In Proc of
the WMT, pages 317–321, Montréal.

Koehn, Philipp, Franz Joseph Och, and
Daniel Marcu. 2003. Statistical
Phrase-Based Translation. In Proc of the
ACL, Sapporo.

Liang, Percy, Alexandre Bouchard-Côté, Dan
Klein, and Ben Taskar. 2006. An end-to-end
discriminative approach to Machine
Translation. In Proc. of the ICL-ACL, pages
761–768, Sydney.

Och, Franz Joseph. 2003. Minimum Error
Rate Training In Statistical Machine
Translation. In Proc of the ACL, pages
160–167, Sapporo.

Papineni, Kishore, Salim Roukos, Todd
Ward, and Wei-Jing Zhu. 2002. BLEU: A
method for automatic evaluation of
Machine Translation. In Proc. of ACL, pages
311–318, Philadelphia.

Quirk, Chris, Arul Menezes, and Colin
Cherry. 2005. Dependency treelet
translation: syntactically informed phrasal
SMT. In Proc of the ACL, pages 271–279,
Ann Arbor.

Sánchez-Cartagena, Victor, Juan Antonio
Pérez-Ortiz, and Felipe Sánchez-Martínez.
2015. A generalised alignment template
formalism and its application to the
inference of shallow-transfer Machine
Translation rules from scarce bilingual
corpora. Computer Speech and Language.
Special Issue on Hybrid MT: Integration of
Linguistics and Statistics, Accepted.

Su, Jinsong, Yang Liu, Yajuan Lü, Haitao Mi,
and Qun Liu. 2010. Learning Lexicalized
Reordering Models from Reordering
Graphs. In Proc. of the ACL, pages 12–16,
Uppsala.

Tyers, Francis M., Felipe Sánchez-Martínez,
and Mikel L. Forcada. 2012. Flexible
finite-state lexical selection for rule-based
MT. In Proc of the EAMT, pages 213–220,
Trento.

Wu, Dekai and Pascale Fung. 2009. Semantic
roles for SMT: A hybrid two pass model.
In Proc of the NAACL HLT, pages 13–16,
Boulder.

8



Marta R. Costa-jussà How much hybridization does MT need?

Zollmann, Andreas and Ashish Venugopal.
2006. Syntax Augmented Machine

Translation via Chart Parsing. In Proc. of
the WMT, pages 138–141, New York.

9



10


