











































Noname manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)

Reasoning about River Basins: WaWO+ Revisited

L. Oliva-Felipe · I. Gómez-Sebastià ·
M. Verdaguer · M. Sànchez-Marrè · M.
Poch · U. Cortés

Received: date / Accepted: date

Abstract This paper characterizes part of an interdisciplinary research effort
on Artificial Intelligence (AI) techniques and tools applied to Environmental
Decision-Support Systems (EDSS). WaWO+ the ontology we present here,
provides a set of concepts that are queried, advertised and used to support
reasoning about and the management of urban water resources in complex
scenarios as a River Basin. The goal of this research is to increase efficiency
in Data and Knowledge interoperability and data integration among hetero-
geneous environmental data sources (e.g., software agents) using an explicit,
machine understandable ontology to facilitate urban water resources manage-
ment within a River Basin.

Keywords Ontologies · Urban Water Systems · Water Resources Manage-
ment · River Basin Management Environmental Decision Support Systems ·
Knowledge Management · Agent-based Simulation

1 Introduction

In the last decade, environmental researchers and professionals have recognized
a strong need to control the complex socio-ecological nature of river basins
(RB) to sustainably manage water resources that are under pressure [37],

Prof. Cortés is a member of the Sistema Nacional de Investigadores (SNI), Mexico.

M. Verdaguer · M. Poch
(LEQUIA)
Universitat de Girona (UdG).
Campus de Montivili, E-17071, Girona, Spain. E-mail: {marta.verdaguer,
manuel.poch}@udg.edu

L. Oliva-Felipe · I. Gómez-Sebastià · M. Sànchez-Marrè · U. Cortés
Knowledge Engineering and Machine Learning Group (KEMLg).
Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya (UPC).
C/Jordi Girona 1-3, E-08034, Barcelona, Spain. E-mail: {igomez, loliva, ia} @cs.upc.edu



2 L. Oliva-Felipe et al.

[41], [44]. Dealing with the complexity of a RB requires analytical frameworks
that can handle the multiple scales and dimensions of environmental problems
as well as uncertainties in the evolution of social systems. Therefore, RBs
have been represented using different analytical lenses, as follows: hydrological,
ecological, institutional, etc. [17]. This is particularly true with urban water
systems (UWS) where all of these elements acquire increasing important roles
with the growth in human populations living there. From the AI point of view,
this necessitates the design of an ontology that can support decision making,
planning and reasoning. As noted by Medema [45] knowledge production and
use in RB and UWS management should accomplish the following:

– be coordinated across water and land resources;
– involve multiple stakeholders (those responsible for and affected by man-

agement interventions);
– support spatial and temporal scale integration;
– integrate disciplinary perspectives;
– enable to reason about environmental legislative and policy issues; and
– be holistic in character.

In these systems environmental data come from different sources, which
are likely to be syntactically and semantically heterogeneous. Syntactic het-
erogeneity involves different data structure or formats [39] while semantic het-
erogeneity is defined as the differences in the objects and attributes that define
the data, leading to disagreement on the meaning, interpretation and use of
the same data [57].

Several initiatives are attempting to tackle environmental problems by of-
fering structured vocabularies for biomes (ecosystem types), environmental
features and environmental materials. Those vocabularies serve as the source
of names and synonyms for identification processes (e.g. [67], [39], [32]).

In addition, the fast growing number of sensors connected to the Internet
of Things (IoT) [61] is increasing the levels and capacities of monitoring. It is
already producing large amounts of data that needs to be dealt with properly
for various modelling, reasoning and decision making applications. A compre-
hensive state-of-the-art review of environmental knowledge-based modelling
approaches can be found in [62].

1.1 Ontologies and River Basins. The case of Urban Water Systems

A context ontology aware is a shared knowledge representation and a reasoning
mechanism used in AI to define the categories of things that exist within an
application domain [13]. By contrast, domain information not included in the
ontology cannot be reasoned about. Categories within the ontology represent
the so-called designer’s ontological commitments.

This commitment to a common ontology guarantees consistency but not
completeness [52]. Ontologies establish a conceptually concise basis for commu-
nicating knowledge across a large community, and have already been applied
to modelling environmental scenarios (see for example [23], [40], [63].



Reasoning about River Basins: WaWO+ Revisited 3

– Ontologies are viewed as the most advanced knowledge representation
model;

– Ontologies support inference; this allows new derived knowledge to be gen-
erated from existing knowledge;

– Ontologies provide reasoning capabilities over existing knowledge through
various user axioms/defined rules.

Domain knowledge for RBs consists of three major parts, as follows: interpre-
tation of data collected by sensors, regulation data published by government,
and domain ontologies generated by researchers and professionals. Here, we
will address all of them as WaWO+ is able to represent all them (see §4).

Developing an ontology of a particular domain is not a goal in itself [50].
In this paper we present an ontology to support reasoning to make decisions
related to the environmental management of water of the UWSs in a RB . In
specific, we aim to derive facts that are not explicitly represented in the ontol-
ogy or in the knowledge base and that help inform decisions. Anthropogenic
uses of water, in agriculture, industry and domestic/urban contexts are an
appropriate area for the application of ontologies, because the management of
complex data, information and knowledge is a fundamental and growing con-
cern. RBmanagement, to be efficiently applied in everyday practice, require
that information is available, as in any other knowledge intensive activity.

An ontology for this purpose ought to support the following reasoning:

– Environmental elements that may suffer impacts and the type of impacts
that may be provoked by natural or human actions.

– Stakeholder activities that produce these impacts, as follows: water use
and reuse, potable and wastewater treatment, collection and distribution,
optimal use, etc.

– Environmental indicators. Water quality indicators are used to measure
the impact of actions and norms regarding water use.

– The social structure and how the relationships between the different stake-
holders affect social goals.

The following physical elements should be considered during the reasoning
process we have:

– Water: Service or product with a defined flow and quality requirement.
The former is usually fixed by the local authorities by law. Representing
those laws is also a key element.

– Infrastructure in an urban sector or city. In addition, geographical infor-
mation is needed to locate each of those elements (see [53]). It encompasses
components such as tanks, pumps, pipes or valves.

– Monitoring and control systems: Hardware (sensors, actuators) and soft-
ware components (e.g. those that extract data from the physical system).

– End point users with service requirements.

As indicated by Mikulecký et al [46] this knowledge, as it happens with
experts everywhere, may not be available when necessary for many reasons,
as follows:



4 L. Oliva-Felipe et al.

– Experts do not need to be always available when necessary,
– Experts can suffer from common human problems, or suddenly their knowl-

edge can be lost because of their mortality, or retirement,
– Experts can differ in their opinions on how to solve a particular situation.
The introduction of an ontological component in a UWS allows the develop-
ment of tools which will contribute to the improvement of the current state-
of-the-art, as follows:
– more stable operation through an ontology-based supervision;
– portability of the management system [8].

1.2 Related work

Ontologies play an important role in different aspects of EDSS development
[38]. As noted by Parekh [51] the effectiveness and efficiency of environmental
data usage greatly depends on the domain-specific understanding and em-
pirical experience of the users in various application domains, such hydrology,
environmental engineering, legal, etc.. The complexity and diversity of domain
knowledge and terminology is one of the key obstacles for successful interdis-
ciplinary studies. There is a vital need for an efficient mechanism for discovery
and uniform representation and integration of relevant datasets.

Ontologies can be used to efficiently search in the domain as noted by
Chau [25]. The assumption in almost all multi-tier component architectures
and database search and access technologies is that in order for a client, being
a human or a software component, to access a remote service (data or process),
that client should know the semantics of the offered services [53]. Ontologies
are a means to minimize semantic heterogeneity and simplify knowledge access
and interchange [6]. The resulting semantic model should be usable, efficient,
robust and authoritative.

Ontologies provide shared domain models that are understandable to both
humans and machines. For water field, ontologies ([23], [22] and [7]) are usu-
ally the first step towards effective knowledge intensive tasks as diagnostic or
assessment. They are a key element to management and model validation.

Garrido and Requena studied the case of Environmental Impact Assess-
ment (EIA) that analyses the effects of human activity, ecosystem integrity
and the quality of the environmental services that can be provided by them
[35]. Similarly, Muñoz et al built an ontology where the environmental do-
main is represented based on the life-cycle assessment (LCA) methodology
standardized in the ISO 1404X series (ISO14001) for setting an Environmen-
tal Management System (EMS) [47].

Moreover, several authors proposed ontologies for specific representation
issues in RB scenarios such as [43], who presented a generic ontology for con-
ceptual design of treatment of flow sheets, [46] pointed out the need of an IoT
approach to deal with the problem, [18] studied an activated sludge facility
and a stabilization lagoon, [60] approached on the instrumentation and con-
trol of the treatment plants, [64] focused on different aspects of the Upper



Reasoning about River Basins: WaWO+ Revisited 5

Ems River Basin, and [9] developed an argumentation-based framework for
managing industrial wastewater discharges.

1.3 Plan of the work

The work in this paper is organized as follows: in §2 we describe target domain
of this study going from a general definition to a specific RB , located in Cat-
alonia, where the modelling takes place (see §2.1). We devoted §3 to revisit the
original WaWO ontology, providing its main characteristics and describing its
original reasoning capabilities [23]. In §4 we justify and discuss the extensions
made to WaWO to evolve it into WaWO+. In §4.4, we address the WaWO+
reasoning capabilities.

In §5, we describe the Agent-Based Simulator (ABS) we are using to model
and reason about a RB using WaWO+. This is a general purpose ABS. We
have been trying to model the Besòs River Basin. In §7, we give our conclusions
and discuss some hints about future work.

2 The River Basin

Many countries are placing growing demands on their rivers, such as using
them to generate power, and for industrial cooling, impacting humans and
wildlife. High population densities and transport networks put pressure on the
water environment. Discharges from sewage works can impact on the quality
of water or the enjoyment of it. In addition, the way land is managed has given
rise to complex pollution and flooding issues. Diffuse pollution is a major pres-
sure on the water environment and can come from urban areas as well as rural
areas [27]. Managing water resources effectively requires a good information
system for an appropriate decision-making activity.

Management of water resources in RBs is hampered by a variety of un-
certainties, such as unpredictability, incomplete knowledge and ambiguities,
affecting problem identification and its solution. Uncertainty due to multiple
knowledge perspectives arises because there are many actors with very differ-
ent objectives and goals.

It is clear that several parameters influence each other and that various
factors should be looked at when judging the water quality. We need to consider
physical, chemical and biological parameters, such as:

– Physical: temperature, turbidity, conductivity.
– Chemical: Dissolved Oxygen, Biochemical Oxygen Demand or Chemical

Oxygen Demand, hardness, pH, alkalinity, nutrients (N and P ), toxic com-
pounds.

– Biological/Ecological: biocenosis of bacteria, plants and animals, coliform
bacteria and variety and complexity of the food chain.



6 L. Oliva-Felipe et al.

The combination of the criteria outlined above leads to river classifications,
including very good, good, mediocre, deficient and bad ecological quality (a
combination of physical, chemical and biological parameters)[20][31][19][30].

2.1 The Besòs Basin

Fig. 1: The river basin scenario where WaWO+ is applied (the Congost is an
affluent of Besòs river)

The Besòs catchment (1020 km2) is located in Barcelona area and is a
typical example of Mediterranean complex catchments. It is quite heteroge-
neous, including mountains over 1000 m tall to rural plains that have been



Reasoning about River Basins: WaWO+ Revisited 7

suffering a continuous urbanization process over the last few decades. Rainfall
is irregularly distributed throughout the year, with maximum rainfall in the
fall (e.g. the flow in the river mouth during fall storms can be 100 times as
strong as during the dry period, 2 m3/s). The driest periods in the summer are
in the flattest area near the sea and in the mountainous areas in the winter.
The catchment area is one of the most populated catchments in Catalonia,
containing more than 2M people. The working population is mainly occupied
in industrial activities and in the sector of services. The type of industries
installed in the catchment is varied with an important presence of the chemi-
cal, metallurgical, plastics, textile, building materials, paper, and food sectors.
Overall, the catchment includes 10000 potentially polluting activities [2].

We used this catchment to model a real environment (see Figure 1) and
to show that the proposed ontology WaWO+ can cover most aspects that are
needed when managing available water resources (see §4).

In previous research, we have focused on the final reaches of the Congost
River, which is 70 km2 from where the river sustains the discharges of four
towns connected to two wastewater treatment plants (WWTPs). In these stud-
ies, the elements under consideration were blocks of the UWSs as follows: the
sewer system, the WWTPs and, the river itself [8], [29], [54]. Here, we are
targeting a more ambitious goal.

3 Ontologies

By 2001, there was some terminological confusion among experts acting in a
UWS, including: biologists, lawyers, economists, chemical and civil engineers,
and plants managers. Each one used a particular vocabulary, and therefore,
a precise common terminology was needed. To model that knowledge, an on-
tology was thought to be the best knowledge representation scheme. In an
ontology, the concepts, the particular instances of a concept, their relations,
as well as some constraining axioms regarding those concepts can be expressed.
Usually, taxonomic relations (is− a, sub− part_of) are organized in a hier-
archical way and constitute the main core of an ontology. In addition, the
knowledge represented in an ontology is easily reusable (e.g., by exporting it
into another ontology), and inferential reasoning processes can be run over
an ontology, such as answering a query related to the ontological knowledge
represented.

3.1 WaWo

Back in 2000, the WaWO ontology was an attempt to build a model defining
the meaning of each term/concept used in the wastewater domain, in a pre-
cise and unambiguous manner [21]. The ontology linked concepts/classes of
individuals and instances/individuals at least with taxonomic/hierarchical re-
lations and provided a terminology that each agent involved could understand



8 L. Oliva-Felipe et al.

and use. The basic categories/concepts in the WaWO model were represented
as objects with specific properties and relations. Objects were structured into
a taxonomy and the definitions of those objects, slots and relations were spec-
ified according to the Ontolingua [33] version of the Frame ontology. Objects
included classes referring to the general wastewater domain, for decision sup-
port, as well as detailed micro-organisms taxonomy. Therefore, WaWO was
represented in a frame-based formalism and stored at the Ontolingua Knowl-
edge System Laboratory (KSL) Server of Stanford University. By October
2001, WaWO class hierarchy had 300 defined classes.

The WaWO ontology was defined and used to improve the supervision and
management of a wastewater treatment plant. It was designed both to model
the processes in WWTP and to enhance the reasoning process within the DAI-
DEPUR system execution [55]. The hierarchical organization of categories in
WaWO was expressed in the Ontolingua knowledge-representation language,
and Knowledge Interchange Format (KIF) [36] axioms were used to answer
queries, language analysis and general reasoning.

A reasoning mechanism provided by WaWO was the explanation ability
for the results of the Rule-Based Reasoning System (RBRS) [16] or the Case-
Based Reasoning System (CBRS) [4]. The impasse resolution reasoning was a
specific reasoning mechanism to enhance the performance of the OntoWEDSS
system. When an impasse situation was reached, such as when the diagnosis
output of the RBRS and the CBRS components were contradictory or when
no diagnosis output at all was obtained, the WaWO reasoning mechanism was
activated to obtain a coherent diagnosis, or after using additional microbiolog-
ical information, not integrated in the RBRS and the CBRS components, to
obtain a successful diagnosis solution. This reasoning mechanism is inherited
by WaWO+.

The introduction of an agreed-upon ontology in the domain of wastewater
biological treatment facilitated:

1. An accurate, effective communication and sharing of meanings, which in
turn leads to other benefits such as knowledge reuse;

2. Advancing in the environmental technologies for the management of bio-
logical and biochemical processes;

3. Enhancing the knowledge about the specific microbial ecology of environ-
mental processes developed in the technological ecosystems of treatment
plants;

4. Improving the reasoning mechanisms to cope with impasse resolution sit-
uations.

4 WaWO+

An important advantage of ontology-based systems can be found in an in-
creased interoperability and reusability by using a semantic reference system
[6]. To capture the knowledge necessary to reason and solving problems in a
RB we decided to expand the original WaWO ontology [23] that was focused



Reasoning about River Basins: WaWO+ Revisited 9

on reasoning about a single WWTP– and update the technology. In addition,
WaWO+ was designed to think about supplying the following aspects:
1. It offers unambiguous communication of domain concepts among agents

that perceive and interact in a UWS or in a RB scenario. That is a simple
way to describe the key entities of the model and yet to infer many facts
(conciseness);

2. It allows the inference of new knowledge from existing facts, allowing agents
to have a more accurate information of their environment;

3. It is authoritative for domain experts;
4. Move from real, grounded concepts to more abstract ones, thus effectively

enabling agents to have a higher-level, domain-free reasoning capability;
5. It can be combined with other ontologies that represent dynamics occur-

ring when consuming resources from the river (e.g., using as part of a
wastewater system).
WaWO was inspired in METHONTOLOGY [34] and implemented in Frames.

While WaWO+ was based in our experience in building ontologies and we de-
cided as formalization tool we use Protégé [49] in OWL format [42]. The
OWL Web Ontology Language is a modelling tool aimed to describe ontolo-
gies and represent knowledge using formal semantics encoded in RDF/XML
formats, thus allowing to be consumed by other computer entities that may
reason about the domain to achieve their goals. Protégé supports the trade-
off between interoperability and usability of knowledge-based systems. These
properties allow WaWO+ to import other ontologies, committing to all of
their classes, properties and constraints, and experts supported the decision
of which ontologies and classes need to be included. Protégé supports Web
2.0 technologies and applications. The internet has become the primary envi-
ronment in which people and machines communicate, exchange content, and
collaborate to solve problems, and WaWO+ is meant to be web accessible.

As a strategy for identifying concepts domain experts were consulted to
expand WaWO towards WaWO+ and a substantial set of taxonomic concepts
were added as a result of this. In the first stage, experts revisited WaWO
to update it and identify possible extensions. Three were selected: a) Water
Quality, b) Social aspects, and c) Urban water cycle (see Figure 2). Normative
regulations were also analysed to extract terms and definitions used to regulate
the water management domain. Work performed by [24] was also used to
aggregate geographical features that may be present in a RB (e.g., lakes,
stream, lagoon). The actual WaWO+ is the evolution of several prototypes, in
those prototypes a sizeable part of the ontology is very detailed; the remainder
is specified in deeper detail in the successive versions.

The following subsections introduce such extensions.

4.1 Water quality extension

The water quality extension of the WaWO ontology covers the evolution of
wastewater treatment philosophy from when it was published until now. For



10 L. Oliva-Felipe et al.

Fig. 2: The WaWO+ ontology extensions. Main additions to the original
WaWO+ ontology cover the urban water cycle, social and water quality as-
pects.

instance, the extension reflects a change in paradigm from pollutants to water
quality measures. For example, the wastewater that an industry discharges to
the sewage system has specific pollutant concentrations as a subproduct/re-
sult of its productive processes. These imply different water quality indicators,
depending on the industrial sector the industry belongs to (e.g. a slaughter-
house usually discharges wastewater with a higher biological demand oxygen
indicator and suspends solids concentration while paperworks produce higher
chemical concentrations). WaWO+ enables water bodies to be defined accord-
ing to their water quality indicators and permits to reason about them.

– Figure 3a shows the set of physical and chemical water indicators that can
be used to characterize a water mass, by means of the concentrations of
these indicators (see Figure 3b). Some of them were already defined in the
original WaWO (e.g. SuspendedSolid, Conductivity or Turbidity). Fig-
ure 3c shows new indicators that also expand to those already in WaWO
such as EmergingContaminants (e.g., antibiotics, beta blockers, analgesics)
and HeavyMetals. WaWO+ not only expands the set of indicators but clas-
sifies them differently to reflect the change in perspective mentioned above.
While WaWO strongly focused on WWTP internal aspects, WaWO+ adds
more fine-grained concepts (e.g., from the initial Metals concept to HeavyMetals
and a set of subclasses that refer to specific heavy metals that affect wa-
ter quality), so these quality measures can be applied to different types of
water masses (see §4.3).

Assessing water quality or reasoning about normative aspects requires de-
termining the water quality of certain parts of the river. For instance, it is
necessary to determine whether water close to urban areas can be considered
to be clear water.



Reasoning about River Basins: WaWO+ Revisited 11

(a) Chemical and physical water indicators

(b) Properties of water indicators

(c) Emerging contaminant and heavy metal water indicators

Fig. 3: WaWO+ ontology for water quality indicators



12 L. Oliva-Felipe et al.

(a) Water bodies (b) Wastewater network

(c) Water sources (d) Agent processes

Fig. 4: Different elements in WaWO+ ontology.

– WaWO+ provides a classification of different types of water that distin-
guishes water bodies from a chemical perspective (e.g., clean water, rain,
wastewater) and its location or dynamism (e.g., flowing/standing water,
ground/surface water). Figure 4a shows the extension of WaWO+ per-
formed to classify water bodies;

4.2 Urban water cycle extension

WaWO focused on the processes and operational concepts of WWTP. The
urban water cycle extension includes a more integrated approach with the
objective of better embracing the urban water scenario. This extension includes
the following concepts:

– Processes, including water treatment operations performed in the differ-
ent elements of urban water cycle both for drinking water and wastewater
treatment.

– Network system for water distribution and sewage systems, which includes
additional elements such as water retention tanks and pipe infrastructure.

Figure 4b depicts the elements of both potable and wastewater networks.
Those include conveyors, pipes, spillways, pumps and tanks.



Reasoning about River Basins: WaWO+ Revisited 13

Figure 4c depicts the different water sources, including natural clean wa-
ter sources and wastewater producers. The sources of clean water are classi-
fied following the current legislation according to their origin. The wastewater
producers follow the type of generators (producing domestic, industrial and
meteorological wastewater)[31][19][30]. In our scenario, we distinguished be-
tween headwaters that continuously feed the river according to seasonal wa-
ter regimes. We also distinguished between at least two different wastewater
producers, including industries and households (e.g., cities and towns). Fi-
nally, we also considered weather phenomena, such as rain, which produces
large masses of water that are collected through the sewage system as well as
run-off water that are directly received in the river, see figure 8.

A sewage network is composed essentially of pipes that connect industries
and households to transport their wastewater to a WWTP and, after proper
treatment, to the river or sea. Several other components can also be found, in-
cluding conveyors, which connect smaller sewage networks into a general one,
collectors to laminate wastewater influents and exercise some control over the
wastewater flows on the network or storage tanks to retain sudden heavy rain-
falls (meteorological retainers) to avoid overfilling the network (which is a
common phenomenon in Mediterranean weather). A WWTP needs to incor-
porate this knowledge during its reasoning processes (see §4.4), or even when
negotiating with wastewater produces when they can perform a discharge or
how much time it takes the water to flow until its destination.

4.3 Social extension

By including actors that interact with integrated urban water cycle inWaWO+
we are effectively creating a society of agents interacting in the river basin sce-
nario. This society includes actors that interact between each other to achieve
both individual goals, which are particular to each actor, and common goals,
which are shared by the whole society of agents. To ensure that the particular
goals are aligned with common ones and facilitate interactions between the
different actors, a normative structure is introduced to define the expected
patterns of behaviour. The extension includes the following concepts:

– Norms and regulations, including European Water Framework Directive
(WFD), Spanish and Catalan regulative bodies, as well as other normative
concepts. This extension allows the actors involved in the scenario to reason
about the normative framework, effectively providing norm-awareness.

For instance, the European Council directive for wastewater treatment [19]
in Article 4 and the Catalan plan for wastewater treatment inspired on this
directive [28] state:

Member States shall ensure that urban wastewater entering collect-
ing systems shall before discharge be subject to secondary treatment or
an equivalent treatment as follows:



14 L. Oliva-Felipe et al.

Norm N1: Let Wi ∈ W be a WWTP, Mj ∈ M a water mass and Tk ∈ T a secondary
treatment. Once Wi receives a particular water mass Mj , the plant has the obligation
to treat the water mass with secondary treatment Tk before discharging the water mass.
Sanction S1: A generic sanction is applied to the WWTP if the norm is not complied
with.

Activation Condition N1 received(Wi,Mj)
Expiration Condition N1 discharged(Wi,Mj)

Maintenance Condition N1 True
Deadline N1 performed(Tk,Wi,Mj)∧

counts_as(Tk, SecondaryTreatment)
Activation Condition S1 isV iolated(N1,Wi)
Expiration Condition S1 GenericSanction(Wi)

Maintenance Condition S1 True
Deadline S1 True

Fig. 5: Example of formal norm specification for obligation

Fig. 6: Normative model in WaWO+

– At the latest by 31 December 2000 for all discharges from agglom-
erations of more than 15 000 p.e. (population equivalent)

– at the latest by 31 December 2005 for all discharges from agglomer-
ations of between 10 000 and 15 000 p.e.

This means that by ’01 January 2006’, all WWTPs WWTPi ∈ W with a
p.e. of 10.000 or more have the obligation to perform a secondary treatment (or
a treatment that counts-as secondary treatment, that is, an equivalent) before
discharging water to the river. Failure to comply with the norm will result in
the WWTP being sanctioned. Figure 5 shows the formal specification of the
regulative norm in our model.

Figure 6 depicts the extension ofWaWO+ performed to support our formal
norm specification. The specification is based on the model presented in [5].
Norm components are formed by a formula. A formula is a set of functions with
constants and variables connected by operators. Norms can be constitutive
or regulative [14]. Constitutive norms are formed by brute facts, institutional
facts and a context. Regulative norms contain activation, maintenance, expira-
tion, deadline and repair conditions. Deontic norms represent the obligations,



Reasoning about River Basins: WaWO+ Revisited 15

prohibitions and permissions in the normative system. Repair conditions are
captured by sanctions that activate when deontic norms are violated.

Fig. 7: Social water classifications in WaWO+and the rules to classify accord-
ing to the composition of water masses

Figure 7 shows water classification from a social point of view, including
wastewater (i.e. polluted water to be treated), river water (i.e. clean water
with bad taste or odour parameters) and drinking water (i.e. clean water for
human consumption). It is also shown the rules that define the class expression
and allows the reasoner to classify instances of water masses accordingly. This
allows to introduce new water masses along the sensor readings that measure
the water indicators (see Figure 3) and infer its classification according to
legislation limits.

4.4 Reasoning with WaWO+

As described in §3.1, WaWO+ inherits WaWO reasoning mechanisms to cope
with impasse resolution situations (i.e. when no diagnostic is provided by the
EDSS) [23]. The original idea was to connect a CBR and an EDSS withWaWO
to support the CBR cycle with inferences from it.

Now, WaWO+ is written in OWL and is therefore equipped with unam-
biguous semantics. This allows devising reasoning algorithms that enable the
discovery of knowledge that is only implicit in the model. Agnostic-domain
reasoners, such as Pellet [59], can be used to exploit it. Furthermore, agents
using the ontology can effectively use the normative structure introduced in
WaWO+ as a basis for more complex reasoning mechanisms based on deontic
logics [15] and inference of the social implications of events in the world [56]
as depicted on the following example.



16 L. Oliva-Felipe et al.

Fig. 8: Meteorological data and situations in WaWO+

Figure 8 depicts the different elements used to socially interpret meteoro-
logical situations. Figure 8A depicts the meteorological events [1] supported in
the current version of WaWO+, mainly Precipitations in the form of Rainfall
and Snowfall. Figure 8B shows the main properties of meteorological events,
mainly a starting and ending time and the amount of precipitation (in the
form of cubic metres) accumulated during the duration of the event. The class
Time-Entity is included in WaWO+, and in principle this allows temporal
reasoning. It is important to note, cases such as Precipitation that have high
variability; in this case, in terms of cubic metres/minute (e.g. covering both
periods of heavy and light rain), the event can effectively be divided into events
with shorter duration. Finally, Figure 8C depicts the classification of meteo-
rological situations. WaWO+ is able to cover periods of both rain and absence
of rain (i.e. Drought) in the form of severe (heavy), medium and light situa-
tions. The classification is performed by agents using WaWO+ to reason about
the history of events, effectively classifying the actual situation as normal or
abnormal.

It is important to notice that, HeavyRain and HeavyDrought situations are
not exclusive. We can find a situation where, after a period of HeavyDrought
(i.e. more than 90 days without significant Precipitations), a huge quantity
of rainfall during a very brief interval of time. This type of Precipitation is
very common in the Mediterranean area, and due to their brief duration, the
water cannot be stored or used effectively. Therefore, these types of events are
considered rain but they simultaneously extend drought situations.

The normative structure present in WaWO+ (as introduced later in §5)
defines the classification rules that allow the interpretation of meteorologi-
cal events (or the absence of them), as one of the available situations. This
classification is tightly coupled to the geographical region in which WaWO+
operates because heavy rains, droughts or snowfalls are not considered equally
in continental and Mediterranean climates. Figure 9 shows an example of a
classification rule for heavy rains in the Mediterranean area. Please note, a
similar classification rule can be used for the classification of Clean Water



Reasoning about River Basins: WaWO+ Revisited 17

Norm C1: Let Pi ∈ P be a precipitation event and τj ∧τk ∈ T two times. In the context
of the a Mediterranean climate, a heavy rain situation is caused by the presence of
precipitation events of 200 m3/h or more. Heavy rain situations are considered to be
over in 3 hours.

Brute Fact ∃Pi : Pi.hasT imestampStart = τj ∧ Pi.hasT imestampEnd =
τk ∧ Pi.CubicMeter ≥ 200 ∧ τj + 1_hour ≤ τk ∧ τj + 3_hour ≤
actualT ime

Institutional Fact HeavyRain
Context Mediterranean Climate

Fig. 9: Example of constitutive norm for heavy rain situations

Producers and Wastewater Producers, as observed on Figure 4c. In this case,
the Brute Fact analyses a water mass in terms of water quantity and quality
(i.e. pollutant concentration) effectively classifying it as an available water
source via the Institutional Fact.

5 Multi-Agent System Simulation

In the following section, we will outline the general idea of simulations –as well
as the specific concept of Multi-Agent System (MAS) simulations– and explain
which features make them particularly suitable for studying a RB . We propose
a bottom-up approach to create a model that simulates the interactions of
different actors in a RB . The result of a simulation is the representation of the
behaviour or key characteristics of a physical or abstract system through the
use of another system.

The simulation system is an abstract and simplified computational repre-
sentation of the real system to analyse a specific problem of the real system
(e.g. the effect of enforcement mechanisms or the emergence of behavioural
patterns). By abstracting from the real system, simulations reduce the com-
plexity of the problem being analysed and allow for problem-oriented experi-
mentation, which might otherwise not be possible in the real system [12], likes
the Besòs basin.

A MAS is the representation of a system as a collection of autonomous self-
directed decision-making entities, so-called agents. An agent is a computer
system that is situated in some environment and is capable of autonomous
action in his environment to meet its delegated objectives [66]. As defined by
Tube [12], these agents engage in complex, often non-linear interactions. They
act locally and individually towards their own goal, based on their assessment
of their current situation with the help of a basic set of agent-individual rules.

The MAS can model a society in which the agents coordinate and interact
with the environment as well as among them. The agents’ behaviours are
driven by a set of norms (policies) and the goals they intend to achieve (e.g.
ensuring a certain level of water quality in a river). In our specific case, we
have opted to describe such norms with deontic specifications. Deontic logic
allows describing a set of obligations and permissions that are intended to



18 L. Oliva-Felipe et al.

Norm N3: Let WWTPi be a Waste Water Treatment Plant, Wj a water mass and
concentration(Wj , Hg) the concentration of mercury in the water mass. It is forbidden
for Waste Water Treatment Plants to discharge water masses to the river with a mercury
concentration higher than 0.005 mg/l. Please note the norm is always active, as the
prohibition always holds, therefore activation condition is set to True and expiration
condition to False.
Sanction S3: A generic sanction is applied to the Waste Water Treatment Plant if the
norm is not complied with.

Activation Condition N3 True
Expiration Condition N3 False

Maintenance Condition N3 discharged(WWTPi,Wj) ∧ concentration(Wj , Hg) ≥
0.005mg/l

Deadline N3
Activation Condition S3 isV iolated(N3,WWTPi)
Expiration Condition S3 GenericSanction(WWTPi)

Maintenance Condition S3 True
Deadline S3 True

Fig. 10: Example of formal norm specification for prohibition.

guide agents’ actions effectively facilitating their decision-making processes.
These obligations and permissions conform to the norms of our system and
are a representation of real-world institutions that govern the environment
in which the agents are limited. Figure 10 shows an example of a deontic
prohibition based on European wastewater directives.

These agents can make use of ontologies to make a deeper reasoning during
their decision making process, as follows: what they perceive in their environ-
ment, the implications of breaking a norm or the indirect effect of their ac-
tions. Enabling agents to make use of an ontology to allow them to manipulate
domain-related concepts and infer new knowledge as well as using higher-level
abstractions in their reasoning and communication with other agents. This
facilitates the implementation of more complex models of agent behaviour.

5.1 Our Multi-Agent System Simulation Architecture

Our proposed system is a LISP-based platform with the following main ele-
ments (see Figure 11):

– agents, which all share a common structure based on a deliberative archi-
tecture. We distinguish between industries, WWTPs, wastewater produc-
ers, (e.g. industries, households, etc.) and the competent authority; the
latter makes use of a monitor component which continuously reads the
events occurring in the system to enforce enacted norms;

– an engine, who is responsible of executing (evaluating) the reasoning pro-
cess of each agent, as well as the actions and messages derived from their
plans;

– an environment, which models a RB ;



Reasoning about River Basins: WaWO+ Revisited 19

Fig. 11: Multi-Agent Simulation System architecture.

– a directory facilitator, which takes care of keeping a register of all the
agents in the system. It also acts as yellow pages to locate a specific agent
for interaction/messaging purposes. After registering in the platform, the
agent is in the execution queue to start its reasoning;

– WaWO+ which contains several domain-related concepts of the modelled
RB scenario. It is used by agents to reason about their actions, update
their beliefs with higher-level abstractions as well as to communicate with
other agents in such a way that it is decoupled from ad hoc messages or
raw data.

The agents (i.e. industries, WWTPs or the competent authority) are meant
to use WaWO+ during their reasoning and planning. This enables agents to
perceive the environment and reason with a higher level of abstraction; for
instance, perceiving the different pollutant concentrations as well as indica-
tors and classifying the water as clean/polluted or acceptable/non-acceptable
according to whatever the norms may impose on certain areas of the RB . Af-
terwards, they can reason according to those abstractions and send messages
to other agents, so their current situation can be easily understood if necessary,
instead of relying on what others may interpret. Furthermore, these classifica-
tions can be performed in accordance to current norms and regulations. Even
if these norms change the interpretation of perceived facts (e.g. a water mass
with a certain pollutant concentration as highly polluted when it was previ-
ously considered as fresh water) their reasoning and plans are decoupled but
the resulting behaviour, messages and plans will change accordingly.



20 L. Oliva-Felipe et al.

Feature WaWO WaWO+
Format Frames OWL/RDF

Number of classes 109 233
Number of instances 0 0
Number of properties 2 22 (object) / 18 (data-type)

Number of class at 1, 2 and 3 level 15, 14, 18 27, 63, 89
Number of class leaves 85 176

Average depth 4.7 3.12
Highest depth level 6 6

Table 1: WaWO and WaWO+ comparison

The monitor component is used to observe the agents’ actions in the sce-
nario, effectively detecting patterns of behaviour that are non-compliant with
the society’s expectations as defined in a set of common norms. Such set of
norms requires a mutual understanding of terms as supported by WaWO+.
This allows domain experts to easily model common behavioural patterns and
high level goals shared by the society of agents (e.g. balance water quality and
economic outcome).

6 Evaluation

WaWO+ expands WaWO not only in content but also in many other features.
As explained in §4, the most prominent difference is in the programming lan-
guage used. Instead of the original Frames language, WaWO+ is built by
means of OWL/RDF. This change allows the use of Description Logics which
allows for certain, and desired, expressive features such as reasoning and in-
ference [11]. This feature, in fact, improves WaWO+’s usability with respect
to WaWO . In addition, reasoning capabilities were used during WaWO+’s
development (e.g. to eliminate local inconsistencies). The more expressive the
ontology language, the more precisely the intended meaning of a vocabulary
can be specified, and consequently, the more precise conclusions can be drawn.
For example, introducing disjointedness axioms greatly facilitates consistency
checking and the automatic evaluation of individuals in a knowledge base with
regards to a given ontology [65]. It also eases the task of consuming the ontol-
ogy through the Web, which is one of the WaWO+’s (secondary) purposes.

When examining Table 1, one can observe that structurally WaWO+ has
increased the expressiveness of the original (WaWO+ has more than doubled
the number of concepts and properties, particularly the number of classes at
second and third level). The average depth has been reduced, as a result of the
WaWO refinement process for its generalization and expansion. WaWO+ has
also incorporated new properties thus moving from a hierarchical taxonomy
provided inWaWO to a full ontology. We then proceeded with an expert-based
evaluation where different questions were asked towards to verify the ontology
was capable to answer as well as to check if classification was correct according
to their expertise. An example of query was the following one:



Reasoning about River Basins: WaWO+ Revisited 21

Fig. 12: WaWO+ expands WaWO , allowing more questions to be asked and
answered. The right hand part of the boxes depictWaWO+’s actual extension.

PREFIX wawo: <http://www.semanticweb.org/riverbasin#>

SELECT

(avg(?bod) as ?avgBOD)(max(?bod) as ?maxBOD)(min(?bod) as ?minBOD)

(avg(?cod) as ?avgCOD)(max(?cod) as ?maxCOD)(min(?cod) as ?minCOD)

(avg(?ss) as ?avgSS) (max(?ss) as ?maxSS) (min(?ss) as ?minSS)

(avg(?tn) as ?avgTN) (max(?tn) as ?maxTN) (min(?tn) as ?minTN)

(avg(?tp) as ?avgTP) (max(?tp) as ?maxTP) (min(?tp) as ?minTP)

WHERE { ?r a wawo:RiverSection.

?r wawo:hasWaterMass ?w.

?w a wawo:WaterMass;

wawo:biologicalOxygenDemandConcentration ?bod;

wawo:chemicalOxygenDemandConcentration ?cod;

wawo:suspendedSolidConcentration ?ss;

wawo:totalNitrogenConcentration ?tn;

wawo:totalPhosphorusConcentration ?tp}

Listing 1: SPARQL query



22 L. Oliva-Felipe et al.

Water Indicator AVG MAX MIN
BOD 20.34 24.03 18.76
COD 21.36 22.15 19.05
SS 29.88 33.40 27.51
TN 8.42 8.54 8.11
TP 0.77 0.85 0.70

Table 2: Results from executing query Listing 1

Afterwards, we created a fictitious water mass whose indicators where
the average values we queried before; then, the water mass was inserted in
the ontology. The resulting inferred classification determined that, in over-
all, the river quality was considered as RiverWaterComposition. However, the
max/min deviation from the average value suggested there were some river
sections that might be not as clean as it seemed.

Therefore, WaWO+ has effectively expanded its predecessor, allowing the
users to ask a wider range of questions (see Figure 12), and provides a broader
model of the river basin domain.

7 Conclusions and Future work

This paper presents WaWO+ and its architecture and discusses the rationale
that supports the extensions to the original WaWO ontology. The WaWO+
was built because previous research in the field (e.g. [29], [8], [10], [48]) has
encouraged us to use more sophisticated techniques in knowledge represen-
tation and management due to the number of actors, the large quantity of
variables and the complexity of the different processes involved in reasoning
about wastewater treatment UWS in RBs, in particular in the Besòs Basin.

The original WaWO ontology was developed to represent knowledge about
the micro-organisms involved in biological wastewater treatments. In turn, the
extensions ofWaWO+ (see figure 4) allow for more complex forms of reasoning
including the expansion to the scope of argumentation to normative aspects.
It also includes a wide range of concepts related to environmental aspects on
water management in the UWSs. As Vatn [3] identified, the understanding of
what institutions are and do is the core issue. When reasoning about RB issues,
one must also acknowledge that communication, calculation, and choices, are
not cost free. The idea of bounded rationality is a response to this problem
[58]. In [10], we only addressed industrial water discharges.

Ontologies provide an abstract conceptualization of information to be rep-
resented and machine-interpretable definitions of basic concepts in a specific
domain and the relations among them. WaWO+ is a step ahead in the ad-
vancement in reasoning about water management in RBs. This is critically
dependent on the proper integration of water information.

The way we designed WaWO+ clearly improves WaWO because it allows
performing more complex reasoning tasks. WaWO+’s reasoning capability is



Reasoning about River Basins: WaWO+ Revisited 23

regarded as a tool and service to help users that enables a direct query func-
tionality and allows an advanced inference functionality. We foresee the use of
WaWO+-like ontologies in the development of River Basin Management Plan,
as in [27]. We expect WaWO+ to grow and be enhanced with the integration
of new services and their Ontological description.

Ontologies should be considered as infrastructures that enable knowledge
sharing and reuse. This is a key factor to cope with the interaction of many
actors with different goals and, possibly, competing interests. Building ontolo-
gies such as WaWO+ or KM [25] are a crucial element when reasoning about
complex problems in which heterogeneous agents intervene and where incom-
plete information and uncertainties are large. Problematic situations in a UWS
might be complex, and agents may be needed to elucidate about the elements
perceived, their relations and the exact meaning or, what implications may
have their actions that should be unambiguously communicated.

WaWO+ users can be decision makers, experts, RB authorities, stakehold-
ers and citizens with different levels of access to the available information1. The
OWL representation is web oriented and allows knowledge sharing through the
Internet.

7.1 Future Work

In the IoT, new water management services will be deployed [46]. For example,
storm water management and smart grid water will see growth. IoT services
will bring the incorporation of stakeholder measurements, local knowledge,
experience and beliefs of their own environment. This participation has to be
properly addressed and the produced information included in the system. This
implies capturing and leveraging the provenance data to increase its extensi-
bility and transparency (see [65] for a complete discussion on these issues.). In
addition, it is expected that WTTPs will evolve into bio-refineries. For exam-
ple, new, innovative wastewater treatment processes will enable water recovery
to help close the growing gap between water supply and demand.

WaWO+ should evolve and be transformed from a contextual ontology into
a context awareness ontology. Ontologies are key requirements for building
pervasive context-aware systems, in which independently developed sensors,
devices, and agents are expected to share contextual knowledge and provide
relevant services and information to users based on their situational needs [26].
A general ontology needs to be able to adapt itself, for example, to a specific
RB or, to a given UWS, in a RB where it will be in use.

All these services need a large amount of domain-specific and general
knowledge to be available, and WaWO+ aims to be one of those sources.

1 The actual version of WaWO+ is obtainable at
http://protegewiki.stanford.edu/wiki/Protege_Ontology_Library#OWL_ontologies



24 L. Oliva-Felipe et al.

References

1. Agriculture meteorology sensor network. https://www.w3.org/2005/Incubator/ssn/wiki/
Agriculture_Meteorology_Sensor_Network. Accessed: 2016-02-11.

2. Consorci per a la Defensa de la Conca del Besòs. http://besos.cat/la-conca/
la-conca-del-besos/. Accessed: 2015-10-05.

3. An institutional analysis of methods for environmental appraisal. Ecological Economics,
68(8-9):2207 – 2215, 2009.

4. Agnar Aamodt and Enric Plaza. Case-based reasoning: Foundational issues, method-
ological variations, and system approaches. AI communications, 7(1):39–59, 1994.

5. Huib Aldewereld, Sergio Álvarez-Napagao, Frank Dignum, and Javier Vázquez-Salceda.
Making norms concrete. In Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on Au-
tonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems: volume 1-Volume 1, pages 807–814. Inter-
national Foundation for Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems, 2010.

6. D. Allemang and J. Hendler. Semantic Web for the Working Ontologist, Effective
Modeling in RDF and OWL. Morgan Kaufman, 2008.

7. Gabriel Anzaldi-Varas. Generic ontology for water supply distribution chain. Deliverable
D1.3. Ref. 318603, Water Enhanced Resource Planning – Where water supply meets
demand, Barcelona, Spain, December 2013.

8. Montse Aulinas, Juan Carlos Nieves, Ulises Cortés, and Manel Poch. Supporting deci-
sion making in urban wastewater systems using a knowledge-based approach. Environ-
mental Modelling and Software, 26(5):562–572, 2011.

9. Montse Aulinas, Juan Carlos Nieves, Manel Poch, and Ulises Cortés. Supporting De-
cision Making in River Basin Systems Using a Declarative Reasoning Approach. In
M. Finkel and P. Grathwohl, editors, Proceedings of the AquaTerra Conference (Sci-
entific Fundamentals for River Basic Management), ISSN 0935-4948, page 75, March
2009.

10. Montse Aulinas, Pancho Tolchinsky, Clàudia Turon, Manel Poch, and Ulises Cortés.
Argumentation-based framework for industrial wastewater discharges management.
Eng. Appl. of AI, 25(2):317–325, 2012.

11. Franz Baader. The description logic handbook: Theory, implementation and applica-
tions. Cambridge university press, 2003.

12. T. Balke. Towards the Governance of Open Distributed Grids - A Case Study in
Wireless Mobile Grids. PhD thesis, U. Bayreuth, 2011.

13. Simon Elias Bibri. The human face of Ambient Intelligence: Cognitive, emotional,
affective, behavioral and conversational aspects, volume 9. Springer, 2015.

14. Guido Boella and Leendert WN van der Torre. Regulative and constitutive norms in
normative multiagent systems. KR, 4:255–265, 2004.

15. Jan Broersen, Frank Dignum, Virginia Dignum, and John-Jules Ch Meyer. Designing a
deontic logic of deadlines. In Deontic logic in computer science, pages 43–56. Springer,
2004.

16. Bruce G Buchanan, Edward Hance Shortliffe, et al. Rule-based expert systems, volume 3.
Addison-Wesley Reading, MA, 1984.

17. Violeta Cabello, Barbara A. Willaarts, Monica Aguilar, and Leandro del Moral Ituarte.
River basins as social-ecological systems: linking levels of societal and ecosystem water
metabolism in a semiarid watershed. Ecology and Society, 20(3):20, 2015.

18. Octavio Cabezut-Boo and Antonio Sánchez-Aguilar. Towards an ontology of waste
water treatment plants: the identification phase. Environmental modelling & software,
14(5):401–408, 1999.

19. CEC. Directive concerning urban waste water treatment (91/271/EEC), volume 30.
Official/Journal/L135/40, 1991.

20. CEC. Directive 2000/60/ec of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing
a Framework for Community Action in the Field of Water Policy. Oficial Journal of the
European Communities on 22 December (OJ L 327), pages 0001:0073, 2000.

21. Luigi Ceccaroni. ONTOWEDSS- An Ontology-based Environmental Decision Support
System for the Management of Wastewater Treatment Plants. PhD thesis, Universitat
Politècnica de Catalunya, 2001.



Reasoning about River Basins: WaWO+ Revisited 25

22. Luigi Ceccaroni. An Environmental Decision-support System for Wastewater Treat-
ment: Bridging Environmental Science and Information and Communication Technol-
ogy. LAP Lambert Academic Publishing, Germany, 2009.

23. Luigi Ceccaroni, Ulises Cortés, and Miquel Sanchez-Marre. Ontowedss: augmenting
environmental decision-support systems with ontologies. Environmental Modelling &
Software, 19(9):785–797, 2004.

24. Luigi Ceccaroni and Luis Oliva. Ontologies for the design of ecosystems. Universal
Ontology of Geographic Space: Semantic Enrichment for Spatial Data: Semantic En-
richment for Spatial Data, page 207, 2012.

25. K. W. Chau. An Ontology-based knowledge management system for flow and water
quality modeling. Advances in Engineering Software, 38(3):172–181, 2007.

26. Harry Chen, Tim Finin, and Anupam Joshi. An ontology for context-aware pervasive
computing environment. The Knowledge Engineering Review, 18(03):197–207, 2003.

27. EFRA Committee. Water for life and livelihoods. river Basin Management Plan. Report,
Environment Agency, Thames River Basin District, December 2009.

28. Generalitat de Catalunya. Psaru 2005. http://aca-web.gencat.cat/aca/appmanager/aca/
aca?_nfpb=true&_pageLabel=P1204654461208200526170&profileLocale=es. Accessed: 2015-
03-30.

29. F. Devesa, J. Comas, C. Turon, A. Freixo, F. Carrasco, and M. Poch. Scenario analysis
for the role of sanitation infrastructures in integrated urban wastewater management.
Environmental Modelling and Software, 24(3):371–380, 2009.

30. Directive. Directive 80/777/eec of 15 july 1980 on the approximation of the laws of the
member states relating to the exploitation and marketing of natural mineral waters,
July 1980.

31. Directive. Directive 98/43/ec of the european parliament and of the council of 3 novem-
ber 1998 on the quality of water intended for human consumption, November 1998.

32. ENvO. Environment Ontology. http://www.environmentontology.org, 2013.
33. Adam Farquhar, Richard Fikes, and James Rice. The ontolingua server: A tool for

collaborative ontology construction. International journal of human-computer studies,
46(6):707–727, 1997.

34. Mariano Fernández-López, Asunción Gómez-Pérez, and Natalia Juristo. Methontology:
from ontological art towards ontological engineering. 1997.

35. Julián Garrido and Ignacio Requena. Proposal of ontology for environmental impact
assessment: An application with knowledge mobilization. Expert Syst. Appl, 38(3):2462–
2472, 2011.

36. Michael R Genesereth, Richard E Fikes, et al. Knowledge interchange format-version
3.0: reference manual. 1992.

37. Corentin Girard, Jean-Daniel Rinaudo, Manuel Pulido-Velazquez, and Yvan Caballero.
An interdisciplinary modelling framework for selecting adaptation measures at the river
basin scale in a global change scenario. Environmental Modelling & Software, 69:42–54,
2015.

38. N. Guarino. Formal ontology and information systems. In N. Guarino, editor, Formal
Ontology in Information Systems (FOIS), pages 3–18. IOS Press, Amsterdam, 1998.

39. J. Horsburgh, D. Tarboton, M. Piasecki, D. Maidment, I. Zaslavsky, D. Valentine, and
T. Whitenack. An integrated system for publishing environmental observations data.
Environmental Modelling & Software, 24:879–888, 2009.

40. Daniel S Kaster, Claudia B Medeiros, and Heloisa V Rocha. Supporting modeling
and problem solving from precedent experiences: the role of workflows and case-based
reasoning. Environmental Modelling & Software, 20(6):689–704, 2005.

41. Nils Kehrein, Jürgen Berlekamp, and Jörg Klasmeier. Modeling the fate of down-the-
drain chemicals in whole watersheds: New version of the great-er software. Environ-
mental Modelling & Software, 64:1–8, 2015.

42. Holger Knublauch, Mark A. Musen, and Alan L. Rector. Editing description logic
ontologies with the protégé OWL plugin. In Volker Haarslev and Ralf Möller, edi-
tors, Proceedings of the 2004 International Workshop on Description Logics (DL2004),
Whistler, British Columbia, Canada, June 6-8, 2004, volume 104 of CEUR Workshop
Proceedings. CEUR-WS.org, 2004.

43. Thilo Koegst. Ontology based model framework for conceptual design of treatment flow
sheets. PhD thesis, Technische Universitat Dresden, 2013.



26 L. Oliva-Felipe et al.

44. Arnim Kuhn, Wolfgang Britz, Daniel Kyalo Willy, and Pieter van Oel. Simulating
the viability of water institutions under volatile rainfall conditions–the case of the lake
naivasha basin. Environmental Modelling & Software, 2014.

45. W. Medema, B. S. McIntosh, and P. J. Jeffrey. From premise to practice: a critical
assessment of integrated water resources management and adaptive management ap-
proaches in the water sector. Ecology and Society, 13(2):29, 2008.

46. P Mikuleckỳ, D Ponce, et al. Knowledge-based approaches for river basin management.
Hydrology and Earth System Sciences Discussions Discussions, 4(3):1999–2033, 2007.

47. E. Muñoz, E. Capón-García, José M. Laínez, A. Espuña, and L. Puigjaner. Ontologi-
cal framework for the enterprise from a process perspective - operational, tactical and
strategic integration for improved decision-making. In Joaquim Filipe and Jan L. G. Di-
etz, editors, KEOD 2011 - Proceedings of the International Conference on Knowledge
Engineering and Ontology Development, Paris, France, 26-29 October, 2011, pages
538–546. SciTePress, 2011.

48. Juan Carlos Nieves, Dario Garcia-Gasulla, Montse Aulinas, and Ulises Cortés. An
operational approach for implementing normative agents in urban wastewater systems.
Computación y Sistemas, 16(1), 2012.

49. Natalya F Noy, Monica Crubézy, Ray W Fergerson, Holger Knublauch, Samson W
Tu, Jennifer Vendetti, Mark A Musen, et al. Protege-2000: an open-source ontology-
development and knowledge-acquisition environment. In AMIA Annu Symp Proc, vol-
ume 953, page 953, 2003.

50. Natalya F. Noy and Deborah L. Mcguinness. Ontology development 101: A guide to
creating your first ontology. Technical report, 2001.

51. Viral Parekh. Applying Ontologies and Semantic Web technologies to Environmental
Sciences and Engineering. Master thesis, University of Maryland, 2005.

52. Maria Teresa Pazienza and Michele Vindigni. Agent to agent talk: "nobody there?"
supporting agents linguistic communication. In Ontologies for Agents: Theory and
Experiences, pages 43–72. Springer, 2005.

53. Hardy Pundt and Yaser Bishr. Domain ontologies for data sharing – an example from
environmental monitoring using field GIS. Computers & Geosciences, 28:95–102, 2002.

54. Thania Rendón-Sallard, Miquel Sànchez-Marrè, Montserrat Aulinas, and Joaquim Co-
mas. Designing a multi-agent system to simulate scenarios for decision-making in river
basin systems. In Proc. of the 2006 Conf. on Artificial Intelligence Research and De-
velopment, pages 291–298. IOS Press, 2006.

55. Miquel Sànchez, Ulises Cortés, Javier Lafuente, Ignasi R Roda, and Manel Poch. Dai-
depur: an integrated and distributed architecture for wastewater treatment plants su-
pervision. Artificial Intelligence in Engineering, 10(3):275–285, 1996.

56. John R Searle. The construction of social reality. Simon and Schuster, 1995.
57. J. A. Sheth and J.Larson. Federated database systems for managing distributed, het-

erogeneous, and autonomous database. ACM Computing Survey, 22:183–236, 1990.
58. Herbert A. Simon. Rational decision making in business organizations. The American

Economic Review, 69(4):493–513, 1979.
59. Evren Sirin, Bijan Parsia, Bernardo Cuenca Grau, Aditya Kalyanpur, and Yarden Katz.

Pellet: A practical owl-dl reasoner. Web Semantics: science, services and agents on the
World Wide Web, 5(2):51–53, 2007.

60. D. Sottara, J. C. Correale, T. Spetebroot, D. Pulcini, D. Giunchi, F. Paolucci, and
L. Luccarini. An ontology-based approach for the instrumentation,control and automa-
tion infrastructure of a WWTP. In Proceedings of the 7th Int. Congress on Env.
Modelling and Software,. iEMS, 2014.

61. Ovidiu Vermesan and Peter Friess. Internet of Things: converging technologies for
smart environments and integrated ecosystems. River Publishers, 2013.

62. F. Villa, I. N. Athanasiadis, and A. E. Rizzoli. Modelling with knowledge: A review of
emerging semantic approaches to environmental modelling. Environmental Modelling
& Software, 24(5):577–587, 2009.

63. Ferdinando Villa, Ioannis N Athanasiadis, and Andrea Emilio Rizzoli. Modelling with
knowledge: A review of emerging semantic approaches to environmental modelling. En-
vironmental Modelling & Software, 24(5):577–587, 2009.



Reasoning about River Basins: WaWO+ Revisited 27

64. Martin Volk, Jesko Hirschfeld, Alexandra Dehnhardt, Gerd Schmidt, Carsten Bohn, Ste-
fan Liersch, and Philip W Gassman. Integrated ecological-economic modelling of water
pollution abatement management options in the Upper Ems River Basin. Ecological
Economics, 66(1):66–76, 2008.

65. Johanna Völker. Learning Expressive Ontologies, volume 2 of Studies on the Semantic
Web. IOS Press, 2009.

66. Michael Wooldridge. An Introduction to MultiAgent Systems. Wiley Publishing, 2nd
edition, 2009.

67. I. Zaslavsky, D. Valentine, and T. Whiteaker. CUASHI WaterML. Discussion paper
07-041r1, Open Geospatial Consortium, 2007.


