












































ParTes. Test Suite for Parsing Evaluation ∗

ParTes: Test suite para evaluación de analizadores sintácticos

Marina Lloberes
Irene Castellón

GRIAL-UB
Gran Via Corts Catalanes 585

08007 Barcelona
marina.lloberes@ub.edu

icastellon@ub.edu

Llúıs Padró
TALP-UPC

Jordi Girona 1-3
08034 Barcelona
padro@lsi.upc.edu

Edgar Gonzàlez
Google Research

1600 Amphitheatre Parkway
94043 Mountain View - CA

edgargip@google.com

Resumen: En este art́ıculo se presenta ParTes, el primer test suite en español y
catalán para la evaluación cualitativa de analizadores sintácticos automáticos. Este
recurso es una jerarqúıa de los fenómenos representativos acerca de la estructura
sintáctica y el orden de argumentos. ParTes propone una simplificación de la eval-
uación cualitativa contribuyendo a la automatización de esta tarea.
Palabras clave: test suite, evaluación cualitativa, analizador sintáctico, español,
catalán

Abstract: This paper presents ParTes, the first test suite in Spanish and Catalan
for parsing qualitative evaluation. This resource is a hierarchical test suite of the
representative syntactic structure and argument order phenomena. ParTes proposes
a simplification of the qualitative evaluation by contributing to the automatization
of this task.
Keywords: test suite, qualitative evaluation, parsing, Spanish, Catalan

1 Introduction

Qualitative evaluation in Natural Language
Processing (NLP) is usually excluded in eval-
uation tasks because it requires a human ef-
fort and time cost. Generally, NLP evalua-
tion is performed with corpora that are built
over random language samples and that cor-
respond to real language utterances. These
evaluations are based on frequencies of the
syntactic phenomena and, thus, on their
representativity, but they usually exclude
low-frequency syntactic phenomena. Conse-
quently, current evaluation methods tend to
focus on the accuracy of the most frequent
linguistic phenomena rather than the accu-
racy of both high-frequent and low-frequent
linguistic phenomena.

This paper takes as a starting point these
issues related to qualitative evaluation. It
presents ParTes, the first parsing test suite
in Spanish and Catalan, to allow automatic
qualitative evaluation as a complementary

∗ The resource presented in this paper arises from
the research project SKATeR (Ministry of Econ-
omy and Competitiveness, TIN2012-38584-C06-06
and TIN2012-38584-C06-01). Edgar Gonzàlez col-
laborated in the ParTes automatization process. We
thank Marta Recasens for her suggestions.

task of quantitative evaluation. This resource
is designed to simplify the issues related to
qualitative analysis reducing the human ef-
fort and time cost. Furthermore, ParTes pro-
vides a set of representative linguistic utter-
ances based on syntax. The final result is a
hierarchical test suite of syntactic structure
and argument order phenomena defined by
means of syntactic features.

2 Evaluation databases

Traditionally, two analysis methods have
been defined: the quantitative analysis and
the qualitative analysis. Both approaches are
complementary and they can contribute to a
global interpretation.

The main difference is that quantitative
analysis relies on statistically informative
data, while qualitative analysis talks about
richness and precision of the data (McEnery
and Wilson, 1996).

Representativeness by means of frequency
is the main feature of quantitative studies.
That is, the observed data cover the most fre-
quent phenomena of the data set. Rare phe-
nomena are considered irrelevant for a quan-
titative explanation. Thus, quantitative de-
scriptions provide a close approximation of

Procesamiento del Lenguaje Natural, Revista nº 53, septiembre de 2014, pp 87-94 recibido 10-04-14 revisado 15-07-14 aceptado 15-07-14

ISSN 1135-5948 © 2014 Sociedad Española para el Procesamiento del Lenguaje Natural



the real spectrum.
Qualitative studies offer an in-depth de-

scription rather than a quantification of the
data (McEnery and Wilson, 1996). Fre-
quent phenomena and marginal phenomena
are considered items of the same condition
because the focus is on providing an exhaus-
tive description of the data.

In terms of analysis methods and
databases, two resources have been widely
used: corpora and test suites. Language
technologies find these resources a reliable
evaluation test because they are coherent and
they are built over guidelines.

A corpus contains a finite collection of
representative real linguistic utterances that
are machine readable and that are a stan-
dard reference of the language variety rep-
resented in the resource itself (McEnery and
Wilson, 1996). From this naive conceptual-
ization, Corpus Linguistics takes the notion
of representativeness as a presence in a large
population of linguistic utterances, where the
most frequent utterances are represented as
a simulation of the reality and they are anno-
tated according to the resource goals. That
is why corpora are appropriate test data for
quantitative studies.

On the other hand, test suites are struc-
tured and robust annotated databases which
store an exhaustive collection of linguistic ut-
terances according to a set of linguistic fea-
tures. They are built over a delimited group
of linguistic utterances where every utter-
ance is detailed and classified according to
rich linguistic and non-linguistic annotations
(Lehmann et al., 1996). Thus, the control
over test data and their detailed annotations
make test suites a perfect guidance for qual-
itative studies.

Corpora have also been used in qualita-
tive analysis, but they collect representative
linguistic utterances by means of frequency
rather than the representative linguistic ut-
terances by means of exhaustiveness. Then,
they are not the most appropriate tool for
qualitative studies.

3 Existing test suites

Traditional test suites were simple collections
of linguistic test cases or interesting exam-
ples. However, with the success of the NLP
technologies, there was a real need for devel-
oping test suites based on pre-defined guide-
lines, with a deep structure, richly annotated

and not necessarily developed for a particular
tool (Flickinger, Nerbonne, and Sag, 1987).
For this reason, the new generation of test
suites are databases that cover the real needs
of the NLP software evaluation (Lehmann et
al., 1996).

The HP test suite (Flickinger, Nerbonne,
and Sag, 1987) is an English and general
purpose resource developed to diagnose and
monitor the progress of NLP software devel-
opment. The main goal of this test suite
is to evaluate the performance of heuristic-
based parsers under development. The suite
contains a wide-range collection of linguistic
examples that refer to syntactic phenomena
such as argument structure verbs and verbal
subcategorization among others. It also in-
cludes some basic anaphora-related phenom-
ena. Furthermore, these phenomena are rep-
resented by a set of artificially constructed
sentences and the annotations are shallow.
This resource has a minimal internal classifi-
cation since the suite organizes the test data
under headings and sub-headings.

In order to step further, subsequent test
suites have been developed as in-depth re-
sources with rich structure and annotations.
One of the groups of EAGLES proposes a set
of guidelines for evaluating grammar checkers
based on test suites (EAGLES, 1994). The
test suite is a collection of attributes that al-
low to validate the quality of the functions
of the evaluated tool. It is derived from a
taxonomy of errors, where each error class is
translated into a feature which is collected
in the test suite. The final result is a classi-
fication of sentences containing an error, the
corresponding sentence without the error, the
name of the error and the guidelines for the
correction process.

The TSNLP (Lehmann et al., 1996) is a
multilingual test suite (English, French and
German) richly annotated with linguistic and
meta-linguistic features. This test suite is
a collection of test items with general, cat-
egorial and structural information. Every
test item is classified according to linguis-
tic and extra-linguistic features (e.g. num-
ber and type of arguments, word order, etc.).
These test items are also included in test sets
by means of positive and negative examples.
Furthermore, the TSNLP includes informa-
tion about frequency or relevance for a par-
ticular domain.

In Spanish, a previous test suite exists

Marina Lloberes, Irene Castellón, Lluís Padró, Edgar Gonzàlez

88



for NLP software evaluation, the SPARTE
test suite (Peñas, Álvaro, and Verdejo, 2006).
Specifically, it has been developed to val-
idate Recognizing Textual Entailment sys-
tems and it is a collection of text and hypoth-
esis pairs with true/false annotations. Al-
though SPARTE and the presented ParTes
in Spanish (ParTesEs) are resources for the
same language, both test suites have been
developed for different purposes which make
both resources unique. With respect to the
Catalan language, the version of ParTes in
Catalan (ParTesCa) is the first test suite for
this language.

4 The construction of ParTes

ParTes is a new test suite in Spanish and
Catalan for qualitatively evaluating parsing
systems. This test suite follows the main
trends on test suite design, so that it shares
some features with the EAGLES test suite
(EAGLES, 1994) and the TSNLP (Lehmann
et al., 1996).

Additionally, ParTes adds two new con-
cepts in test suite design concerning how the
data are classified and which data are en-
coded. The test suite is seen as a hierar-
chy where the phenomenon data are explic-
itly connected. Furthermore, representative-
ness is the key-concept in ParTes to select the
phenomenon-testing data that configure the
test suite.

The ParTes guidelines are created to en-
sure the coherence, the robustness and the
easy implementation of this resource.

Specific purpose. While some test suites
are general purpose like TSNLP, ParTes is a
specific purpose test suite. Particularly, it is
focused to validate the accuracy of the syn-
tactic representations generated by parsers.
For this reason, the test cases are related to
syntactic phenomena and the test suite has
been annotated with several syntactic fea-
tures.

Test suite of syntactic phenomena.
ParTes is not a simple collection of linguistic
test cases nor a set of linguistic features, ac-
tually. This resource lists the syntactic phe-
nomena that configure a language by a set of
syntactic features.

For example, ParTes collects syntactic
structures based on head-child relation. It
also contains several features that syntacti-
cally define every phenomenon (e.g. the syn-

tactic category of the head or the child, the
syntactic relation with the node that gov-
erns it, etc.). Complementarily, every phe-
nomenon is associated with a test case that
corresponds to the linguistic utterance of the
actual phenomenon described and that is
used to evaluate the accuracy of the perfor-
mance of the parser.

Hierarchy of syntactic phenomena.
Previous test suites were a collection of
test sentences, optionally structured (EA-
GLES and TSNLP). ParTes proposes a
hierarchically-structured set of syntactic phe-
nomena to which tests are associated.

Polyhedral hierarchy. Test suites can de-
fine linguistic phenomena from several per-
spectives (e.g. morphologic features, syn-
tactic structures, semantic information, etc.).
Because ParTes is built as a global test suite,
it defines syntactic phenomena from two ma-
jor syntactic concepts: syntactic structure
and argument order (Section 5).

Exhaustive test suite. In order to eval-
uate NLP tools qualitatively, test suites list
exhaustively a set of linguistic samples that
describe in detail the language(s) of the re-
source, as discussed in Section 2. ParTes is
not an exception and it contains an exhaus-
tive list of the covered syntactic phenomena
of the considered languages. However, some
restrictions are applied to this list. Other-
wise, listing the whole set of syntactic phe-
nomena of a language is not feasible, and it
is not one of the goals of the test suite’s de-
sign.

Representative syntactic phenomena.
As mentioned, lists of test cases need to be
delimited because test suites are controlled
data sets. Similarly to corpora development,
the syntactic phenomena to be included in
the test suite can be selected according to a
certain notion of representativeness. Conse-
quently, representative syntactic phenomena
are relevant for testing purposes and they
should be added in the test suite, whereas
peripheral syntactic phenomena can be ex-
cluded. The next section (Section 5) details
the definition of representativeness in ParTes
and how it is implemented.

Rich annotations. Every syntactic phe-
nomenon of ParTes is annotated with precise
information that provides a detailed descrip-
tion and that allows the qualitative interpre-
tation of the data. The annotations refer to

ParTes. Test Suite for Parsing Evaluation

89



several linguistic and extra-linguistic features
that determine the syntactic phenomena.

Controlled data. As argued in Section 2,
there is a direct relation between qualita-
tive evaluation, test suites and controlled test
data. Because ParTes is a test suite for qual-
itative evaluation, there is a strong control
over the test data and, specifically, the con-
trol is applied in a double way. The number
of test cases is limited to human-processing
size. The sentences of the test cases are con-
trolled to avoid ambiguities and interactions
with other linguistic utterances. For this rea-
son, test cases are artificially created.

Semi-automatically generated. Lin-
guistic resources usually have a high cost
in terms of human effort and time. For
this reason, automatic methods have been
implemented whenever it has been possible.
Manual linguistic description of the syntac-
tic structure has been the main method to
annotate the syntactic phenomena related to
the structure. On the other hand, argument
order annotations have been automatically
generated and manually reviewed, using
the automatization process of the SenSem
corpus (Fernández and Vàzquez, 2012).

Multilingual. The architecture of this re-
source allows it to be developed in any
language. The current version of ParTes
includes the Spanish version of the test
suite (ParTesEs) and the Catalan version
(ParTesCa).

5 The results of ParTes

The final result of ParTes is an XML hierar-
chically and richly annotated test suite of the
representative syntactic phenomena of the
Spanish (ParTesEs) and Catalan (ParTesCa)
languages. This resource is the first test suite
for the evaluation of parsing software in the
considered languages. It is freely available1

and distributed under the Creative Com-
mons Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported
License.

ParTes is built over two kinds of informa-
tion: the test suite module with the syntactic
phenomena to be evaluated and the test data
module with the linguistic samples to evalu-
ate over. Since it is a polyhedral test suite, it
is organized according to two major concepts
in Syntax: structure and order. Table 1 gives
the size of the current version of ParTes.

1http://grial.uab.es/descarregues.php

Section ParTesEs ParTesCa

Structure 99 101
Order 62 46

Total 161 147

Table 1: ParTes in numbers

5.1 Syntactic structure

The structure section is a hierarchy of syn-
tactic levels where each level receives a tag
and it is associated to a set of attributes
that define several aspects about the syntac-
tic structure. This section is placed between
the <structure></structure> tags and it is
organized into the following parts:

<level> It can be intrachunk (i.e. any
structure inside a chunk) or intraclause (i.e.
any connection between a clause marker and
a grammatical category, phrase or clause).

<constituent> Phrase or clause that de-
termines the nature of the constituent (e.g.
noun phrase, verb phrase, infinitive clause,
etc.). The head of the constituent corre-
sponds to the parent node.

<hierarchy> Given two connected con-
stituents, it defines which one occurs in the
parent position and which other one in the
child position.

<realization> Definition of the attributes
of the head or child:

• id: Numerical code that identifies every
<realization>.

• name: Name of the gramatical category,
phrase or clause that occurs in head or
child position (e.g. noun, pronoun, etc.,
as heads of noun phrase).

• class: Specifications about the gramat-
ical category, the phrase or the clause
that occurs in head or child position (e.g.
a nominal head can be a common noun
or a proper noun).

• subclass: Sub-specifications about the
gramatical category, the phrase or the
clause that occur in head or child posi-
tion (e.g. a nominal head can be a bare
noun).

• link: Arch between parent and child ex-
pressed by Part of Speech tags (e.g. the
link between a nominal head and a mod-
ifying adjective is ‘n-a’).

Marina Lloberes, Irene Castellón, Lluís Padró, Edgar Gonzàlez

90



<constituent name="verbphrase">
<hierarchy name="head">

<realization id="0001" name="verb" class="finite" subclass="default" link="null"
parent="salir" child="null" freq="null"
test="Saldrán"/>

<realization id="0002" name="verb" class="nonfinite" subclass="default" link="null"
parent="viajar" child="null" freq="null"
test="Hubiesen viajado"/>

</hierarchy>
<hierarchy name="child">

<realization id="0003" name="verb" class="auxiliar" subclass="haber" link="v-v"
parent="vender" child="haber" freq="0.010655" test="Habrán vendido la casa"/>

<realization id="0004" name="verb" class="auxiliar" subclass="ser" link="v-v"
parent="acusar" child="ser" freq="0.010655"
test="Es acusada de robo"/>

...
<realization id="0009" name="noun" class="null" subclass="default" link="v-n"

parent="romper" child="taza" freq="0.131629"
test="La taza se rompió"/>

<realization id="0010" name="adjective" class="null" subclass="default" link="v-a"
parent="considerar" child="innovador" freq="0.010373"
test="Se considera una propuesta innovadora"/>

...
</hierarchy>

</constituent>

Figure 1: Syntactic structure of the verb phrase in ParTesEs

• parent: Lemma of the upper level be-
tween the two nodes defined in link (e.g.
in ‘casa cara’ - ‘expensive house’, the
parent is ‘casa’).

• child: Lemma of the lower level be-
tween the two nodes defined in link (e.g.
in ‘casa cara’ - ‘expensive house’, the
child is ‘caro’).

• freq: Relative frequency in the AnCora
corpus of the link between the two nodes
defined in link.

• test: Linguistic test data that illus-
trates the syntactic structure.

For example, in the definition
of verb phrase as <constituent
name="verbphrase"> (Figure 1), the
possible grammatical categories, phrases
and clauses that can form a verb phrase are
detected and classified into two categories:
those pieces that can be the head of the
verb phrase (<hierarchy name="head">)
and those that occur in child position
(<hierarchy name="child">).

Next, the set of the possible heads of the
verb phrase are listed in the several instances
of <realization>. Furthermore, all the can-
didates of the child position are identified.

Every realization is defined by the previ-
ous set of attributes. In the Figure 1, in the
case where the realization of one of the verb

phrase children is a noun (<realization
... name="noun".../>), the frequency of
occurrence of this link (i.e. the link of a ver-
bal head and a nominal child, link="v-n")
is 0.131629 (in a scale between 0 and 1) and
the test case to represent this structure is
‘La taza se rompió’ (‘The cup broke’). Fur-
thermore, the parent of the link ‘v-n’ of the
test case is the lemma of the finite verb form
‘rompió’ (parent="romper", ‘to break’) and
the child of this link is the substantive ’taza’
(child="taza", ‘cup’). The rest of this real-
ization’s attributes are empty.

As mentioned in Section 4, the most
representative syntactic structure phenom-
ena have been manually collected. In or-
der to determine which phenomena are rel-
evant to be included in ParTes, linguistic de-
scriptive grammars have been used as a re-
source in the decision process. Thus, the
syntactic phenomena that receive a special
attention in the descriptive grammars can
be considered candidates in terms of repre-
sentativeness. In particular, the construc-
tions described in Gramática Descriptiva de
la Lengua Española (Bosque and Demonte,
1999) and in Gramàtica del Català Contem-
porani (Solà et al., 2002), for Spanish and
Catalan respectively, have been included.

In addition, the representativeness of the
selected syntactic phenomena is supported by
the frequencies of the syntactic head-child re-

ParTes. Test Suite for Parsing Evaluation

91



lations of the AnCora corpus (Taulé, Mart́ı,
and Recasens, 2008). These frequencies are
automatically extracted and they are gener-
alizations of the Part of Speech tag of both
head and child given a link: all the main
verb instances are grouped together, the aux-
iliaries are recognized into the same class, etc.
Some frequencies are not extracted due to the
complexity of certain constructions. For ex-
ample, comparisons are excluded because it
is not possible to reliable detect them by au-
tomatic means in the corpus.

The representation of the syntactic struc-
tures in ParTes follows the linguistic proposal
implemented in FreeLing Dependency Gram-
mars (Lloberes, Castellón, and Padró, 2010).
This proposal states that the nature of the
lexical unit determines the nature of the head
and it determines the list of syntactic cate-
gories that can occur in the head position.

5.2 Argument order

Similarly to the syntactic structure section,
the argument order schemas are also a hi-
erarchy of the most representative argument
structures that occur in the SenSem corpus.
This section is organized in ParTes as follows:

<class> Number and type of arguments in
which an order schema is classified. Three
classes have been identified: monoargumen-
tal with subject expressed (subj#V), biar-
gumental where subject and object are ex-
pressed (subj#V#obj), and monoargumental
with object expressed (V#obj).

<schema> Sub-class of <class> where the
argument order and the specific number of
arguments are defined. For example, di-
transitive verbs with an enclitic argument
(e.g. ‘[El col·leccionistasubj] no [liiobj] [venv]
[el llibredobj]’ - ‘The collector to him do not
sell the book’) are expressed by the schema
subj#obj#V#obj (Figure 2).

<realization> Specifications of the argu-
ment order schema, which are defined by the
following set of attributes (Figure 2):

• id: Numerical code that identifies every
<realization>.

• func: Syntactic functions that define
every argument of the argument or-
der schema. In Figure 2, the argu-
ment schema is composed by subject
(subj), preverbal indirect object (iobj)
and postverbal direct object (dobj).

• cat: Grammatical categories, phrases or
clauses that define every argument of the
argument order schema. For example,
the three arguments of Figure 2 are re-
alized as noun phrases (np).

• parent: Lemma of the upper level node
of the argument order schema. In the
case illustrated in Figure 2, the parent
corresponds to the lemma of the verbal
form of the test case (i.e. ‘vendre’-‘to
sell’).

• children: Lemmas of the lower level
nodes of the argument order schema.
In the test case of Figure 2, the chil-
dren are the head of every argument
(i.e. ‘col·leccionista’-‘collector’, ‘ell’-
‘him’, ‘llibre’-‘book’).

• constr: Construction type where a par-
ticular argument order schema occurs
(active, passive, pronominal passive, im-
personal, pronominal impersonal). In
Figure 2, the construction is in active
voice.

• sbjtype: Subject type of a particu-
lar argument order schema (semantically
full or empty and lexically full or empty).
The subject type of Figure 2 is seman-
tically and lexically full so the value is
full.

• freq: Relative frequency of the ar-
gument order schema in the SenSem
corpus (Fernández and Vàzquez, 2012).
The frequency of the ditransitive argu-
ment schema in Figure 2 is 0.005176,
which means that the realization
subj#iobj#V#dobj occurs 0.005176
times (in a scale between 0 and 1) in
the SenSem corpus.

• idsensem: Three random SenSem id
sentences have been linked to every
ParTes argument order schema.

• test: Linguistic test data of the de-
scribed realization of the argument order
schema (in Figure 2, ‘El col·leccionista
no li ven el llibre’-‘The collector to him
do not sell the book’).

The ParTes argument order schemas have
been automatically generated from the syn-
tactic patterns of the annotations of the
SenSem corpus (Fernández and Vàzquez,
2012). Specifically, for every annotated verb

Marina Lloberes, Irene Castellón, Lluís Padró, Edgar Gonzàlez

92



<class name="subj#V#obj">
<schema name="subj#obj#V#obj">

<realization id="0140" func="subj#iobj#v#dobj" cat="np#np#v#np" parent="vendre"
children="col·leccionista#ell#llibre" constr="active" sbjtype="full"
freq="0.005176" idsensem="43177#45210#52053"
test="El col·leccionista no li ven el llibre"/>

</schema>
</class>

Figure 2: Argument order of ditransitive verbs in ParTesCa

in the corpus, the argument structure has
been recognized. This information has been
classified into the ParTes argument order
schemas. Finally, the most frequent schemas
have been filtered and manually reviewed,
considering those schemas above the average.
The total set of candidates is 62 argument or-
der schemas for Spanish and 46 for Catalan.

5.3 Test data module

ParTes contains a test data set module to
evaluate a syntactic tool over the phenomena
included in the test suite. For the sentences
in the data set, both plain text and syntac-
tic annotations are available. The test data
set is controlled in size: ParTesEs contains 94
sentences and ParTesCa is 99 sentences long.
It is also controlled in terms of linguistic phe-
nomena to prevent the interaction with other
linguistic phenomena that may cause incor-
rect analysis. For this reason, test cases are
artificially created.

A semi-automated process has been imple-
mented to annotate ParTesEs and ParTesCa
data sets. Both data sets have been au-
tomatically analyzed by the FreeLing De-
pendency Parser (Lloberes, Castellón, and
Padró, 2010). The dependency trees have
been mapped to the CoNLL format (Fig-
ure 3) proposed for the shared task on mul-
tilingual dependency parsing (Buchholz and
Marsi, 2006). Finally, two annotators have
reviewed and corrected the FreeLing Depen-
dency Parser mapped outputs.

6 ParTes evaluation

To validate that ParTes is a useful evalua-
tion parsing test suite, an evaluation task has
been done. ParTes test sentences have been
used to evaluate the performance of Span-
ish and Catalan FreeLing Dependency Gram-
mars (Lloberes, Castellón, and Padró, 2010).
The accuracy metrics have been provided
by the CoNLL-X Shared Task 2007 script
(Buchholz and Marsi, 2006), in which the
syntactic analysis generated by the FreeL-

ing Dependency Grammars (system output)
are compared to ParTes data sets (gold stan-
dard).

The global scores of the Spanish De-
pendency Grammar are 82.71% for LAS2,
88.38% for UAS and 85.39% for LAS2. Con-
cerning to the Catalan FreeLing Dependency
Grammar, the global results are 76.33% for
LAS, 83.38% for UAS and 80.98% LAS2.

A detailed observation of the ParTes syn-
tactic phenomena shows that FreeLing De-
pendency Grammars recognize successfuly
the root of the main clause (Spanish: 96.8%;
Catalan: 85.86%). On the other hand, sub-
ordinate clause recognition is not perfomed
as precise as main clause recognition (Span-
ish: 11%; Catalan: 20%) because there are
some limitations to determine the boundaries
of the clause, and the node where it should
be attached to.

Noun phrase is one of the most stable
phrases because it is formed and attached
right most of times (Spanish: 83%-100%;
Catalan: 62%-100%). On the contrary,
prepositional phrase is very unstable (Span-
ish: 66%; Catalan: 49%) because the current
version of the grammars deals with this syn-
tactic phenomenon shallowly.

This evaluation has allowed to determine
which FreeLing Dependency Grammars syn-
tactic phenomena are also covered in ParTes
(coverage), how these syntactic phenomena
are performed (accuracy) and why these phe-
nomena are performed right/wrong (qualita-
tive analysis).

7 Conclusions

The resource presented in this paper is the
first test suite in Spanish and Catalan for
parsing evaluation. ParTes has been de-

2Labeled Attachment Score (LAS): the percentage
of tokens with correct head and syntactic function
label; Unlabeled Attachment Score (UAS): the per-
centage of tokens with correct head; Label Accuracy
Score (LAS2): the percentage of tokens with correct
syntactic function label.

ParTes. Test Suite for Parsing Evaluation

93



1 Habrán haber VAIF3P0 _ _ 2 aux
2 vendido vender VMP00SM _ _ 0 top
3 la el DA0FS0 _ _ 4 espec
4 casa casa NCFS000 _ _ 2 dobj
5 . . Fp _ _ 2 term

Figure 3: Annotation of the sentence ‘Habrán vendido la casa’ (‘[They] will have sold the house’)

signed to evaluate qualitatively the accuracy
of parsers.

This test suite has been built following the
main trends in test suite design. However, it
also adds some new functionalities. ParTes
has been conceptualized as a complex struc-
tured test suite where every test case is clas-
sified in a hierarchy of syntactic phenomena.
Furthermore, it is exhaustive, but exhaus-
tiveness of syntactic phenomena is defined in
this resource as representativity in corpora
and descriptive grammars.

Despite the fact that ParTes is a polyhe-
dral test suite based on the notions of struc-
ture and order, there are more foundations in
Syntax, such as syntactic functions that cur-
rently are being included to make ParTes a
more robust resource and to allow more pre-
cise evaluation tasks.

In addition, the current ParTes version
contains the test data set annotated with
syntactic dependencies. Future versions of
ParTes may be distributed with other gram-
matical formalisms (e.g. constituents) in or-
der to open ParTes to more parsing evalua-
tion tasks.

References

Bosque, I. and V. Demonte. 1999. Gramática
Descriptiva de la Lengua Española. Es-
pasa Calpe, Madrid.

Buchholz, S. and E. Marsi. 2006. CoNLL-X
Shared Task on Multilingual Dependency
Parsing. In Proceedings of the Tenth Con-
ference on Computational Natural Lan-
guage Learning, pages 149–164.

EAGLES. 1994. Draft Interim Report EA-
GLES. Technical report.

Fernández, A. and G. Vàzquez. 2012.
Análisis cuantitativo del corpus SenSem.
In I. Elorza, O. Carbonell i Cortés, R. Al-
barrán, B. Garćıa Riaza, and M. Pérez-
Veneros, editors, Empiricism and Ana-
lytical Tools For 21st Century Applied
Linguistics. Ediciones Universidad Sala-
manca, pages 157–170.

Flickinger, D., J. Nerbonne, and I.A. Sag.
1987. Toward Evaluation of NLP Sys-
tems. Technical report, Hewlett Packard
Laboratories, Cambridge, England.

Lehmann, S., S. Oepen, S. Regnier-Prost,
K. Netter, V. Lux, J. Klein, K. Falkedal,
F. Fouvy, D. Estival, E. Dauphin,
H. Compagnion, J. Baur, L. Balkan, and
D. Arnold. 1996. TSNLP – Test Suites for
Natural Language Processing. In Proceed-
ings of the 16th Conference on Computa-
tional Linguistics, volume 2, pages 711–
716.

Lloberes, M., I. Castellón, and L. Padró.
2010. Spanish FreeLing Dependency
Grammar. In Proceedings of the Sev-
enth International Conference on Lan-
guage Resources and Evaluation, pages
693–699.

McEnery, T. and A. Wilson. 1996. Corpus
Linguistics. Edinburgh University Press,
Edinburgh.

Peñas, A., R. Álvaro, and F. Verdejo.
2006. SPARTE, a Test Suite for Recog-
nising Textual Entailment in Spanish.
In Alexander Gelbukh, editor, Compu-
tational Linguistics and Intelligent Text
Processing, volume 3878 of Lecture Notes
in Computer Science. Springer, Berlin
Heidelberg, pages 275–286.

Solà, J., M.R. Lloret, J. Mascaró, and
M. Pérez-Saldanya. 2002. Gramàtica
del Català Contemporani. Empúries,
Barcelona.

Taulé, M., M.A. Mart́ı, and M. Recasens.
2008. AnCora: Multi level annotated cor-
pora for Catalan and Spanish. In 6th In-
ternational Conference on Language Re-
sources and Evaluation, pages 96–101.

Marina Lloberes, Irene Castellón, Lluís Padró, Edgar Gonzàlez

94




