























































A new grammatical formalism to solve ellipsis: 


Boosting Terminology Extraction through Crosslingual Resources

Mejora de la extracción de terminología usando recursos translingües

Sergio Cajal, Horacio Rodríguez
Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya, TALP Research Center

Jordi Girona Salgado 1-3 edifici Omega D-316
Campus Nord 08034 Barcelona (Spain)
scajal@gmail.com, horacio@lsi.upc.edu

Resumen: La  extracción  de  terminología  es  una  tarea  de  procesamiento  de  la  lengua
sumamente importante y aplicable en numerosas áreas. La tarea se ha abordado desde múltiples
perspectivas y utilizando técnicas diversas. También se han propuesto sistemas independientes
de la lengua y del dominio. La contribución de este artículo se centra en las mejoras que los
sistemas  de  extracción  de  terminología  pueden  lograr  utilizando  recursos  translingües,  y
concretamente la Wikipedia y en el uso de una variante de PageRank para valorar los candidatos
a término.
Palabras  clave: Extracción  de  terminología.  Procesamiento  translingüe  de  la  lengua.
Wikipedia, PageRank

Abstract:  Terminology  Extraction  is  an  important  Natural  Language  Processing  task  with
multiple applications in many areas. The task has been approached from different points of view
using different techniques. Language and domain independent systems have been proposed as
well. Our contribution in this paper focuses on the improvements on Terminology Extraction
using  crosslingual  resources  and specifically  the  Wikipedia  and on  the  use  of  a  variant  of
PageRank for scoring the candidate terms.
Keywords: Terminology Extraction, Wikipedia, crosslingual NLP, PageRank

1 Introduction

Terminology Extraction is an important Natural
Language Processing,  NLP, task with multiple
applications in many areas. Domain terms are a
useful mean for tuning both resources and NLP
processors to domain specific tasks. The task is
important and useful but it is also challenging.
In (Krauthammer, Nenadic, 2004), it has been
said  that  “terms  identification  has  been
recognized  as  the  current  bottleneck  in  text
mining  and  therefore  an  important  research
topic in NLP”. 

Terms  are  usually  defined  as  lexical  units
that designate concepts in a restricted domain.
Term  extraction  (or  detection)  is  difficult
because there is no formal difference between a
term  and  a  non  terminological  unit  of  the
language.  Furthermore,  the  frontier  between
terminological and general units is not always

clear and the belonging to a domain is more a
fuzzy than a rigid function. (Hartmann, Szarvas
and Gurevych, 2012) present the lexical units in
a two dimensional space where  x axe refers to
domainhood, represented as a continuous, and y
axe  to  constituency of  the  linguistic  unit,  i.e.
single words and multiword expressions, MWE,
(2-grams, 3-grams, etc.). Several types of MWE
can  be  considered  such  as  idioms,  “kick  the
bucket”, particle verbs, “fall off”, collocations,
“shake hands”, Named Entities, “Los Angeles”,
compound nouns, “car park”,  some of which
are compositional and other not. Obviously not
all the  MWE are terminological and not all the
terms are MWE1. 

In this paper we prefer to refer to terms as
term candidates (TC). As pointed out above, TC

1 Many authors claim that most terms are MWE-
From our experience we think that almost half of the
TC extracted  are single words.

Procesamiento del Lenguaje Natural, Revista nº 53, septiembre de 2014, pp 129-136 recibido 14-04-14 revisado 15-07-14 aceptado 15-07-14

ISSN 1135-5948 © 2014 Sociedad Española para el Procesamiento del Lenguaje Natural



can be atomic lexical units or  MWE composed
by  atomic  units  (usually  named  basic
components  of  the  term).  There  are  some
properties  that  must  hold  for  a  given  TC in
order to be considered a term: i)  unithood,  ii)
termhood and iii) specialized usage.  Unithood
refers to the internal coherence of a unit: Only
some  sequences  of  POS  tags  can  produce  a
valid term, N (e.g. “Hepatology” in the Medical
domain),  NN  (e.g.  “Blood  test”),  JN  (e.g.
“Nicotinic  antagonist”),  etc.  and  these
combinations  are  highly language dependent),
termhood to  the  degree  a  TC is  related  to  a
domain-specific concept and specialized usage
(general  language versus  specialized domain).
It is clear that measuring such properties is not
an  easy  task.  They  can  only  be  measured
indirectly by means of other properties easier to
define and measure like frequency (of the  TC
itself,  its  basic  components  or  in  relation  to
general  domain corpus),  association measures,
syntactic  context  exploration,  highlighting
and/or  structural  properties,  position  in  an
ontology, etc. 

We present in this paper a term ranker aimed
to extract a list of  TC sorted by termhood. Our
claim is that the system is language and domain
independent.  In  fact  nothing  in  our  approach
depends  on  the  language  or  the  domain.  The
experiments  and evaluation  are  carried out  in
two  domains,  medicine and  finance and  four
languages:  English,  Spanish,  Catalan,  and
Arabic.

Our approach is based on extracting for each
domain  the  TC  corresponding  to  all  the
languages  simultaneously,  in  a  way  that  the
terms extracted for a language can reinforce the
corresponding to the other languages. As unique
knowledge sources we use the wikipedias of the
involved languages. 

Following  this  introduction,  the  paper  is
organized as follows. In section 2 we describe
some recent work done in this area. Section 3
describes the methodology that we use to obtain
new  terms  while  section  4  describes  the
experiments  carried  out  as  well  as  its
evaluation.  Finally,  in  section  5,  we  present
some  conclusions  and  directions  for  future
work.

2 Related work

Term extraction,  TE,   and related tasks (Term
ranking,  Named  Entity  Recognition,  MWE
extraction,  lexicon  and  ontology  building,

multilingual lexical extraction, etc.) have been
approached  typically  using  linguistic
knowledge, as in (Heidet al, 1996), or statistical
strategies,  such  as  ANA (Enguehard,  Pantera,
1994),  with  results  not  fully  satisfactory,  see
(Cabré, Estopà, Vivaldi,  2001) and (Pazienza.
Pennacchiotti,  Zanzotto,  2005).  Also,  TE
systems  often  favor  recall  over  precision
resulting in a large number of  TC that have to
be manually checked and cleaned.

Some  approaches  combine  both  linguistic
knowledge  and  Statistics,  such  as  TermoStat
(Drouin,  2003),  or  (Frantzi,  Ananiadou  and
Tsujii, 2009),  obtaining clear improvement. A
common  limitation  of  most  extractors  is  that
they do not use semantic knowledge, therefore
their accuracy is limited. Notable exceptions are
Metamap  (Aronson,  Lang,  2010)  and  YATE
(Vivaldi, 2001). 

Wikipedia2,  WP,  is  by  far  the  largest
encyclopedia  in  existence  with  more  than  32
million  articles  contributed  by  thousands  of
volunteers.  WP experiments  an  explosive
growing. There are versions of WP in more than
300 languages although the coverage (number
of articles and average size of each article) is
very irregular. For the languages covered by the
experiments  reported  here  the  size  of  the
corresponding  WPs are  4,481,977  pages  in
English,  1,091,299  in  Spanish,  425,012  in
Catalan, and  269,331 in Arabic. A lot of work
has been performed for using this resource in a
variety  of  ways.  See  (Medelyan  et  al,  2009)
and  (Gabrilovich,  Markovitch,  2009)  for
excellent surveys. 

WP has been,  from the very beginning,  an
excellent source of terminological information.
(Hartmann,  Szarvas  and  Gurevych,  2012)
present a good survey of main approaches, see
also (Sabbah, Abuzir, 2005). Both the structure
of  WP articles  (infoboxes,  categories,  redirect
pages,  input,  output,  and  interlingual  links,
disambiguation  pages,  etc.)  and  their  content
have been used for  TE.  Figure 1 presents the
bi-graph  structure  of  WP.  This  bi-graph
structure  is  far  to  be  safe.  Not  always  the
category links denote belonging of the article to
the category; the link can be used to many other
purposes. The same problem occurs in the case
of  links  between categories,  not  always  these
links denote hyperonymy/hyponymy and so the
structure shown in the left of figure 1 is not a
real taxonomy. Even worse is the case of inter-

2 https://www.wikipedia.org/

Sergio Cajal, Horacio Rodríguez

130



page links  where the  semantics  of  the  link is
absolutely unknown. 

Figure 1: The graph structure of Wikipedia

Nakayama and colleagues,  (Erdmann et al,
2008),  and  (Erdmann  et  al,  2009)  face  the
problem  of  bilingual  terminology  extraction
mainly using the interlingual links of WP, while
(Sadat, 2011) uses, as well, the context of words
and the Wikitionary3. Gurevych and collegues,
(Wolf, Gurevych, 2010), (Niemann, Gurevych,
2011, map WP and WordNet4, WN. Vivaldi and
Rodríguez  propose  in  (Vivaldi,   Rodríguez,
2011) to use  WP for extracting and evaluating
term candidates in the medical domain,  and in
(Vivaldi,   Rodríguez,  2012) propose to obtain
lists  of  terms  a  multilingual/multidomain
setting. (Alkhalifa, Rodríguez, 2010)  use  WP
for enriching the Arabic WordNet with NE. The
approaches  more  related  to  ours  are  those  of
Vivaldi and Rodríguez, both use WP categories
and  pages  and  their  relations  as  knowledge
sources, but there are clear differences: our use
of  interlingual  links  and  the  way  of  scoring
candidates by means of the modified PageRank
algorithm.  

3 Our approach

The  global  architecture  of  our  approach  is
displayed in Figure 2. As we can see it consists
of  6  steps  that  are  applied  for  each  of  the
domains as detailed below. Let d be the domain
considered  (as  we  will  see  in  Section  4  our
experiments  and evaluation have been carried
out  for  medicine  and  finance).  We will  note
WPl the wikipedia for language l (l ranging on
the four  languages considered,  i.e.  en,  sp,  ca,
ar).

3 http://www.wiktionary.org/
4 http://wordnet.princeton.edu/

Figure 2: Architecture of our approach

As  a  preparatory  step  we  downloaded  the
required WPs from the WP dumps site5 and then
we  used  the  JWLP6 toolbox,  (Zesch,  Müller,
Gurevych,  2008)  for  obtaining  a  MYSQL
representation of the  WPs and the interlingual
links.  We then looked for the Top of the  WP
category  graph (topCat),  that  for  English  WP
corresponds  to  “Articles”7.  Further  on  we
enriched the WP category graph with the depth
respect to topCat of all the categories. We have
also downloaded the tables corresponding to the
interlingual links. Although these links present
problems  of  lack  of  reciprocity  and
inconsistency,  see  (De  Melo,  Weikum,  2010)
for a method of facing these problems, we have
made  no  attempt  to  face  them  and  we  have
accepted all the links as correct. 

In  step 1  the  top  category  of  domain  d is
looked for  in  WPen.  Let  topCaDomd  be this
category. Once located topCaDomd for English,
the top categories  for  the  other languages are
obtained through the corresponding interlingual
links.  This  is  the  only  step  requiring  a  small
amount of human intervention. 

In  step  2,  the  initial  set  of  categories  is
obtained for each language  l by navigating top
down,  from  the  top  category,  through
category/category links,  the category graph of
WPl. Although ideally the WP category graph is
a  DAG,  it  is  not  really  the  case  because  two
problems: i) the existence of cycles and ii) the
presence of backward links. 

Both  problems  have  the  same  origin:  the
way  of  building  the  resource  by  lots  of
volunteers working independently. Many cycles

5 http://dumps.wikimedia.org/
6 http://www.ukp.tu-darmstadt.de/software/jwpl/
7 In fact the real top category is “Contents”, we

have used “Articles” instead as topCat for avoiding
that  the shortest  paths  to  the top traverse  meta-
categories. 

WP categories WP pages

A B

C
D E

F

G

P1

P2

P3

Redirection
table

……

…
…

…

…

… …

Disambiguation
table

WP categories WP pages

A B

C
D E

F

G

P1

P2

P3

Redirection
table

……

…
…

…

…

… …

Disambiguation
table

Boosting Terminology Extraction through Crosslingual Resources

131



occur  in  WK,  an  example,  from  the  Spanish
WP, is  Drogas  →  Drogas  y  Derecho  →
Narcotráfico → Drogas.  Detecting cycles and
removing them is quite straightforward.

The  second  problem  is  more  serious  and
difficult  to  face.  When working  with  English
WP we  discovered  that  for  the  domain
Medicine 90% of the whole WP category graph
was collected as descendants of the domain top
category. Consider the following example, from
English  WP:  Volcanology  →  Volcanoes  →
Volcanic islands → Iceland. In this case going
Top Down from the category Volcanology a lot
of  categories  related  to  Iceland,  but  with  no
relation with Volcanology  will be collected. For
facing the second problem (backward links) we
can take profit of the following information: 

 The  relative  depth  of  each  category  c
regarding  topCaDomd, i.e, the length of the
shortest path from c to  topCaDomd.

 The  absolute  depth  of  c,  computed  in  the
preparatory  step,  i.e,  the  length  of  the
shortest path from c to topCat.

 The  absolute  depths  of  topCat and
topCaDomd.

 The absolute depth of the parent of  c in the
dop down navigation.

We have experimented with several filtering
mechanisms,  from  the  very  simplest  one,
pruning the current branch when the depth of c
is  lower than the depth of the parent  of  c,  to
others  more sophisticated.  Finally  we decided
to apply the following filtering: c is pruned, and
not further expanded, if the relative depth of  c
is  greater  than  the  difference  between  the
absolute depths of topCat and topCaDomd plus
1. 

Applying  this  filtering  mechanism resulted
in reducing the set of involved categories (more
than 900,000 without filtering) to a manageable
number of 5,874 categories for English.

In step 3 we build the initial  set  of pages,
collecting for each category in the set of initial
categories the corresponding pages through the
category/page  links.  The  process  is,  so,  quite
straightforward.  A simple  filtering  mechanism
is performed for removing Named Entities and
not content pages.

In step 4, from the two sets built in step 2
and 3 a graph representing the whole set of TC
for the domain  d and for all  the languages is
built. Figure 3 presents an excerpt of this graph.

The nodes of  the  graph correspond to all  the
pages and categories selected in steps 2 and 3
for  all  the  involved  languages.  The  edges,
which   are  directional,  correspond  to  all  the
links  considered  (category  category,
category  page,  page  category,  page
page and interlingual links). 

Figure 3: Graph representation of TC

In step 5 the nodes of the graph of  TC  are
scored.  For  doing  so  we  use  an  algorithm
inspired  in  Topic-Sensitive  PageRank,
(Haveliwala.  2002),  in  turn  based  on  the
original  PageRank  algorithm,  (Page,  Brin,
1998). 

The  original  PageRank  algorithm is  based
on a scoring mechanism that allows for a given
node upgrading its  score accordingly with the
scores of its incident nodes. So in this setting all
the incident edges are equally weighted and the
new score is only affected by the old one and
the scores of the incident nodes. As is discussed
en section  4,  this  setting  does  not  work  very
well and we looked for some form of weighting
of  the  edges,  and  not  only  of  the  nodes  for
computing the final score of a node. 

In the case of nodes corresponding to pages
there  are  three  types  of  incident  edges  (for
nodes corresponding to categories the formulas
are similar):

 il: inlinks, links from other pages.
 cp: links from the categories the page 

belongs to.
 ll: langlinks,  links from pages in other 

languages

Sergio Cajal, Horacio Rodríguez

132



The score of a page is computed by adding
three weighted addends,  one for each type of
edge. The formula applied is the following:

where   PR(i) is the PageRank score of node  i,
Ft are weights of edges of type  t (il, cp, or  ll),
and L(n)  are normalizing factors for pages or
categories, computed as:

for pages and similarly for categories.
Finally,  in  step  6  the  set  of  nodes

corresponding to  each language are  sorted by
descendent score giving the final result of the
system.  No  distinction  is  made  in  this  sorted
sequence  between  TC corresponding  to
categories and these corresponding to pages.

4 Experiments and evaluation

4.1 Initial Settings

We  performed  some  initial  experiments  for
setting  the  parameters  Ft defined  in  step  5.
Finally we set  Fll and  Fcp  to 100 and the other
parameters to 1.  For evaluating these settings
we limited ourselves to English and Spanish in
the  medical  domain  for  which  a  golden
repository of terms, SNOMED8, is available. We
consider four scenarios: i) all_zeroes, where no
scoring procedure is  used,  ii)  all_ones,  where
the standard PageRank algorithm is applied, iii)
no_langlinks,  where  interlingual  links  weights
are set to zero, i.e. the TC for each language are
extracted  independently,  and,  iv)  best,  where
the  setting  described  above  was  applied.  The
results are presented in Figures 4 , for English,
and  5,  for  Spanish.  All  PageRank based
scenarios  clearly  outperform  the  all_zeroes
baseline.  The  differences  between  these
scenarios are small for English but significant
for Spanish where best outperforms clearly the
others.

4.2 Experiments

We applied the procedure described in section 3
to the two domains and 4 languages using the
setting of section 4.1. The results are presented
in Table 1.

8  http://www.ihtsdo.org/

Figure 4: Initial experiments for English

Figure 5: Initial experiments for Spanish

Language Medicine Finance
English 67,448 8,711
Spanish 8,872 1,310
Catalan 2,827 674
Arabic 7,318 1,557

Table 1: Overall results of our experiments

The  figures  in  Table  1  are  not  very
informative. Being our system a ranker what is
important  is  accepting  as  true  terms  the  best
ranked until some threshold.  We depict, so, in
Figures 6 (for medicine) and 7 (for finance) the
distribution  of  TC in  a  coverage/score  plots9.
Content  of  these  Figures  and  Table  1  are
somewhat complementary.

9 Note that, contrary to Figures 4 and 5 where
ordinates  display  precision,  in  this  case  ordinate
display scores, i.e. PR values.

Boosting Terminology Extraction through Crosslingual Resources

133



Figure 6: Results for medicine

Figure 7: Results for finance

4.3 Evaluation

Evaluation of  our  results  is  not  easy. For  the
pairs  medicine/English  and  medicine/Spanish
we can use as golden repository SNOMED and
use as evaluation the results of the best curve in
Figures  4  and  5.  We  have  measured  the
correlation between precision in Figures 4 and 5
and score in Figure 6. Pearson’s coefficient is
0.93 for Spanish and 0.98 for English, so we are
pretty  confident  on  our  results  for  these  two
pairs.  However,  as  pointed  out  in  (Vivaldi,
Rodríguez,  2012),  SNOMED is  far  to  be  a
reliable reference, for English only 62% of the
correct  TC were  found  in  SNOMED.  So  the
figures in Figures 4 and 5 can be considered a
lower bound of the precision. For measuring a
more  accurate  value  we  performed  an
additional manual validation10 over the  TC not
found in  SNOMED corresponding to  the  best
20% ranked ones.  Figure 8 compares  for this
rank  interval  the  precisions  computed  against
SNOMED golden  and  those  that  combines  it

10 Performed by the two authors independently,
followed  by  a  discussion  on  the  cases  with  no
agreement. 

with  the  manual  evaluation.  At  can  be  seen,
results  improvement  is  between  20  and  30
points. 

Figure  8:  Comparison  of  SNOMED based
and manual evaluation for Spanish

Obviously all these evaluations are in some
cases partial and in other cases indirect. A point
to be assessed is whether the evaluation results
could be extrapolated to other domains and/or
languages.  For  having  some  insights  we
computed the Pearson’s correlation coefficient
between the  non-cumulated  ranked scores  for
the  different  languages.  Table  2  shows  the
results for  medicine.  A very similar  result  has
been obtained for  finance.  The high values of
these  coefficients  seem  to  support  out
hypothesis.  The  score  distribution  correlates
well  between  all  the  languages  for  all  the
domains.  At  the  beginning of  this  section  we
saw  that  for  medicine and  for  the  languages
English  and  Spanish  scores  and  precision
correlated  well  too.  So  our  guess  is  that  the
evaluation based on  SNOMED for English and
Spanish and the manual one for a segment of
Spanish  can  be  likely  been  extended  to  the
other cases.

A  comparison  with  other  systems  is  not
possible  globally  but  we  can  perform  some
partial  and  indirect  comparisons  with  the
system  closest  to  ours’,  (Vivaldi,  Rodríguez,
2012).  In  this  work,  applied  to  Spanish  and
English,  one  of  the  domains  included  is
medicine  and SNOMED is used for evaluation.
The main differences with ours’ are that i) it is a
term  extractor,  not  a  ranker  and,  ii)  the
evaluation is performed over terms belonging to
WordNet. So the comparison has to be indirect.
For the level of precision reported there, 0.2 for
English,  0.4  for  Spanish,  the  corresponding
coverage in Figures 4 and 5 are 0.8 and 0.9. So,
the number of terms we extract are 53,950 and

Sergio Cajal, Horacio Rodríguez

134



7,985 that clearly outperform largely the 21,073
and 4,083 reported there.

en es ca ar
en 1.0 0.996 0.990 0.992
es 0.996 1.0 0.995 0.994
ca 0.990 0.995 1.0 0.982
ar 0.992 0.994 0.982 1.0

Table 2: Correlations between non-cumulated
ranked scores for the different languages

5 Conclusions and Future work

We have presented a terminology ranker, i.e. a
system that provides a ranked list of terms for a
given  domain  and  language.  The  system  is
domain and language independent and uses as
unique  Knowledge  Source  the  Wikipedia
versions of the involved languages. The system
proceeds  in  a  cross-lingual  way  using  for
scoring a variant of the well-known  PageRank
algorithm.

We  have  applied  the  system  to  four
languages  and  two  domains.  The  evaluation,
though  not  complete,  and  somehow  indirect,
and  the  comparison  with  a  recent  system
closely related to ours’, at least at the level of
the  source,  shows  excellent  results  clearly
outperforming  the  subjects  of  ours
comparisons.

Future  work  includes  i)  the  application  of
the system to other  domains and,  possibly, to
other languages and, ii) the improvement of the
evaluation  setting  applying  the  system  to
domains for which terminology exists.

No  attempt  has  been  made  to  face  the
reciprocity  and  inconsistency  of  interlingual
links.  We plan  in  the  near  future  to  analyze
these  issues  and  to  try  to  obtain  aligned
collections of multilingual terminologies. 

The software and datasets described in this
paper  will  be  made  publicly  available  in  the
near future through github. 

Acknowledgements

The research described in this article has been
partially  funded  by  Spanish  MINECO  in  the
framework  of  project  SKATER:  Scenario
Knowledge  Acquisition  by  Textual  Reading
(TIN2012-38584-C06-01). 

We  are  in  debt  with  three  anonymous
reviewers  whose  advices  and  comments  have
contributed to a clear improvement of the paper.

References

Aronson,  A.,  Lang,  F.,  2010.  An overview of
MetaMap: historical  perspective and recent
advances. JAMIA 2010 17:229-236.

Cabré,  M.T.,  Estopà,  R.,  Vivaldi,  J.,  2001.
Automatic  term  detection.  A  review  of
current  systems.  Recent  Advances  in
Computational Terminology 2:53-87.

Drouin,  P.,  2003.  Term  extraction  using  non-
technical corpora as a point of leverage. Ter-
minology 9(1):99-115.

Enguehard,  C.,  Pantera,  L.,  1994.  Automatic
Natural  Acquisition  of  a  Terminology.
Journal of Quantitative Linguistics 2(1):27-
32.

Erdmann, M., Nakayama, K., Hara, T., Nishio,
S.,  2009.  Improving  the  extraction  of
bilingual  terminology  from  Wikipedia.
TOMCCAP 5(4).

Erdmann, M., Nakayama, K., Hara, T., Nishio,
S.,  2008.  An  Approach  for  Extracting
Bilingual  Terminology  from  Wikipedia.
DASFAA 2008 380-392.

Frantzi,  K.T.,  Ananiadou,  S.,  Tsujii,  J.,  2009.
The C-value/NC-value Method of Automatic
Recognition for Multi-word Terms.  Lecture
Notes in Computer Science  1513:585-604.

Gabrilovich,  E.,  Markovitch,  S.,  2009.
Wikipedia-based Semantic Interpretation for
Natural  Language  Processing.  Journal  of
Artificial Intelligence Research 34:443-498. 

Hartmann, S., Szarvas, G., Gurevych, I., 2012.
Mining  Multiword  Terms  from  Wikipedia.
M.T.  Pazienza  and  A.  Stellato:  Semi-
Automatic  Ontology  Development:
Processes and Resources 226-258.

Haveliwala,  T.H.,  2002.  Topic-sensitive
PageRank.  Proceedings  of  the  11th
international conference on World Wide Web
(WWW '02) 517-526. 

Heid,  U.,  Jauß,  S.,  Krüger, K.,  Hohmann,  A.,
1996.  Term  extraction  with  standard  tools
for  corpus  exploration.  Experience  from
German.  Proceedings  of  Terminology  and
Knowledge Engineering (TKE'96).

Boosting Terminology Extraction through Crosslingual Resources

135

http://nlp.lsi.upc.edu/skater


Alkhalifa,  M.,  Rodríguez,  H.,  2010.
Automatically  Extending  Named  Entities
coverage  of  Arabic  WordNet  using
Wikipedia.  International  Journal  on
Information  and  Communication
Technologies 3(3).

Krauthammer,  M.I.,  Nenadic,  G.,  2004.  Term
identification  in  the  biomedical  literature.
Journal of Biomed Inform 37(6):512-26.

Medelyan,  O.,  Milne,  D.N.,  Legg,  C.,  Witten,
I.H., 2009. Mining meaning from Wikipedia.
International  Journal  of  Human-Computer
Studies, 67(9):716-754.

De Melo, G., Weikum, G., 2009. Untangling the
Cross-Lingual Link Structure of Wikipedia,
48th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics.

Niemann, E., Gurevych, I., 2011. The People’s
Web  meets  Linguistic  Knowledge:
Automatic  Sense  Alignment  of  Wikipedia
and  WordNet}.  Proceedings  of  the  9th
International Conference on Computational
Semantics 205-214.

Page,  L.,  Brin,  S.,  1998.  The  anatomy  of  a
large-scale hypertextual web search engine.
Proceedings  of  the  Seventh  International
Web Conference (WWW-98).

Pazienza,  M.T.,  Pennacchiotti,  M.,  Zanzotto,
F.M.,  2005.  Terminology  Extraction:  An
Analysis  of  Linguistic  and  Statistical
Approaches.  Studies  in  Fuzziness  and Soft
Computing 185:255-279.

Sabbah,  Y.W.,  Abuzir,  Y.,  2005.   Automatic
Term  Extraction  Using  Statistical
Techniques- A Comparative In-Depth Study
and Application. Proceedings of ACIT'200.

Sadat,  F.,  2011.  Extracting  the  multilingual
terminology  from  a  web-based
encyclopedia. RCIS 2011 1-5.

Vivaldi,  J.,  2001.  Extracción  de  candidatos  a
término  mediante  combinación  de
estrategias  heterogéneas.  PhD  Thesis,
Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya.

Vivaldi, J., Rodríguez, H., 2008.  Evaluation of
terms  and  term  extraction  systems.  A
practical  approach.  Terminology 13(2):225-
248. John Benjamins.

Vivaldi,  J.,  Rodríguez,  H.,  2011.  Using
Wikipedia  for  term  extraction  in  the
biomedical  domain:  first  experience.

Procesamiento  del  Lenguaje  Natural
45:251-254.

Vivaldi,  J.,  Rodríguez,  H.,  2012.  Using
Wikipedia for Domain Terms Extraction. In
Gornostay,  T.  (ed.)  Proceedings  of  CHAT
2012: The 2nd Workshop on the Creation,
Harmonization  and  Application  of
Terminology  Resources:  co-located  with
TKE 2012.

Wolf,  E.,  Gurevych,  I.,  2010.  Aligning  Sense
Inventories  in  Wikipedia  and  WordNet.
Proceedings  of  the  First  Workshop  on
Automated  Knowledge  Base  Construction
24-28. 

Zesch,  T.,  Müller,  C.,  Gurevych,  I.,  2008.
Extracting  Lexical  Semantic  Knowledge
from  Wikipedia  and  Wiktionary.  LREC
2008:  Proceedings  of  the  Conference  on
Language Resources and Evaluation 1646-
1652.

Sergio Cajal, Horacio Rodríguez

136


	1 Introduction
	2 Related work
	3 Our approach
	4 Experiments and evaluation
	4.1 Initial Settings
	4.2 Experiments
	4.3 Evaluation

	5 Conclusions and Future work
	Acknowledgements



