








































Noname manuscript No.
(will be inserted by the editor)

Intelligent Data Analysis Approaches to Churn as a Business
Problem: a Survey

David L. Garćıa · Àngela Nebot · Alfredo Vellido

Received: date / Accepted: date

Abstract Globalization processes and market deregulation policies are rapidly changing the com-
petitive environments of many economic sectors. The appearance of new competitors and tech-
nologies leads to an increase in competition and, with it, a growing preoccupation among service
providing companies with creating stronger customer bonds. In this context, anticipating the cus-
tomer’s intention to abandon the provider, a phenomenon known as churn, becomes a competitive
advantage. Such anticipation can be the result of the correct application of information-based
knowledge extraction in the form of business analytics. In particular, the use of intelligent data
analysis, or data mining, for the analysis of market surveyed information can be of great assistance
to churn management. In this paper, we provide a detailed survey of recent applications of business
analytics to churn, with a focus on computational intelligence methods. This is preceded by an
in-depth discussion of churn within the context of customer continuity management. The survey is
structured according to the stages identified as basic for the building of the predictive models of
churn, as well as according to the different types of predictive methods employed and the business
areas of their application.

Keywords Churn analysis · intelligent data analysis · computational intelligence · customer
continuity management · literature survey

This research was partially supported by Spanish MINECO TIN2012-31377 research project.

David L. Garćıa
Department of Computer Science, Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya, Spain
Tel.: +34-93-4137796
Fax: +34-93-4137833

Àngela Nebot
Department of Computer Science, Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya, Spain
Tel.: +34-93-4137783
Fax: +34-93-4137833

Alfredo Vellido
Department of Computer Science, Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya, Spain
Tel.: +34-93-4137796
Fax: +34-93-4137833

montse aragues
Texto escrito a máquina
The final publication is available at Springer via http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10115-016-0995-z

montse aragues
Texto escrito a máquina

montse aragues
Texto escrito a máquina

montse aragues
Texto escrito a máquina

montse aragues
Texto escrito a máquina

montse aragues
Texto escrito a máquina



2 David L. Garćıa et al.

1 Introduction

The ongoing processes of globalization and deregulation are changing the competitive framework
in the majority of economic sectors. The appearance of new competitors and technologies entails a
sharp increase in competition. It also entails a growing preoccupation among service providing com-
panies with the creation of stronger bonds with customers in a context in which they are required
to fight over their customer portfolios in increasingly shifting markets. Many of these companies
are diverting resources away from the goal of capturing new customers and are instead focusing
on retaining the existing ones, particularly those who represent a higher return on investment. In
this context, anticipating the customer’s intention to abandon, a phenomenon also known as churn,
and facilitating the launch of retention-focused actions both may become elements of competitive
advantage.

Data mining (DM) was originally conceived as a process for business analytics, organized as a
succession of stages defined according to a methodology [85]. Intelligent data analysis (IDA), in the
form of pattern recognition (PR), machine learning (ML), statistics and related approaches, remains
at the core of DM. IDA approaches are key in several stages of DM, including data exploration for
knowledge discovery [85, 25] and data modelling for tasks of prediction, classification, segmentation,
or rule extraction, amongst others.

Despite the fact that DM has outgrown its original purpose, IDA techniques have proven useful
over de last decades in their application to business problems [96, 64]. We should therefore expect
these techniques, applied to market surveyed information, which is often readily available for service
providing companies, to be of assistance in churn management processes.

This paper aims to provide the reader, be it a business analyst or a data scientist, with a
thorough survey and review of churn analysis applications of IDA techniques reported in recent
academic literature.

In Section 2, we first describe the concept of churn or supplier abandonment by the customer as
a business problem in some detail. In order to do so, we discuss business concepts such as customer
life-cycle, customer loyalty and customer continuity management.

Section 3 shifts the focus of attention to different aspects of the use of IDA techniques in
churn management. We explore them from the point of view of DM, differentiating the consecutive
stages of the mining process for building predictive models of abandonment, which include: data
gathering and understanding, feature selection, design and development of the predictive model,
and validation and evaluation of this model.

This is followed by a compilation of the reviewed literature in the form of tables, according to
two main criteria: the predictive method used in the application and the business area to which
churn analysis is applied. Then, a discussion of the surveyed studies is provided in Section 4. It is
again structured according to the four stages of the mining process for building predictive models
of abandonment. All stages are illustrated and discussed using examples from recent churn analysis
literature. General patterns for each of the stages are commented and some recommendations, both
general and business area-specific, are made. The paper wraps up with some concluding remarks.

2 Churn as a business problem

In the scenario of global competitive pressure described in the introduction, the possibilities of
commercial development and, consequently, of adding value to a company require prolonging the
useful life of its existing customers and increasing their average consumption. The management of
the different commercial development alternatives in mature markets is illustrated in Figure 1.

Customer retention requires understanding how customer loyalty construction mechanisms
work, in order to anticipate customers’ intention to abandon and facilitate the launch of retention-
focused actions as a result. This understanding enables defensive commercial strategies oriented to



Intelligent Data Analysis Approaches to Churn as a Business Problem: a Survey 3

retain and create loyalty bonds in existing customers, an approach that is likely to be more effective
and less costly than an aggressive strategy to expand the overall size of the market, attracting po-
tential customers. The cost of losing profitable customers to fiercely competitive markets is making
many companies shift their target from the massive capture of new customers to the preservation
of existing ones.

However, this struggle for achieving customer loyalty collides with the grinding exposure to
advertised offers from competitors that customers face on a regular basis. Furthermore, customers’
market awareness is constantly on the increase and, as a result, so are their expectations.

Companies have their customers as their main assets and they are responsible for the definition
and implementation of policies that allow them to reach and prolong their maximum commercial
development potential. In other words, they must prolong the life expectancy of their customer
portfolio as much as possible, ensuring its adequate development in terms of value through the
implementation of suitable commercial actions for each one of the stages of their life-cycle1 (See an
illustration of the stages of a customer life-cycle in Figure 2). Despite the fact that both dimensions
in this figure: generated value and time of customer-company relationship, are strongly related in
a unique Customer Value Management model, we understand that an appropriate development of
customer’s commercial value needs to guarantee its continuity first [27], although it is equally true
that a proactive customer’s value development has a positive influence on its relationship with the
company: high purchase and high value customers use to have a longer lifetime value. Thereby,
increasing customer’s life expectancy should be the primary aim that determines and guides any
posterior commercial action of value development.

The final objective is self-explanatory: the commercial relationship with customers -the valuable
ones- must be kept and reinforced. For that purpose, companies should build strong customer
defection-avoiding schemes. This is not to say that unprofitable customers should not be cared for.
As supported by investigations in [35], companies should be aware of the fact that the abandonment
of unprofitable customers by the supplier might lead to unintended negative impacts on the loyalty
and attitudes of the retained valuable customers. As shown in this study, the increase of switching
costs and satisfaction among the latter might not be enough to compensate for those negative
impacts. Moreover, it may often be the case that the abandonment of unprofitable customers may
have a significant economic impact that should be accounted for when quantifying lifetime customer
value [36].

It should be borne in mind that companies and their customers are in a constant evolution
that may lead to natural and unpredictable disruptions in the commercial relationship (change of
home address, family life-cycle, change in interests, payment type, etc.). Thus, final success will not
be based on lengthening customers’ life-cycle in an unnatural fashion, but on ensuring that good
customers do not leave prematurely.

2.1 Customer continuity management

The creation of loyalty bonds in customers requires a systematic approach to its management. The
possible symptoms that might alert of a possible defection to the competition must be preventively
anticipated, and this requires evaluation of their evolution over time. Therefore, the adoption of a
suitable Customer Continuity Management (CCM) model [27] should make it easier for companies
to critically review all aspects that might affect the construction of true loyalty bonds with cus-
tomers, including policies for everyday management, both for the customer life-cycles and for the
predicted and declared cases of customer loss (see Figure 3).

1 Through the increase in services used (up-selling); the increase in consumption or wallet share (cross-selling);
the construction of stronger loyalty bonds; the proactive retention actions on customers who intend to leave the
actual provider; the launch of new products and services (innovation) and/or the adjustment of commercial costs,
giving each costumer as expected.



4 David L. Garćıa et al.

The level of customer bonding and, as a result, their life expectancy is intimately bound to
the level of customer satisfaction relative to the quality of the service provided by a company.
The higher the level of quality of service that customers perceive, the stronger the loyalty bonds
[20, 47, 48, 79, 83, 53]. Thus, consumers who experience high levels of satisfaction about the service
usually continue with their current provider.

However, and despite customer satisfaction having a positive influence on the level of bonding,
it does not always suffice. There are numerous situations in which better service quality does not
have a significant impact on consumer loyalty: for instance, customers that change mobile phone
operators in spite of the fact that their current provider offers greater coverage; customers that fill
up in slow petrol stations, with bad accesses and no additional services for the driver; customers
who prefer to travel with certain airlines despite the continuous delays to their flights, etc. In
consequence, there must be other factors, beyond satisfaction with service, influencing customer
loyalty.

At this point, we introduce the concept of barriers to change as a construct that should mediate
the satisfaction-loyalty relationship [20, 47, 48]. When the level of customer satisfaction with respect
to different providers is similar, the level of bonding should be expected to depend, to a large
extent, on the nature and strength of the barriers to change in place. The existing literature
usually portrays the barriers to change in a negative sense, as difficulties and burdens -emotional,
social or financial- that the customer must overcome when making the decision to change providers
[20, 47, 48, 79, 55, 28]. However, in a market place that is becoming increasingly deregulated
and competitive, the understanding of the construction of barriers to change as bureaucratic,
contractual and/or in some cases, as the result of the abuse of a dominant position, is a limited
viewpoint. Barriers such as penalties when cancelling a given service; problems in the portability
of mobile phone numbers; delays in the provision of the new service that are the fault of the old
provider: all these are actions that are becoming steadily more regulated and penalized by the
market and are not sustainable in the medium term.

To be sustainable, barriers to change must be built, like satisfaction, on customer perception.
In this way, the active development of barriers to change becomes an excellence factor, in addition
to satisfaction with the service, that is difficult to overcome by competitors in their attempt to
attract the best customers. The construction of policies and procedures that maintain and improve
excellence in both dimensions (satisfaction and barriers to change) should act as tools of prevention
that protect customers from being lured by competitors.

However, not all customers need the same level of service; nor are they all prepared to pay
the same for it, or to obtain it in the same way. Common sense tells us that it is not possible to
fulfill completely, in an increasingly heterogeneous environment, the difficult task of developing the
loyalty of all customers. For this reason, starting from the certainty that dissatisfied customers will
always exist, companies must concentrate their efforts on the development of a broad-spectrum
retention program, maintaining and improving those dimensions of the offer and barriers to change
that most and best impact on the overall bonding of customers as a group. The objective is not
to protect all customers, but rather as many of them as possible and, in particular, those who are
most valuable to a given company.

It has to be born in mind that the effect of prevention procedures is never foolproof. Over
the natural life-span of the customers, it is possible that external changes, such as the appearance
of new products, variations in competitors’ offers, technological changes; and/or internal changes
(improvement in the customer’s knowledge level or increase in his exigency, socioeconomic changes,
etc.) occur that might affect customers’ expectations and, as a result, their level of satisfaction.
Companies must watch out for these changes to adapt their policies and procedures so that they
can maintain and improve customers’ opinions about the service on offer. The process of analyzing
the dimensions with most impact on the satisfaction and the subsequent adjustment in commercial
procedures and policies should become an ongoing process over time.



Intelligent Data Analysis Approaches to Churn as a Business Problem: a Survey 5

On the other hand, and from an operational perspective, it is not possible, given the high
cost involved, to ask all customers from time to time for their opinions (even more so in the case
of companies with hundreds of thousands or even millions of active clients) on the satisfaction
perceived of the service they are being offered and/or their level of bonding. Companies must
therefore work with representative enough samples and develop, based on their analysis, appropriate
commercial policies.

Customers’ evolution must be tracked and the number of customers at risk of churning must be
estimated. That is why companies must have a reliable prediction model (adapted to the market
research and based on behavioural information systematically gathered by the company) that
allows them to identify -with enough anticipation- those clients that show symptoms of propensity
to switch service providers and, thus, launch efficient retention actions. Following with the medical
metaphor, early diagnosis of the propensity to churn will reduce considerably the aggressiveness
of the required loyalty bonding treatment and will increase the customer’s recovery possibilities.
In this context, the client’s value (understanding as client’s value the sum of his actual recurrent
value and his potential value) becomes the fundamental dimension that will determine which type
of therapy, proactive and/or reactive, should be applied at any time.

This business effort -measured in the form of discounts, benefits and privileges that are offered
to the client so that she or he will dismiss the idea of changing providers- should be balanced against
the customer’s expected value. This means that there may be clients that the company will decide
not to retain even if their intention to change is identified in advance, since the expected return on
the prolongation of their customer life does not justify the cost of the necessary commercial action.
Identical criteria can be applied when deciding recovery policies and actions for already lost clients.
Note though that, as reported in [35], careless abandonment of the less profitable customers may
lead to unexpected negative reactions from the valuable ones that companies aim to retain.

3 Intelligent Data Analysis for churn management

The design of CCM models has been suggested in the previous section as an adequate approach
to the task of prolonging the life-cycle of company customers. Anticipating a customer’s intention
to abandon their current provider company should be considered a key element of any therapeutic
strategy in churn management.

In this context, DM techniques, including IDA in the form of PR, ML, statistics and related
approaches, as applied to market surveyed information, could and should play a key role in helping
to understand how customer loyalty construction mechanisms work, and helping to analyze cus-
tomers’ intention to abandon from different angles, from exploratory characterization to outright
prediction.

However, not all cases of churn are equally important, nor are they all predictable. According
to the reasons behind it, abandonment can be classified in different typologies:

– Involuntary cancellation : It affects customers from which their current company withdraws
the service (e.g., fraud, arrears). Generally, companies do not even consider these cancellations
as abandonment for their records.

– Voluntary cancellation : It corresponds to customers who consciously decide to change provider.
Two variants of this type can be considered:
– Circumstantial : Due to changes in the customer’s circumstances which do not allow them

to continue (change of address, inclusion in the company’s social benefit plans, change of
marital status, children, etc.). This cancellation is intrinsically unpredictable.

– Deliberate: It occurs when the customer voluntarily decides to abandon their current sup-
plier for a competitor.

Here, we only consider this last scenario: voluntary and deliberate churn. In the remaining of
the section we discuss the different stages of the standard process of design and development of



6 David L. Garćıa et al.

a predictive model of supplier abandonment (customer abandoning the supplier). This literature
will then be summarily organized in Section 3.2 and in the Appendix in the form of tables created
according to two main grouping criteria: the type of predictive model used in the study and its
particular business area of application.

3.1 Building predictive models of abandonment

The design and development of predictive models of supplier abandonment or churn can be divided
into four general stages [21], as seen in Figure 4. The last three stages of this process form a cycle
that is completed only if and when adequate prediction results are achieved. We will now take a
closer look at each of these stages in turn.

Stage 1: Identifying and obtaining the best data. This might arguably be the most relevant stage
in the construction of a predictive abandonment model. Experience shows that the quality and
suitability of the available data determines the accuracy and predictive power of the resulting
model. Different data combinations may be better or worse indicators for different problems and
for different areas of business. Ultimately, it is a question of identifying the data that best fit the
type of analysis being carried out. Only in this manner could useful and usable knowledge (in
business terms) be extracted in subsequent stages of analysis.

This stage in the building of predictive models of abandonment would fit, from a DM process
point of view, the phases of problem and data understanding. Bearing this in mind, and from
a practical point of view, it is important to note that the predictive model should ideally be
constructed on the basis of the available data gathered routinely by a company from its whole
customer base, which can be an extremely costly process. Consequently, those data bearing most
of the predictive power may not always be available. Companies, therefore, may often be faced by
the trade-off problem of identifying the best possible data from what is available to them.

The process of understanding and interpreting the data is often difficult. Even though the data
in each field of a database may seem self-explanatory and unambiguous, interpretation may be
hampered by the use of specific and ad hoc company lingo, different numerical formats, or simply
because their meaning is different from the apparently obvious. Given the usual lack of standards
to facilitate this process at the company level, its success is largely based on good communication
between database managers and the data analysts. In fact, these DM stages have not been duly
documented in the majority of investigations carried out in recent years [34].

Stage 2: Selection of attributes. In this stage, the most appropriate attributes or features for predic-
tion must be selected from those available to the analyst, which, in a supervised PR setting, which
is the most common in the literature of churn IDA, would be those that minimize the classification
or prediction error; in an unsupervised learning setting, which might address churn analysis as a
market segmentation problem, would be those which best reflect the grouping or cluster structure
of the data. From a DM process point of view, this stage would correspond to the phase of data
pre-processing.

This pre-processing is paramount as it helps to reduce the dimensionality of the data so that only
the important attributes are included for analysis, whereas the redundant, noisy and/or irrelevant
ones are excluded [107]. As a result, the selected features are also much more likely to provide an
easier interpretability, in practical terms, of the obtained solutions.

Feature selection in supervised settings is a problem that has been thoroughly studied through-
out the years [32, 89, 67], and providing a survey of selection methods is beyond the scope of this
review. There are different feature selection criteria for the less frequently explored problems in
unsupervised learning (e.g., clustering), although a number of variable ranking criteria are useful
across applications, including saliency, entropy, smoothness, density and reliability [32].



Intelligent Data Analysis Approaches to Churn as a Business Problem: a Survey 7

Stage 3: Development of a predictive model. Once the best data available for analysis have been
selected, the next stage of predictive model development entails the choice of the most suitable
methods and techniques for building such model. This corresponds to the modeling phase in DM.
In a simplified manner, a predictive model can be defined as one that extracts patterns from the
available data in order to make inferences for previously unseen data or future situations [84].

In the area of abandonment prediction, the most commonly used modelling techniques, as
reflected in the literature, include decision trees (DT), regression analysis [63] and artificial neural
networks (ANN) [18], while in more recent years new methods such as support vector machines
(SVM) have proven their adequacy [17, 13, 106].

As later explained in Section 3.2, one of the criteria according to which our review of churn IDA
literature is organized is the type of predictive model used for analysis. For the sake of simplicity,
three general categories were considered: standard methods, computational intelligence (CI)methods
and other alternative methods.

Standard methods
In this category, we consider two families of techniques, namely regression analysis from stan-
dard multivariate statistics, and DTs, which are algorithmic methods with close ties to statistics
and which are considered here as standard due to their widespread acceptance for churn analysis
applications.

– Regression analysis: A popular standard multivariate statistics family of techniques used
by researchers dealing with the prediction of abandonment. It is stated in [72] that logistic
regression’s popularity in particular is due to its quick and robust results as compared to other
classification techniques, added to its conceptual simplicity and its closed-form solution available
for posterior probabilities.

– Decision Trees: Arguably, the most popular type of predictive model in business applications
is the DT. In its different forms, it has become an important knowledge extraction method,
used for the classification of markets from static data or for the classification of future events
[77].

Popular choices of DT in churn data analysis include the C5.0 classification tree -a variant of
the well-known C4.5-, which assembles classification trees by recursively splitting the instance
space into smaller subgroups, according to an information entropy criterion, until only instances
from the same class remain known as a pure node, or a sub-group containing occurrences from
different classes known as impure nodes. The tree is allowed to grow to its full potential before
it is pruned back in order to increase its power of generalisation on unseen data.

Another frequently used DT is the classification and regression tree (CART), constructed
by recursively splitting the instance space into smaller sub-groups until a specified criterion
has been met. The decrease in impurity of the parent node against the child nodes defines the
goodness of the split. The tree is only allowed to grow until the decrease in impurity falls below
a user-defined threshold. At this time the node becomes a terminal, or leaf node [5].

Computational Intelligence methods
CI methods provide, in one form or another, flexible information processing capabilities for handling
real life problems. Exploiting the tolerance for imprecision, uncertainty, approximate reasoning and
partial truth in order to achieve tractability, robustness, low solution cost, and close resemblance
with human-like decision making, is the overall objective of CI methods [78]. Techniques that fall
into this category include evolutionary computation (EC), ANNs and other ML techniques, fuzzy
logic (see, for instance, [7] for an interesting clustering application) and their combinations, such
as neuro-fuzzy systems [34]. We shall briefly describe them next.

– Artificial Neural Networks: ANNs are a family of ML models that have successfully been
used to estimate complex non-linear functions and have been applied to many types of churn



8 David L. Garćıa et al.

problems with high predictive accuracy, mostly related to classification, and prediction [53,
45, 3]. An important factor when considering the practical use of ANN is that they do not
necessarily uncover patterns in an easily understandable and interpretable form [1], which may
limit the scope of their implementation in practice, unless they are accompanied by sound
strategies of feature selection from stage 2.

– Support Vector Machines: This ML method, based on statistical learning theory, is able
to optimally separate two class of objects (e.g., churners and retained customers) through the
generation of a multivariate maximally separating hyperplane. Its theoretical basis was estab-
lished in [8] and [15]. SVMs have been widely used in recent studies due to notable advantages
such as a lower number of controlling parameters and good generalization capability [12, 40].
This method, though, remains difficult to interpret in terms of the input attributes [86] and
may perform poorly in problems with strongly overlapping classes.

– DMEL (Data Mining by Evolutionary Learning): This EC algorithm aims to overcome
the limitations of interpretation and understanding of the results obtained through some CI
techniques -in contrast with the clarity of the if-then-rules obtained through DT, for example-.
DMEL uses a non-random initial population based on first order rules. Higher-order rules are
then obtained iteratively using a genetic algorithm (GA) type process. The fitness value of a
chromosome uses a function that defines the probability that the attribute value is correctly de-
termined using the rules it encodes. The likelihood of prediction is estimated and the algorithm
handles missing values.

– Bayesian networks: These are probabilistic graphical models that lay somewhere in between
multivariate statistics and CI. A Bayesian network can be seen as a probabilistic “white box”
that represents conditional dependencies over a set of discrete stochastic variables as a directed
acyclic graph. As such, this type of model could nicely represent the possibly complex interde-
pendencies between variables leading to the churn phenomenon.

Other alternative methods
This category does in fact include methods that could at least partially fit into the previous cat-
egories, but which have scarcely been used in the context of churn analysis. They can thus be
considered as somehow exotic in this context and include: Ensemble Learning in different forms,
semi-Markov processes, mixture transition distribution models and goal-oriented sequential pattern
algorithms.

Stage 4: Validation of results.
This is again a key to the success of any data-based churn analysis and corresponds to the evaluation
phase in DM. Some of the most commonly used methods for model validation in the churn analysis
literature are:

– Cross-validation: Most suitable in those cases in which data are scarce. In its most simple
version, a single split of the data is generated (such as the 70/30 used in [45]; the 70% of cases
used as training set and the 30% remaining as validation set). Cross-validation is based on the
principle of using the available data for both training and validation. Several more sophisticated
cross-validation methods have been proposed in the literature [34], including:
– K-fold cross-validation: The learning set is randomly partitioned into K subsets of equal

size. Each individual subset is then used in turn for validation, while the rest of the data are
used for training. In the extreme case of choosing single case folds, the procedure is called
leave-one-out cross-validation.

– Monte Carlo (or repeated random sub-sampling) cross-validation: The learning
set is repeatedly divided into two random sets, one of which is used for training and the
other for validation. Not all cases are necessarily chosen at any point for validation. See, for
instance, [93] for an application of the method to churn analysis.



Intelligent Data Analysis Approaches to Churn as a Business Problem: a Survey 9

– Separate validation dataset: Several authors [21, 5, 81] have successfully used single val-
idation sets separated from the training sets in the validation of their predictive models of
abandonment. This method should only be acceptable in those cases in which data availability
is not an issue.

When testing the validity of a model, or comparing the results of different methods, the following
set of indicators are the most commonly used [63, 22]:

– Accuracy, Sensitivity and Specificity: For classification models with a binary target vari-
able. Accuracy measures the ratio of correctly classified observations (churn or not-churn) to
the overall number of cases. Sensitivity instead measures the ratio of correctly predicted events
(i.e., correct churn predictions) to the total number of events (total of churn cases), whereas
specificity measures the ratio of correctly predicted non-events (i.e., not-churn) to the total
number of non-events (total of not-churn cases). Although accuracy is intuitive and commonly
used to compare prediction methods [63, 102, 76], it is not considered to be an optimum figure
of merit for churn modelling because it is unreliable in a situation of class imbalance [60], which
is by far the most common in this application area [82].

– Area under the Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curve: ROC is a function
of the sensitivity versus 1 − specificity for all values of the classification threshold and it has
been widely used in the churn prediction literature [43, 17, 69, 31, 76, 60, 22, 104, 106]. Its
Area Under the Curve (AUC), unlike accuracy, evaluates the ability of a classifier to distinguish
between classes based on the predicted class membership probabilities and is therefore suitable
for imbalanced classification problems [57].

– Lift Chart: This technique focuses on the segment of highest-risk customers, arranging them
into deciles based on their predicted probability to churn and comparing its results with the rest
of the cases. The Lift Chart has also been commonly used in recent studies [69, 31, 76, 16, 22].
It can be found in two different forms:
– Top decile Lift (TDL): Is the churn rate in the top decile of ordered posterior churn

probabilities over the churn rate in the total customer population [60].
– Lift Index (LI): Is the weighted index of the correctly predicted churners, ranked by its

posterior churn probability [19].
– Loss function: Calculated on the basis of customers’ Life Time Value (LTV), this method indi-

cates the loss caused by the error of the model, considering the effect of misclassified customers.
Some examples can be found in recent work [76, 29].

3.2 A summarized review of the literature

We have compiled the reviewed literature in a number of detailed summary tables: 2 to 14, which
can be found in the Appendix. They list the main references in recent literature (roughly over the
last 15 years and including mainly peer-reviewed journal publications, although some conference
publications and PhD thesis have also been included for their specific interest) that address the
problem of building predictive models of abandonment. Following the same scheme of stages pro-
posed for the previous section as guiding index, these tables show: the references to the articles; the
type of data used in the analysis; the source from which those data were obtained; the attribute
selection technique employed; the possible use of time series data in its definition; the techniques
used to develop the predictive models; and, finally, the methods used for validation, if any.

These detailed tables are organized according to two main criteria:

– According to the predictive methods used: Tables 2, 3 and 4 for standard techniques; tables 5,
6 and 7 for CI methods; and tables 8 and 9 for alternative ones.

– According to fields of application: Tables 10 and 11 (telecommunications), 12 (banking), and
13 and 14 (other areas of application).



10 David L. Garćıa et al.

Here, we show a single summary table structuring the reviewed publications according to, first,
business area and subsequently, type of analytical method (standard methods, CI methods and other
alternative methods).

[Table 1 here]

4 Discussion

This section of discussion of the reviewed literature is articulated, first, according to the four stages
for building predictive models of abandonment described in section 3.1. Comments and recommen-
dations are made for each of these stages, followed by specific comments and recommendations
for, in turn, the two main blocks of industries in which the tabular results are organized in the
appendix, namely Telecommunications and Banking.

4.1 Stage 1 : Identifying and obtaining the best data.

A selection of different data requirements and motifs for the analysis of churn can be drawn from
the recent literature. The most relevant are detailed next.

A large group of studies base their models of abandonment prediction on customer use/consumption
variables: Madden and colleagues [68], in their customer retention model for the Australian ISP
(Internet Service Provider) industry, classified and used four categories of variables: economic, use,
ISP choice and demographics. Ng and Lin suggested in [73] the use of customer consumption for
identifying churn in the telecommunications market. In [100], it was concluded that the purchase of
products and services can be better predicted using historic purchasing data. This view was backed
in [39], where it was proposed that the analysis of transaction data, through historic account and
customer data, could provide us with clues to identify the best incentives for a bank to offer its
customers and to improve the marketing strategy. Data on customer usage have also been used to
identify the behaviour of website-using customers [46] and to predict repeat purchasing by mail
[94].

More recently, customer usage/consumption data have been complemented with other variables
as key elements in identifying abandonment. For instance, in a study of customer deflection in the
wireless telecommunications market [87], customer data were grouped into four types: demograph-
ics, usage level, quality of service and marketing features. This method was supported in a more
recent study in the same sector [109]. Still in the field of telecommunications [72], Neslin and Gupta
classified the selected variables into three main categories: customer behavior (minutes of use, rev-
enue, handset equipment, trends in usage), company interaction data (calls to customer service)
and customer household demographics (age, income, geographic location, home ownership), similar
to the ones used in [43]. Hung and colleagues considered in [44] that the most significant variables
for churn prediction in the mobile telephone industry are: demographic data (age, penetration rate,
and gender), payment and account data (monthly quota, billing amount, arrears account), call de-
tails (call duration, call type), and customer service data (number of PIN number changes, number
of blocks and suspensions). In their research about abandonment of the subscribers of a newspaper
publishing company [17], Coussement and Van den Poel grouped customer data into four groups:
subscription data (time since last renewal, monetary value, product), socio-demographics (age, gen-
der), client/company interactions (number of complaints, time since the last complaint, responses
to marketing actions) and renewal-related variables (days between subscription renovation and ex-
piry date). More recently, data from credit card holder’s in a Chinese bank were used in [75] and
[102] to predict their abandonment, with a combination of usage variables (daily balance, abnormal
usage, limit usage, revoking pays, transactions, etc.) and customer personal information.



Intelligent Data Analysis Approaches to Churn as a Business Problem: a Survey 11

Stage 1: General recommendations: Some interesting conclusions can be drawn from the way the
reviewed studies addressed stage 1 of the prediction model building process. The types of data gath-
ered for analysis are quite varied and, to some extent, depend on the area of application. Overall,
they do not seem to depend on the type of analysis technique applied in the study. Usage, socio-
economic and demographic variables predominate, and the use of RFM attributes is quite common.
Curiously, given their likely predictive power, very few studies resort to analysis of standard data
concerning quality of service or customer satisfaction, such as the SERVQUAL (e.g. in [3]) This is
probably due to the difficulty of obtaining this type of information from customers (in comparison
with, for instance, usage or socio-demographics), but perhaps also due to a lack of awareness of
their usefulness as predictors of churn.

Another key issue is the fact that churn should be treated as a dynamic process that naturally
evolves over time. For this reason, it is surprising that most of the studies are either static from
the point of view of the data gathered for analysis (that is, most of the investigated data are
market snapshots that lack information on its evolution), or unclear about the periodicity of the
surveyed data, or used data that were averaged over time. Even among those studies that used
data collected over time, many just cover a few months, making it difficult to discount seasonality
effects. Some exceptions include the impressive 77 years of data from a financial services company
that were analysed in [95]; the 30 months of data used to create the model plus 12 months of data
for prediction used in [17]; the 17 + 4 months in [16]; the 18 months in [38]; and the 12 + 12
months periods used in [102], [76] and [13]. Again, this could be at least partially justified by the
cost and difficulty of gathering consistently homogeneous customer data over long periods of time
in rapidly changing scenarios.

Beyond the problem of choosing the most adequate set of data attributes, the paradox is that,
as remarked in [95] and corroborated in [31] a decade later, few studies, even if using longitudinal
surveys, make use of dynamic analysis models. Little work in churn analysis adventures beyond
limited time windows both for the data to be modeled and for the predictions. It has been proposed
[31] that the most natural framework for this problem is longitudinal data analysis and its related
methods such as survival analysis (in their study, using Cox regression), that is, a dynamic ana-
lytical framework that allowed to allocate customer retention efforts across time and identify early
indicators of attrition. The design and development of such dynamic models is one of the most
important pending challenges in churn analysis. A very interesting example of a proper dynamic
analysis of churn can be found in recent work by Bose and Chen [7].

Stage 1: Specific recommendations per industry.

Telecommunications: Usage data seem to be the common denominator of recent studies in this
business domain [73, 106, 93, 7] and, as seen from the previous paragraph, these type of data are
often complemented and enriched using demographics, socio-economic and marketing information.

Beyond that, recent technological advances have allowed to add a new type of data to the churn
prediction mix: those generated by the customers’ social communication networks, which could
be analyzed under the conceptual framework of social commerce [30]. Sharing a somehow similar
outlook on the problem, Kim and colleagues [52] developed procedures for churn prediction by ex-
amining the communication patterns among service subscribers, whereas Verbeke and co-workers
[98] developed relational classifiers based on intercommunication graphs that allow to incorporate
social network effects within a churn prediction model. This social communications network in-
formation could be easily added to the data mix in other industries beyond telecommunications,
mostly those with strong internet presence.

Banking and financial services: Interestingly, the banking sector seems to take a much narrower
approach to the identification of the best data for churn analysis, at least as compared to telecommu-
nications and other industries. An example of this is the fact that number of churn studies in this re-
view, mostly not related to banking and finances and including [39, 94, 80, 38, 101, 49, 65, 66, 13, 69]



12 David L. Garćıa et al.

agree in suggesting the use of three groups of variables, globally known as RFM (Recency, Frecuency
and Monetary variables):

– length of time since last purchase,
– frequency of use,
– economic expense effected over a certain time period,

as a source for the prediction of the churn probability. Note that most of these studies are in the
areas of direct marketing and retailing, with the only exception of [39], which is an application
to banking. Bose and Chen [6], when discussing direct marketing, stated that RFM variables
are amongst the strongest performing variables in explaining future customer behavior. Nothing
prevents the banking sector from using variations of RFM to enrich their churn analysis processes,
especially given that modern banking often provides their customers with extra services that are
not that far removed from the retail sector.

4.2 Stage 2 : selection of attributes

Stage 2: General recommendations The investigation of stage 2 of the prediction model building
process provides a really mixed picture in the reviewed literature. Many studies do not even con-
sider attribute selection, while quite a few others justify the selection not on the quantitatively
demonstrated impact of the data on the prediction but, instead, on domain knowledge (using at-
tributes that have shown relevance in previous similar studies) or expert knowledge in the field
(again, trusting prior experiences). Even among those investigations using some form of attribute
selection, this often takes a very simple form, far from the state-of-the-art in the field (e.g., R2

statistic coefficient, z-test, collinearity measure, Fisher score, etc.) and only in a few cases, the
attribute selection technique is intrinsically associated to the modelling technique of choice (e.g.
DTs [21, 73, 56], RFs [17], ANNs [106], or SVMs [24, 56]).

This is a worrisome picture for the following reasons:

– Almost any business domain is becoming data-dependent in most of its processes and, therefore,
more and more data attributes are likely to become available for a process such as abandonment
prediction. This could be particularly true for those industries whose environment is the internet,
such as web retailers. With the increase of information availability, comes a harder problem of
selection of the adequate attributes to include in the analysis of supplier abandonment by the
customer. As a result, the use of adequate procedures of attribute selection should become
compulsory.

– There is nothing intrinsically wrong in the idea of using domain knowledge or expert knowledge
in the specific business area. Much is to be learnt from prior experiences, but excessive reliance
on prior experience may come with a higher risk of negative bias on the selection of attributes
for the churn problem, as it might prevent from using attributes whose relevance might not
be obvious to the human expert, but could still be found by data-based quantitative attribute
selection methods.

– It is particularly unusual that such a small number of the reviewed studies using CI methods
resort to attribute selection procedures, given the huge effort in this direction that has been
made in the CI field. There are countless selection procedures specifically devised for any of the
CI methods that have been employed in the reviewed churn analysis studies [32, 67].

Stage 2: Specific recommendations per industry

Telecommunications: As seen in the previous section, the reviewed studies of churn analysis in
the telecommunications sector are precisely characterized by a rich usage of data attributes, in-
cluding usage data and often also using demographics, socio-economic and marketing information.



Intelligent Data Analysis Approaches to Churn as a Business Problem: a Survey 13

This complex mixture of attributes would be enough motivation for the use of attribute selection
procedures. Not using such procedures would entail running a few risks, including:

– The combination of datasets with a large number of cases (becoming more and more common
in this field) and a large number of attributes may become burdensome from a computational
viewpoint, specially for complex modeling techniques.

– Many of the available attributes maybe uninformative for prediction purposes, or redundant,
negatively affecting the prediction capabilities of the churn prediction models.

– Without appropriate attribute selection, it becomes impossible to ascertain which attributes are
the most relevant for churn classification and prediction. This becomes an easily avoidable lim-
itation for knowledge extraction in the domain and precludes experts from saving unnecessary
data gathering efforts.

For all these reasons, it is strange that a majority of the reviewed studies in the area of telecom-
munications either do not report any attribute selection at all or base the selection on expert and
domain knowledge. In both cases, this is tantamount to not performing any data-based quantitative
attribute selection. Only a minority of papers report the use of either statistical techniques (such as
the R2 or the Fisher score) or methods associated to non-traditional models. The obvious recom-
mendation here would be to encourage researchers in the area to take attribute selection seriously
as an almost compulsory part of the DM process oriented towards novel knowledge discovery. An
example of proper and intensive attribute selection process using CI methods can be found in [106].

Banking and financial services: The banking and financial service sector provides us with the
opposite side of the coin in terms of attribute selection, when compared to telecommunications.
Even though there are still too many papers with either no attribute selection at all or a selection
based only on expert and domain knowledge, the majority of the reviewed publications have used
quantitative selection methods based on either statistics or embedded in the own modeling process.
Further good news is that the most recent publications of churn analysis in banking seem to be
paying adequate attention to this issue; examples of these are the detailed methods that can be
found in [24] and, again, in [106].

4.3 Stage 3 : Development of a predictive model.

The following lists provide a non-exhaustive overview of both the more traditional and the CI
methods most used for predictive churn modelling.

– Regression analysis:
Regression analysis was used in [71] and [70] to link customer retention with satisfaction and
its attributes in the fields of wireless telecommunications and private banking, while Kim and
Yoon [51] used a logistic regression (logit) model to determine subscriber churn in the telecom-
munications industry, based on discrete choice theory (study of behaviour in situations where
decision makers must select from a finite set of alternatives). In the same field, logistic regression
was also used in [60], [62] and [93] to predict abandonment.
There are regression models specifically suited to the analysis of longitudinal data such as Cox
regression, from the area of survival analysis, which was recently used in [31] as a natural
framework for dynamic attrition studies.
In other studies [11, 17], logit models were used to predict abandonment of a Pay-TV operator
and a newspaper publisher, comparing them with more novel methods: Markov chains in the
first one and SVMs in the second. In the first case, logit models showed better accuracy while, in
the second case, SVM only showed a better performance when an optimal parameter-selection
procedure was applied. Huang et al. [45] and Lee et al. [59] proved that logistic regression
outperformed ANNs, DTs and other methods in their churn prediction studies.



14 David L. Garćıa et al.

More recently, multiple criteria decision models were used in [102] to evaluate the accuracy
of 12 different algorithms -including logistic regression, multiple DT algorithms, and different
Bayesian networks - when predicting churn on a bank’s credit card holders. It was found that
logistic regression yielded the highest predictive accuracy. Logistic regression and DTs were
later used in [76] to forecast credit card customer defection, reporting a better performance of
logistic regression.

– Decision Trees:
The literature contains quite a few examples of DTs for the construction of predictive models
of abandonment. Datta and colleagues [21] carried out research in the area of churn prediction
and developed a model that they called Churn Analysis Modelling and Prediction (CHAMP).
CHAMP also uses DTs to predict customer churn in the telecommunications industry. The
C4.5 method was chosen in [73] to automatically generate classification rules for the purpose
of identifying potential defectors, while C5.0 was recently applied to churn analysis in telecom-
munication markets in [93].
In the analysis of wireless telecommunications markets, the performance of DT, ANN and
logistic regression was compared in [45]. This study stated that the DT showed slightly better
accuracy over the other methods (however, the authors affirmed that these results do not prove
DT to be the best choice in all cases). This conclusion is supported by [71], [26] and [72]. These
models can also been used for the purpose of rule extraction. An example of the use of Näıve
Bayes Trees for rule extraction in the credit card business of the banking sector can be found
in [24]. DTs have also been successfully applied in recent years to problems such as email users
churn prediction [74], supplier selection [105], broadband internet users churn [41], churn in
telecommunications companies [44, 62], and credit card users churn [102, 56, 76, 24].

Computational Intelligence methods

– Artificial Neural Networks:
ANNs have been reported [21] to be still scarcely being used by companies in their day-to-
day operations. In spite of that, many authors have used ANNs in an entrepreneurial setting
for churn analysis [64, 44, 84, 56, 10, 33, 92, 42, 109, 72, 95, 29] due to their high predictive
accuracy. In a recent study, Tiwari and colleagues [91] described a novel ANN method which
predicted customers that were likely to be churn in the future, with less time margin than
previous models.

– Support Vector Machines:
Several studies [90, 97, 61, 93] have used SVM methods to predict churn in the telecommuni-
cation sector. It has also been applied to the analysis of churn of newspaper subscribers [17],
concluding that SVMs outperform logistic regression as a predictive method. This technique
has also been used in [106] as base classifier in an ensemble model applied to the analysis of
churn in both the telecommunications and banking sectors.

– DMEL (Data Mining by Evolutionary Learning): DMEL was used to predict churn in
the telecommunications industry in [1]. More recently, Yeshwanth et al. [108] used a hybrid
model to predict churn in mobile networks customers. They combined a pre-processing based
on DT algorithms with a GA classification process.

– Bayesian networks: An attempt to estimate whether a new customer will increase or de-
crease future spending was reported in [2]. A Bayesian network was defined in this study as a
probabilistic “white box” that represents a joint probability distribution over a set of discrete
stochastic variables. Verbraken and colleagues [99] have recently continued this work by test-
ing the predictive power of a number of Bayesian Network algorithms in churn analysis and
proposing a feature selection method based on the concept of the Markov Blanket. Bayesian
Networks have been successfully applied in recent studies of churn forecasting in the field of
telecom industry [54] and in banking [102].



Intelligent Data Analysis Approaches to Churn as a Business Problem: a Survey 15

Other alternative methods

– Semi-Markov processes: They were used in [46] to create a model that considers e-customer
behaviour. The discrete-time semi-Markov process was designed as a probabilistic model for use
in the analysis of complex dynamic systems. It has also been used in [88] to study customer
retention.

– Mixture transition distribution (MTD): Prinzie and Van den Poel [81] introduced a mix-
ture transition distribution (MTD) to investigate purchase-sequence patterns. The MTD was
designed to allow estimations of high order Markov chains, providing a smaller transition matrix
facilitating managerial interpretation.

– Goal-oriented sequential pattern: a novel algorithm for identifying potential churners using
association rules that identify relationships amongst variables was introduced in [14]. The au-
thors defined a two-step process for finding out association rules. In the first step, the large item
set (attribute-value pairs) is defined, requiring compliance with certain minimum conditions of
support and minimum confidence defined by the researcher. In the second stage, an A Priori
algorithm is used to explore the rules of association.

Stage 3. General recommendations: In this stage, the key issue is, precisely, the choice of the most
adequate model or models (separately or in combination) for churn analysis.

From the summary Figures 5 and 6, it is clear that two of the standard methods are, by far, the
most popular ones in recent literature: DTs and Regression Analysis. Their reasonable predictive
accuracy is arguably the main reason behind the fact that more than 46% of the reviewed methods
(see Figure 5, left) belong to these categories. They are mentioned in more than 70% of the analysed
literature, acting as a benchmark to compare the results of other methods, or as the main predictive
method. These methods have remained popular over the years, even increasing to a 51% share of
the references published in the last 5 years (see Figure 5, right).

Further reasons to explain this popularity include their ease of implementation and availability
of standard commercial software, but, perhaps more importantly, their transparency: the outcomes
of both families of methods can easily be interpreted in terms of the attributes used to create the
model; as a result, business rules to explain the churn phenomenon are reasonably easy to come
by. In the particular case of DT, such rules take an attractive hierarchical form resulting from the
tree-like model that branches according to specific attributes.

For their part, Computational Intelligence methods are also reasonably well accepted but still
a bit of a novelty despite their long-standing record in many other application fields, including
business [96, 64]. ANNs are the most commonly used ones (in 16% of the reviewed literature),
although in decline over the last few years. Their proficient predictive ability turns them into very
attractive methods for researchers, but their lack of straightforward interpretability may slow their
usage down in entrepreneurial environments [103, 2]. Such lack of interpretability is often the result
of the nonlinear nature, which confers them with great modeling flexibility at the price of obscuring
the relationship between the outcome and the data attributes. The adoption of CI methods in this
area may also be slowed down by the lack of clear standards for their implementation.

Finally, the denominated “alternative methods”, less specific and constantly improving, have
only a marginal role (17, 2% of the studied literature in recent years) as methods of choice in
supplier abandonment modelling.

Despite the obvious importance of such approach, comparative analyses in which the more
traditional statistical methods are exhaustively compared with CI techniques are still uncommon
in this application field [50, 93]. Such lack of comparisons limits the possibility of properly assessing
the relative virtues and limitations of each of the methods.

A sound alternative to model comparison is Ensemble Learning, in which the predictions yielded
by each of the models (learners) in the ensemble are combinations of the individual predictions of
multiple algorithms. They have shown strong and robust prediction performance in many appli-



16 David L. Garćıa et al.

cation areas. According to the combination of algorithms, the most popular ensemble learning
methods in the field (although not the only ones; see for instance [106] and [93]) are:

– Random Forest (RF): It is a combination of Bagging [9], Random Subspace Method [37] and
CART DTs [5]. RFs solve the high instability that hampers the use of DT and they have been
used in several marketing research studies [11, 10, 58] due to their high predictive performance
and robustness to outliers and noise. Research about churn in newspaper subscribers [17] found
that RF outperformed SVMs and logistic regression, and its usefulness was recently confirmed
when predicting abandonment in the online gaming industry [16].

– GAMens: A combination of Bagging and Random Subspace Method (RSM) with Generalized
Additive Models (GAM). The latter [17, 4] is a flexible technique for nonparametric regression.
Recent work [23] has proven that GAMens can be competitive with RF in accuracy. More re-
cently, they proved the predictive ability of this method applied to problems in several industries
such as supermarkets, banking and telecommunications [22].

Stage 3: Specific recommendations per industry

Telecommunications: From an industry of application viewpoint, the reviewed literature reveals
(see Figure 6, left) that telecommunications is the more active sector in terms of churn prediction
modelling research (46% of the publications apply to this sector), followed by banking, found in
23% of literature. This makes sense, as churn is a much more pressing concern in the very volatile
telecommunications market.

The profile of analytical model choice revealed by the graphics in Figure 6 (right) is quite
interesting, as it indicates that telecommunications is, out of the reviewed sectors, the one in which
less traditional models are being tested. This could perhaps be explained by the fact that banking
is, by comparison, a more mature type of business with a long-standing tradition of use of statistical
methods (which is a similar situation to the one observed in clinical medicine, in which statistical
methods are still very prevalent). It is also curious to note that telecommunications includes a
majority of studies in which several different techniques are compared or combined, which is a very
positive approach. Combining both previous thoughts, an specific recommendation for this sector
would be the integration of multivariate statistical approaches in the comparison and combination
of methods for churn analysis.

Banking and financial services: It can be observed from Figure 6 (right) that in banking and
financial services, Alternative methods are extraordinarily prevalent, much in contrast with the
figures for the telecommunications sector. The suspicion that such contrast in the type of model
choice is mostly motivated by the internal inertias of each industry is impossible to avoid, given
that the churn problem itself is not that industry-dependent and the type of analyzed data does
not justify the use of radically different methods.

The relative scarcity of the use of CI methods in this sector is somehow surprising, given that
it was precisely in banking and financial services that CI scored some its first extremely successful
real-world implementations, pioneering commercial software in the 1990’s for problems such as
bankruptcy prediction and credit scoring, amongst others [96]. Churn analysis in banking and
financial services could, an perhaps should, benefit from the use of this accumulated knowledge and
the resulting best-practice guidelines. This would also benefit from a more integral DM approach
to data analysis that embedded the attribute selection procedures of stage 2 and robust validation
techniques from stage 4, an integration that is usually straightforward in CI methods.

4.4 Stage 4 : Validation of results

Stage 4: General recommendations The last stage of the prediction model building process, the
validation of results, reveals that the literature in the field is far from agreeing in any standards.



Intelligent Data Analysis Approaches to Churn as a Business Problem: a Survey 17

The dominating evaluation metric is the accuracy, which is often inadequate in situations of class
unbalance, that is, when the prevalence of one of the classes is much higher than that of the
rest. Needless to say, this is the most common scenario in churn analysis, where the number of
churning cases is often much lower than the number of non-churning cases. Even though, sensitivity,
specificity and the related precision, recall and AUC measures, which are much more adequate
metrics in situations of class unbalance, are also used in quite a few studies. Lift charts are also
quite commonly used. Note that sensitivity should be given special relevance in this context, as it
measures the ratio of correctly predicted events (correct churn predictions) to the total number of
events (total of churn cases). In most real scenarios, service providers should strive to maximize this
metric, because correctly detecting the propensity of abandonment, which is a relatively uncommon
event, is the most difficult task in churn analysis, but also the most important one for churn
management.

Surprisingly, many studies do not seem to include any form of validation explicitly, something
that should be compulsory if we aim to assess the ability of the model to generalize its results
to unseen data. Such requirement should be specially relevant in churn analysis, in which the
main goal is inferring the potential supplier abandonment of out-of-sample customers. This is a
surprising finding, given that data scarcity is not a problem for any of the problems under analysis
and, therefore, there is no barrier for the definition of a proper training-validation-test setting.

Out of those studies using validation, quite a few make use of different forms of cross-validation.
The use of separate subsets for the three-way process of building, validating, and testing the model
(which is the most appropriate and robust approach of validation) seems to be rarely considered
in this area. This means that many of the reported results risk being, at best, over-optimistic
estimations, or, at worst, or strongly biased and unreliable ones.

Stage 4: Specific recommendations per industry

Telecommunications: The use of appropriate validation seems specially important in churn analysis
for the telecommunications sector. This is because of its higher levels of customer volatility and its
lower switching barriers, which should make the adequate assessment of out-of-sample customers
a more pressing concern. From Tables 10 and 11 in the appendix, it is clear that cross-validation
is the most favoured strategy, but still a few studies only report a single training/test data split,
which is a clearly sub-optimal validation strategy that risks biasing the results, undermining our
confidence on their reliability. Even worse, quite a few studies in this field completely ignore the
validation strategy, which means that their results could easily be over-optimistic as they might
just reflect an over-fitting of a very specific and not necessarily representative data sample.

Another issue that demands attention in this area, related to one of the previous general rec-
ommendations, is that only a handful of the reviewed papers pay attention to the calculation of
the sensitivity or related performance metrics.

Banking and financial services: Customers in banking and financial services might be far less
volatile than those of telecommunication service providers. This, in principle, could mean that
population samples are likely to be more stable and, therefore, models of such populations are less
likely to be affected by data over-fitting; that is, out-of-sample estimations are bound to be more
similar to the in-sample ones. Having said that, it is still surprising the extent to which many
churn studies in this area do not provide any proper validation strategy for their models. Only one
of the reviewed papers [24] resorts to a standard complete training-validation-test strategy with
10-fold cross-validation. On a more positive note, most studies (specially the most recent ones) use
adequate evaluation metrics, including sensitivity, specificity and AUC.



18 David L. Garćıa et al.

5 Conclusions

Supplier abandonment is one of the main problems faced by service-providing companies in rapidly
changing and extremely competitive mature markets. This is a problem that can only be addressed
through personalization strategies oriented to retain valuable customers. When the market base is
large, such personalization is only feasible as a data-intensive business analytics problem.

In such a scenario, a DM methodology based on IDA may become a useful knowledge and
information management tool for knowledge extraction from domain data. This paper has surveyed
and reviewed recent literature in which the use of IDA to build predictive models has been proposed
to address the churn problem, with a (non-exclusive) focus on the use of CI techniques. Importantly,
this literature has been reviewed according to the different stages of DM implementation, from data
gathering and understanding, to predictive model validation. Different business areas of application
have also been independently considered, with a focus on telecommunications, banking and financial
services. Publications in the field are abundant and we have tried to narrow the scope of the
review by prioritizing journal publications and covering the period 2000-2015. The reviewed studies
are scattered in a large number of international journals (over 20), although two of them stand
out for the special attention paid to the problem of churn analysis, namely Expert Systems with
Applications and the European Journal of Operational Research.

From the existing literature, the relevance of adequate data gathering and attribute selection
procedures becomes evident. It is also clear that no particular IDA method has the upper hand
in terms of results, which means that the choice of method is very problem-dependent. It must be
noted, though, that there are trends in the choice of methods that seem to be motivated by nothing
more than their popularity in a given application area. An example of this is the preponderance of
CI techniques for churn analysis in the banking sector, due to the fact that this sector pioneered
the use of CI in the business world to tackle problems such as risk assessment, credit scoring, or
bankruptcy prediction, to name a few [96].

References

1. AuWH, Chan KC, Yao X (2003) A novel evolutionary data mining algorithm with applications
to churn prediction. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation 7(6):532–545

2. Baesens B, Verstraeten G, Van den Poel D, Egmont-Peterson M, Van Kenhove P, Vanthienen
J (2004) Bayesian network classifiers for identifiying the slope of the customer lifecycle of
long-life customers. European Journal of Operational Research 156(2):508–523

3. Behara RS, Fisher WW, Lemmink JG (2002) Modelling and evaluating service quality mea-
surement using neural networks. International Journal of Operations and Production Man-
agement 22(10):1162–1185

4. Berg D (2007) Bankruptcy prediction by generalized additive models. Applied Stochastic
Models in Business and Industry 23(2):129–143

5. Bloemer JM, Brijis T, Vanhoof K, Swinnen G (2003) Comparing complete and partial clas-
sification for identifying customers at risk. International Journal of Research in Marketing
20(2):117–131

6. Bose I, Chen X (2009) Quantitative models for direct marketing: A review from systems
perspective. European Journal of Operational Research 195(1):1–16

7. Bose I, Chen X (2015) Detecting the migration of mobile service customers using fuzzy clus-
tering. Information & Management 52(2):227–238

8. Boser BE, Guyon IM, Vapnik V (1992) A training algorithm for optimal margin classifiers.
In: Fifth Annual Workshop on Computational Learning Theory, Pittsburg, pp 114–152

9. Breiman L (1996) Bagging predictors. Machine Learning 24(2):123–140



Intelligent Data Analysis Approaches to Churn as a Business Problem: a Survey 19

10. Buckinx W, Van den Poel D (2005) Customer base analysis: Partial defection of behaviorally
loyal clients in a non-contractual FMCG retail setting. European Journal of Operational
Research 164(1):252–268

11. Burez J, Van den Poel D (2007) CRM at a pay-TV company: using analytical models to
reduce customer attrition by targeted marketing for subscription services. Expert Systems
with Applications 32(2):277–288

12. Burges C (1998) A tutorial on support vector machines for pattern recognition. Data Mining
and Knowledge Discovery 2(2):121–167

13. Chen ZY, Fan ZP, Sun M (2012) A hierarchical multiple kernel support vector machine for cus-
tomer churn prediction using longitudinal behavioral data. European Journal of Operational
Research 223(2):461–472

14. Chiang D, Wang Y, Lee S, Lin C (2003) Goal-oriented sequential pattern for network banking
and churn analysis. Expert Systems with Applications 25(3):293–302

15. Cortes C, Vapnik V (1995) Support-vector networks. Machine Learning 20(3):273–297
16. Coussement K, De Bock KW (2013) Customer churn prediction in the online gambling indus-

try: the beneficial effect of ensemble learning. Journal of Business Research 66(9):1629–1636
17. Coussement K, Van den Poel D (2008) Churn prediction in subscription services: An applica-

tion of support vector machines while comparing two parameter-selection techniques. Expert
Systems with Applications 34(1):313–327

18. Crespo F, Weber R (2005) A methodology for dynamic data mining based on fuzzy clustering.
Fuzzy Sets and Systems 150(2):267–284

19. Crone SF, Lessmann S, Stahlbock R (2006) The impact of preprocessing on data mining.
an evaluation of classifier sensitivity in direct marketing. European Journal of Operational
Research 173(3):781–800

20. Cronin JJ, Brady MK, Hule GT (2000) Assessing the effects of quality, value, and customer
satisfaction on customer behavioural intentions in service environments. Journal of Retailing
76(2):193–218

21. Datta P, Masand B, Mani PR, Li B (2000) Automated cellular modelling and prediction on
a large scale. Artificial Intelligence Review 14(6):485–502

22. De Bock K, Van den Poel D (2012) Reconciling performance and interpretability in customer
churn prediction using ensemble learning based on generalized additive models. Expert Sys-
tems with Applications 39(8):6816–6826

23. De Bock K, Coussement K, Van den Poel D (2010) Ensemble classification based on generalized
additive models. Computational Statistics & Data Analysis 54(6):1535–1546

24. Farquad M, Ravi V, Raju S (2014) Churn prediction using comprehensible support vector
machine: An analytical CRM application. Applied Soft Computing 19:31–40

25. Fayyad U, Piatetski-Shapiro G, Smith P (1996) From data mining to knowledge discovery in
databases. AI Magazine 17(3):37–54

26. Ferreira JB, Vellasco M, Pacheco MA, Barbosa CH (2004) Data mining techniques on the
evaluation of wireless churn. In: Proceedings of the 12th European Symposium on Artificial
Neural Networks (ESANN), pp 483–488

27. Garćıa DL, Vellido A, Nebot À (2007) Customer continuity management as a foundation for
churn data mining. Technical report LSI-07-2-R, Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya (UPC),
Barcelona, Spain

28. Gilbert R (1989) Mobility barriers and the value of incumbency. Handbook of Industrial
Organisation 1:475–535

29. Glady N, Baesens B, Croux C (2008) Modeling churn using customer lifetime value. European
Journal of Operational Research 197(1):402–411

30. Gonçalves Curty R, Zhang P (2011) Social commerce: Looking back and forward. Proceedings
of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 48(1):1–10



20 David L. Garćıa et al.

31. Gür-Ali O, Aritürk U (2014) Dynamic churn prediction framework with more effective use of
rare event data: The case of private banking. Expert Systems with Applications 41(17):7889–
7903

32. Guyon I, Elisseeff A (2003) An introduction to variable and feature selection. The Journal of
Machine Learning Research 3(1):1157–1182

33. Hadden J (2008) A customer profiling methodology for churn prediction. PhD thesis, Cranfield
University, UK

34. Hadden J, Tiwari A, Roy R, Ruta D (2007) Computer-assisted customer churn management:
State-of-the-art and future trends. Computers and Operations Research 34(10):2902–2917

35. Haenlein M, Kaplan AM (2012) The impact of unprofitable customer abandonment on cur-
rent customers exit, voice, and loyalty intentions: an empirical analysis. Journal of Services
Marketing 26(6):458–470

36. Haenlein M, Kaplan AM, Schoder D (2006) Valuing the real option of abandoning unprofitable
customers when calculating customer lifetime value. Journal of Marketing 70(3):5–20

37. Ho TK (1998) The random subspace method for constructing decision forests. IEEE Trans-
actions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 20(8):832–844

38. Ho Ha S, Min Bae S, Chan Park S (2002) Customers’ time-variant purchase behaviour and
corresponding marketing strategies: an online retailer’s case. Computers and Industrial Engi-
neering 43(4):801–820

39. Hsieh N (2004) An integrated data mining and behavioural scoring model for analysing bank
customers. Expert Systems with Applications 27:623–633

40. Hsu C, Chang C, Lin C (2008) A practical guide to support vector classification. Technical
report, Department of Computer Science, National Taiwan University, Taiwan

41. Huang BQ, Kechadi MT, Buckley B (2009) Customer churn prediction for broadband internet
services. In: T B Pedersen MKM, Tjoa M (eds) DaWaK 2009, LNCS 5691, Springer-Verlag,
Berlin, pp 229–243

42. Huang BQ, Kechadi MT, Buckley B (2012) Customer churn prediction in telecommunications.
Expert Systems with Applications 39(1):1414–1425

43. Huang Y, Kechadi T (2013) An effective hybrid learning system for telecommunication churn
prediction. Expert Systems with Applications 40(14):5635–5647

44. Hung S, Yen DC, Wang HY (2006) Applying data mining to telecom churn management.
Expert Systems with Applications 31(3):512–524

45. Hwang H, Jung T, Suh E (2004) An LTV model and customer segmentation based on cus-
tomer value: a case study on the wireless telecommunication industry. Expert Systems with
Applications 26(2):181–188

46. Jenamani M, Mohapatra PK, Ghose S (2003) A stochastic model of e-customer behaviour.
Electronic Commerce Research and Applications 2(1):81–94

47. Jones MA, Mothersbaugh DL, Beatty SE (2000) Switching barriers and repurchase intentions
in services. Journal of Retailing 70(2):259–270

48. Jones MA, Mothersbaugh DL, Beatty SE (2002) Why customers stay: measuring the underly-
ing dimensions of services switching costs and managing their differential strategic outcomes.
Journal of Business Research 55(6):441–450

49. Jonker J, Piersma N, Van den Poel D (2004) Joint optimization of customer segmentation
and marketing policy to maximize long-term profitability. Expert Systems with Applications
27(2):159–168

50. Keramatia A, Jafari-Marandi R, Aliannejadi M, Ahmadian I, Mozaffari M, Abbasi U (2014)
Improved churn prediction in telecommunication industry using datamining techniques. Ap-
plied Soft Computing 24:994–1012

51. Kim H, Yoon C (2004) Determinants of subscriber churn and customer loyalty in the Korean
mobile telephony market. Telecommunications Policy 28(9-10):751–765



Intelligent Data Analysis Approaches to Churn as a Business Problem: a Survey 21

52. Kim K, Jun C, Lee J (2014) Improved churn prediction in telecommunication industry by
analyzing a large network. Expert Systems with Applications 41(15):65756584

53. KimMK, Park MC, Jeong DH (2004) The effects of customer satisfaction and switching barrier
on customer loyalty in Korean mobile telecommunication services. Telecommunications Policy
28(2):145–159

54. Kisioglu P, Topcu YL (2010) Applying Bayesian belief network approach to customer churn
analysis: a case study on the telecom industry of Turkey. Expert Systems with Applications
38(6):7151–7157

55. Klemperer P (1987) Markets with consumer switching cost. The Quarterly Journal of Eco-
nomics 102(2):375–394

56. Kumar D, Ravi V (2008) Predicting credit card customer churn in banks using data mining.
International Journal of Data Analysis Techniques and Strategies 1(1):4–28

57. Langley P (2000) Crafting papers on machine learning. In: Langley P (ed) 17th International
Conference on Machine Learning (ICML 2000), Stanford University, pp 1207–1216

58. Larivière B, Van den Poel D (2005) Predicting customer retention and profitability by using
random forests and regression forests techniques. Expert Systems with Applications 29(2):472–
484

59. Lee TS, Chiu CC, Chou YC, Lu CJ (2006) Mining the customer credit using classification
and regression tree and multivariate adaptive regression splines. Computational Statistics and
Data Analysis 50(4):1113–1130

60. Lemmens A, Croux C (2006) Bagging and boosting classification trees to predict churn. Jour-
nal of Marketing Research 43(2):276–286

61. Lessmann S, Voß S (2009) A reference model for customer-centric data mining with support
vector machines. European Journal of Operational Research 199(1):520–530

62. Lima E, Mues C, Baesens B (2010) Monitoring and backtesting churn models. Expert Systems
with Applications 38(1):975–982

63. Lima EO (2009) Domain knowledge integration in data mining for churn and customer lifetime
value modelling: New approaches and applications. PhD thesis, University of Southampton,
Faculty of Law, Arts and Social Sciences, Southampton, UK

64. Lisboa PJ, Edisbury B, Vellido A (2000) Business Applications of Neural Networks. World
Scientific Publishing Co

65. Liu D, Shih Y (2005) Hybrid approaches to product recommendation based on customer
lifetime value and purchase references. The Journal of Systems and Software 77(2):181–191

66. Liu D, Shih Y (2005) Integrating AHP and data mining for product recommendation based
on customer lifetime value. Information & Management 42(3):387–400

67. Liu H, Motoda H (2007) Computational Methods of Feature Selection. Chapman and Hall /
CRC Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery Series

68. Madden G, Savage SJ, Coble-Neal G (1999) Subscriber churn in the australian ISP market.
Information Economics and Policy 11:195–207

69. Miguéis V, Camanho A, Falcão e Cunha J (2013) Customer attrition in retailing: An
application of multivariate adaptive regression splines. Expert Systems with Applications
40(16):6225–6232

70. Mihelis G, Grigoroudis E, Siskos Y, Politis Y, Malandrakis Y (2001) Customer satisfac-
tion measurement in the private bank sector. European Journal of Operational Research
130(2):347–360

71. Mozer MC, Wolniewicz R, Grimes DB, Johnson E, Kaushansky H (2000) Predicting subscriber
dissatisfaction and improving retention in the wireless telecommunications industry. IEEE
Transactions on Neural Networks 11(3):690–696

72. Neslin SA, Gupta S (2006) Defection detection: Improving predictive accuracy of customer
churn models. Journal of Marketing Research 43(2):204–211



22 David L. Garćıa et al.

73. Ng K, Liu H (2000) Customer retention via data mining. Artificial Intelligencie Review
16(4):569–590

74. Nie G, Zhang L, Li X, Shi Y (2006) The analysis on the customers churn of charge email
based on data mining. In: Sixth IEEE International Conference on Data Mining (ICDM),
Springer-Verlang, Hong Kong, China, pp 843–847

75. Nie G, Wang G, Zhang P, Tian Y, Shi Y (2009) Finding the hidden pattern of credit card
holder’s churn: a case of China. In: Computational Science - ICCS 2009, Springer-Verlag,
Berlin, pp 561–569

76. Nie G, Rowe W, Zhang L, Tian Y, Shi Y (2011) Credit card churn forecasting by logistic
regression and decision tree. Expert Systems with Applications 38(12):15,273–15,285

77. Osei-Bryson KM (2004) Evaluation of decision trees: a multi criteria approach. Computers
and Operations Research 31(11):1933–45

78. Pal SK, Ghosh A (2004) Soft computing data mining. Information Sciences 163(1-3):5–12
79. Patterson MP, Smith T (2003) A cross-cultural study of switching barriers and propensity to

stay with service providers. Journal of Retailing 79(2):107–120
80. Pfeifer PE, Carraway RL (2000) Modeling customer relationships as Markov chains. Journal

of Interactive Marketing 14(2):43–55
81. Prinzie A, Van den Poel D (2006) Investigating purchasing-sequence patterns for financial

services using Markov, MTD and MTDg models. European Journal of Operational research
170(3):710–34

82. Provost P, Fawcett T, Kohavi R (2000) The case against accuracy estimation for comparing
induction algorithms. In: 15th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML 1998),
Morgan Kaufman, Madison, Wisconsin, pp 445–453

83. Ranaweera C, Neely A (2003) Some moderating effects on the service quality-customer relation
link. International Journal of Operations and Production Management 23(2):230–248

84. Rygielski J, Wang J, Yen DC (2002) Data mining techniques for customer relationship man-
agement. Technology in Society 24(4):483–502

85. Shearer C (2000) The CRISP-DM model: the new blueprint for data mining. Journal of Data
Warehousing 5(4):13–22

86. Shin HW, Sohn SY (2004) Segmentation of stock trading customers according to potential
value. Expert Systems with Applications 27(1):27–33

87. Slater SF, Narver JC (2000) Intelligence generation and superior customer value. Journal of
the Academy of Marketing Science 28(1):120–127

88. Slotnick SA, Sobel MJ (2005) Manufacturing lead - time rules: Customer retention versus
tardiness costs. European Journal of Operational Research 163(3):825–856

89. Sun Z, Bebis G, Miller R (2004) Object detection using feature subset selection. Pattern
Recognition 37(11):2165–2176

90. Suryadi K, Gumilang S (2008) Actionable decision model in customer churn monitoring based
on support vector machines technique. In: 9th Asia Pacific Industrial Engineering and Man-
agement Systems Conference, Bandung, Indonesia

91. Tiwari A, Hadden J, Turner C (2010) A new neural network based customer profiling method-
ology for churn prediction. In: ICCSA 2010, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, chap IV, pp 358–369

92. Tsai CF, Lu YH (2009) Customer churn prediction by hybrid neural networks. Expert Systems
with Applications 36(10):12,547–12,553

93. Vafeiadis T, Diamantaras K, G S, Chatzisavvas K (2015) A comparison of machine learning
techniques for customer churn prediction. Simulation Modelling Practice and Theory 55:1–9

94. Van den Poel D (2003) Predicting mail-order repeat buying: which variables matter? Tijd-
schrift voor Economie and Management 48(3):371–403

95. Van den Poel D, Laraviére B (2004) Customer attrition analysis for financial services using
proportional hazard models. European Journal of Operational research 157(1):196–217



Intelligent Data Analysis Approaches to Churn as a Business Problem: a Survey 23

96. Vellido A, Lisboa PJ, Vaughan J (1999) Neural networks in business: a survey of applications
(1992-1998). Expert Systems with Applications 17(1):51–70

97. Verbeke W, Dejaeger K, Martens D, Hur J, Baesens B (2011) New insights into churn predic-
tion in the telecommunication sector: A profit driven data mining approach. European Journal
of Operational Research 218:211–219

98. Verbeke W, Martens D, Baesens B (2014) Social network analysis for customer churn predic-
tion. Applied Soft Computing 14, part C:431446

99. Verbraken T, Verbeke W, Baesens B (2014) Profit optimizing customer churn prediction with
Bayesian network classifiers. Intelligent Data Analysis 18(1):3–24

100. Verhoef PC, Donkers B (2001) Predicting customer potential vualue, an application in the
insurance industry. Decision Support Systems 32(2):189–99

101. Verhoef PC, Spring PN, Hoekstra JC, Leeflang PS (2003) The commercial use of segmenta-
tion and predictive modelling techniques for database marketing in the Netherlands. Decision
Support Systems 34(4):471–81

102. Wang G, Liu L, Peng Y, Nie G, Kou G, Shi Y (2010) Predicting credit card holder churn
in banks of China using data mining and MCDM. In: IEEE / WIC / ACM International
Conference on Web Intelligence and Intelligent Agent Technology (WI-IAT), pp 215–218

103. Wei CP, Chiu LT (2002) Turning telecommunications call details to churn preduction: a data
mining approach. Expert Systems with Applications 23(2):103–12

104. Witten IH, Frank E (2005) Data Mining: Practical Machine Learning Tools and Techniques,
2nd edn. Morgan Kaufman, San Francisco

105. Wu D (2009) Supplier selection: A hybrid model using DEA, decision tree and neural network.
Expert Systems with Applications 36(5):9105–9112

106. Xiao J, Xiao Y, Huang A, Liu D, Wang S (2015) Feature-selection-based dynamic transfer
ensemble model for customer churn prediction. Knowledge and Information Systems 43(1):29–
51

107. Yan L, Wolniewicz RH, Dodier R (2004) Predicting customer behaviour in telecommunica-
tions. IEEE Intelligent Systems 19(2):50–58

108. Yeswanth V, Vimal Raj V, Saravanan M (2011) Evolutionary churn predition in mobile net-
works using hybrid learning. In: Proceedings of the 24th International Florida Artificial Intel-
ligence Research Society Conference (FLAIRS), Florida, USA, pp 471–476

109. Zhao Y, Li B, Li X, Liu W, Ren S (2005) Customer churn prediction using improved one-class
support vector machine. In: Li X, Wang S, Yang-Dong Z (eds) Advanced Data Mining and
Applications, Springer, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol.3584, pp 300–306

6 Appendix

The detailed tables of publications are reported in this appendix, following the description reported
in section 3.2.

[Tables 2 to 14, to be placed here]



24 David L. Garćıa et al.

Figure Captions

Fig 1 Commercial development alternatives in mature markets. Left) the figure shows the main
axis of the development of commercial value in a mature market environment: on one side, Customer
Continuity Management and Customer Development -aspects that complement and configure the
so-called Customer Value Management- and, on the other side, the development of selective strate-
gies of high value customers acquisition. Right) the figure shows the customer-focused policies that
can be developed for each of the defined strategic axes.

Fig 2 Stages in a client’s life-cycle. The figure shows the generated value -ordinate axis- of
three illustrative customer profiles -gold, silver, bronze- during their time of relationship with the
company -abscissa axis-. Moreover, the figure shows the stages of customer-company interactions
and the basic commercial aspects to solve in each one of the stages.

Fig 3 Customer life-cycle management model: Customer Continuity Management. The figure
shows both a) prevention policies integrated in the ordinary customer management (upper part of
the diagram), formed by the excellence in service quality, the creation of positive switching barriers
and the development of proactive bonding policies, and b) the specific therapy policies for customer
deflection (lower part of the diagram), which requires the creation of reactive retention policies,
proactive recovery policies and a segmented retention island.

Fig 4 Stages of the predictive model building process ([21]).
Fig 5 Abandonment prediction methods in recent literature. Left : overall summary. Right :

summary of literature published over the period 2009-2015.
Fig 6 Abandonment prediction methods by field of application. Left : Distribution by field of

application. Right : Detail on the type of applied methodology.



Intelligent Data Analysis Approaches to Churn as a Business Problem: a Survey 25

Figure 1



26 David L. Garćıa et al.

Figure 2



Intelligent Data Analysis Approaches to Churn as a Business Problem: a Survey 27

Figure 3



28 David L. Garćıa et al.

Figure 4



Intelligent Data Analysis Approaches to Churn as a Business Problem: a Survey 29

Figure 5



30 David L. Garćıa et al.

Figure 6



Intelligent Data Analysis Approaches to Churn as a Business Problem: a Survey 31

Table 1 Summary of Tables 2 to 14, located in the Appendix section. From left to right, it is structured first
by application area and then by category of predictive model (as in stage 3 of Section 3; the “mixed” category
includes studies in which methods from different categories have been used). References are listed in the right-
hand column. Studies that applied quantitative attribute selection (stage 2) methods are identified with symbol
“* ”, while studies that applied explicit validation (stage 4) methods are identified with symbol “† ”.

Application Area Method Category References

Telecommunications

Standard [68]∗,[71]†,[73]∗†,[103],[1],[26]†,[45]∗†,[51],[72]∗,[109],[44]∗,
[60],[105]†,[63]†,[62]∗†,[97]∗,[108],[50]∗,[93]†

CI [68]∗,[71]†,[1],[26]†,[45]∗†, [72]∗,[109],[44]∗,[90],[33],[92]†,
[105]†,[63]†,[54],[97]∗,[108],[13], [50]∗,[106]∗,[93]†,[7]

Alternative [105]†,[23]†,[97]∗,[108],[106]∗, [93]†

Mixed [68]∗,[71]†,[1],[26]†,[45]∗†, [72]∗,[109],[44]∗,[105]†,[63]†,[97]∗,
[108],[50]∗,[93]†

Banking

Standard [100],[59]∗,[29]†,[56]∗†,[102]†,[76]†,[31]∗†,
CI [86],[39],[29]†,[56]∗†,[102]†,[24],∗†,[106]∗

Alternative [14]∗,[95],[58]†,[81]†,[59]∗,[56]∗†,[106]∗

Mixed [59]∗,[29]†,[56]∗†,[102]†,[106]∗

Others

Standard [10]†,[69]∗†,[94]∗,[74],[17]∗†,[11]†,[41],[61]∗†

CI [38],[2],[10]†,[91],[3],[49],[17]∗†,[41],[61]∗†,[13]†

Alternative [10]†,[66]∗,[23]†,[17]∗†,[23]†,[80],[46],[88],[11]†,[16]∗†

Mixed [10]†,[17]∗†,[11]†,[41],[61]∗†



32 David L. Garćıa et al.

T
a
b
le

2
L
it
e
ra
tu

re
o
n
a
b
a
n
d
o
n
m
e
n
t
p
re
d
ic
ti
o
n
m
o
d
e
ll
in
g
,
li
st
e
d
in

ch
ro
n
o
lo
g
ic
a
l
o
rd

e
r
(1
9
9
9
-2
0
0
5
)
a
n
d
c
o
rr
e
sp

o
n
d
in
g
to

th
e
u
se

o
f
st
a
n
d
a
rd

m
e
th

o
d
s
(1

o
u
t

o
f
3
,
c
o
n
ti
n
u
e
s
in

th
e
n
e
x
t
ta
b
le
).

R
e
f.

D
a
t
a

t
y
p
e

D
a
t
a

g
a
t
h
e
r
in

g
F
e
a
t
u
r
e

s
e
le
c
t
io

n
T
im

e
p
e
r
io

d
s

M
o
d
e
ll
in

g
t
e
c
h
n
iq

u
e
s

V
a
li
d
a
t
io

n
m

e
t
h
o
d

[6
8
]

4
c
a
t
e
g
o
r
ie

s
:
u
s
e
,
e
c
o
n
o
m

ic
a
l,

c
h
o
ic

e
o
f
p
r
o
v
id

e
r

a
n
d

d
e
m

o
g
r
a
p
h
ic

a
l.

W
e
b

S
u
r
v
e
y
.

N
o
t

s
p
e
c
if
ie

d
.

N
o
.

L
o
g
is
t
ic

R
e
g
r
e
s
s
io

n
.

A
c
c
u
r
a
c
y

o
n

s
e
p
a
r
a
t
e

v
a
li
d
a
t
io

n
s
e
t
s
.

[2
1
]

B
il
li
n
g
,
s
e
r
v
ic

e
a
n
d

s
o
c
io

-
d
e
m

o
g
r
a
p
h
ic

d
a
t
a

o
n

c
e
ll

p
h
o
n
e

u
s
e
r
s
.

D
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
.

D
T
s
-
a
n
d

G
A
s
-
b
a
s
e
d
.

D
a
t
a

c
o
ll
e
c
t
e
d

o
n

a
m

o
n
t
h
ly

b
a
s
is

a
n
d

p
r
e
d
ic

t
in

g
fu

t
u
r
e

c
h
u
r
n
.

C
H
A
R
T

o
w
n

m
e
t
h
o
d
,
a
s

a
c
o
m

b
in

a
t
io

n
o
f

D
T
s

a
n
d

A
N
N
s
.

A
c
c
u
r
a
c
y

o
n

a
s
e
p
a
r
a
t
e

v
a
li
d
a
t
io

n
d
a
t
a

s
e
t
.

[7
1
]

C
a
ll

d
e
t
a
il
s
,
q
u
a
li
t
y

(
in

t
e
r
fe

r
e
n
c
e
s

a
n
d

s
ig

n
a
l

c
o
v
e
r
a
g
e
)
,
fi
n
a
n
c
ia

l
a
n
d

s
e
r
v
ic

e
a
p
p
li
c
a
t
io

n
(
c
o
n
t
r
a
c
t

d
e
t
a
il
s
,
r
a
t
e

p
la

n
,
h
a
n
d
s
e
t

t
y
p
e

a
n
d

c
r
e
d
it

r
e
p
o
r
t
)

a
n
d

d
e
m

o
g
r
a
p
h
ic

in
fo

r
m

a
t
io

n
.

D
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
.

N
o
t

s
p
e
c
if
ie

d
.

3
m

o
n
t
h
s

o
b
s
e
r
v
a
t
io

n
a
n
d

2
m

o
n
t
h
s

p
r
e
d
ic

t
io

n
.

L
o
g
is
t
ic

R
e
g
r
e
s
s
io

n
a
n
d

D
T
s

(
C
5
.0

)
.

L
if
t

C
h
a
r
t

a
n
d

C
r
o
s
s
-
v
a
li
d
a
t
io

n
.

[7
3
]

U
s
a
g
e

d
a
t
a

o
n

t
e
le

c
o
m

c
u
s
t
o
m

e
r
s
.

D
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
.

D
e
c
is
io

n
T
r
e
e
s
.

N
o
t

s
p
e
c
if
ie

d
.

D
T
s

(
C
4
.5

)
.

C
r
o
s
s
-
v
a
li
d
a
t
io

n
.

[1
0
0
]

H
is
t
o
r
ic

a
l
p
u
r
c
h
a
s
e

b
e
h
a
v
io

r
,
s
o
c
io

-
d
e
m

o
g
r
a
p
h
ic

s
a
n
d

a
c
t
u
a
l
p
u
r
c
h
a
s
e

o
f
b
a
n
k
in

g
c
u
s
t
o
m

e
r
s
.

S
u
r
v
e
y
.

D
o
m

a
in

K
n
o
w
le

d
g
e
.

N
o

(
s
u
r
v
e
y

a
t

t
h
e

m
o
m

e
n
t

o
f
la

s
t

p
u
r
c
h
a
s
e
)
.

L
in

e
a
r

R
e
g
r
e
s
s
io

n
.

A
c
c
u
r
a
c
y
.

[1
0
3
]

V
a
r
ia

b
le

s
r
e
la

t
e
d

t
o

t
h
e

c
o
n
t
r
a
c
t

(
le

n
g
t
h

o
f
s
e
r
v
ic

e
,

p
a
y
m

e
n
t

t
y
p
e
,
c
o
n
t
r
a
c
t

t
y
p
e
)

a
n
d

c
o
n
s
u
m

p
t
io

n
v
a
r
ia

b
le

s
(
m

in
u
t
e
s

o
f
u
s
e
,
fr
e
q
u
e
n
c
y

a
n
d

s
p
h
e
r
e

o
f

in
fl
u
e
n
c
e
)
.

D
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
.

I
n
t
e
r
v
ie

w
s

w
it
h

e
x
p
e
r
t
s
.

3
p
e
r
io

d
s
:
O

b
s
e
r
v
a
t
io

n
,

r
e
t
e
n
t
io

n
a
n
d

p
r
e
d
ic

t
io

n
.

D
T
s

(
C
4
.5

)
.

A
c
c
u
r
a
c
y

a
n
d

s
e
n
s
it
iv

it
y
.

[9
4
]

R
F
M

,
b
e
h
a
v
io

u
r
a
ls

(
s
p
e
c
if
ic

s
o
f
t
h
e

c
o
m

p
a
n
y
,

p
r
e
d
ic

t
io

n
o
f
w
h
e
t
h
e
r

p
u
r
c
h
a
s
e

b
y

p
o
s
t

w
il
l
b
e

r
e
p
e
a
t
e
d

o
r

n
o
t
)

a
n
d

n
o
n
-
b
e
h
a
v
io

u
r
a
ls

(
s
a
t
is
fa

c
t
io

n
)
.

S
u
r
v
e
y

a
n
d

D
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
.

S
e
q
u
e
n
t
ia

l
S
e
a
r
c
h

A
lg

o
r
it
h
m

.
4

y
e
a
r

h
is
t
o
r
ic

a
l
d
a
t
a

p
lu

s
o
n
e

s
u
r
v
e
y
.
6

m
o
n
t
h
s

p
r
e
d
ic

t
io

n
.

L
o
g
is
t
ic

R
e
g
r
e
s
s
io

n
.

A
c
c
u
r
a
c
y

a
n
d

A
U
C
.

[1
]

C
u
s
t
o
m

e
r

lo
c
a
li
s
a
t
io

n
,
c
u
s
t
o
m

e
r

t
y
p
e
,
p
a
y
m

e
n
t

m
e
t
h
o
d
,
s
e
r
v
ic

e
p
la

n
,
m

o
n
t
h
ly

u
s
e
,
n
u
m

b
e
r

o
f
c
a
ll
s

m
a
d
e

a
n
d

n
u
m

b
e
r

o
f
c
a
ll
s

a
b
n
o
r
m

a
ll
y

e
n
d
e
d

(
2
5
1

v
a
r
ia

b
le

s
)

D
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
.

I
n
t
e
r
v
ie

w
s

w
it
h

e
x
p
e
r
t
s
.

2
m

o
n
t
h
s

fo
r

t
r
a
in

in
g

a
n
d

1
m

o
n
t
h

fo
r

p
r
e
d
ic

t
io

n
.

D
T
s

(
C
4
.5

)
.

L
if
t

C
h
a
r
t

a
n
d

A
c
c
u
r
a
c
y

v
a
lu

e
s
.

[2
6
]

B
il
li
n
g
,
c
o
n
s
u
m

e
r

u
s
a
g
e
,
d
e
m

o
g
r
a
p
h
ic

s
,
c
u
s
t
o
m

e
r

r
e
la

t
io

n
s
h
ip

a
n
d

m
a
r
k
e
t

d
a
t
a

fr
o
m

a
w
ir
e
le

s
s

t
e
lc

o
c
o
m

p
a
n
y
.

C
o
m

p
a
n
y

d
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
.

D
o
m

a
in

k
n
o
w
le

d
g
e
.

N
o

(
d
a
t
a

c
o
ll
e
c
t
e
d

d
u
r
in

g
9

m
o
n
t
h
s
)
.

D
T
s
.

T
e
n
-
fo

ld
c
r
o
s
s

v
a
li
d
a
t
io

n
.

[4
5
]

S
o
c
io

-
d
e
m

o
g
r
a
p
h
ic

a
n
d

u
s
a
g
e

v
a
r
ia

b
le

s
.

D
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
.

R
2

m
e
t
h
o
d
.

N
o

(
6

m
o
n
t
h
s

d
a
t
a
)
.

D
T
s

a
n
d

L
o
g
is
t
ic

R
e
g
r
e
s
s
io

n
.

L
if
t

C
h
a
r
t

a
n
d

c
r
o
s
s
-
v
a
li
d
a
t
io

n
.

[5
1
]

C
o
m

p
a
n
y

s
e
r
v
ic

e
,
d
e
m

o
g
r
a
p
h
ic

a
n
d

s
e
r
v
ic

e
u
s
e

c
h
a
r
a
c
t
e
r
is
t
ic

s
.

S
u
r
v
e
y
.

N
o
t

s
p
e
c
if
ie

d
.

N
o
.

L
o
g
is
t
ic

R
e
g
r
e
s
s
io

n
.

L
o
g

li
k
e
li
h
o
o
d
.

[7
2
]

C
u
s
t
o
m

e
r

b
e
h
a
v
io

r
(
m

in
u
t
e
s

o
f
u
s
e
,
r
e
v
e
n
u
e
,
h
a
n
d
s
e
t

e
q
u
ip

m
e
n
t
,
t
r
e
n
d
s

in
u
s
a
g
e
)
,
c
o
m

p
a
n
y

in
t
e
r
a
c
t
io

n
d
a
t
a

(
c
a
ll
s

t
o

c
u
s
t
o
m

e
r

s
e
r
v
ic

e
)

a
n
d

d
e
m

o
g
r
a
p
h
ic

s
(
a
g
e
,
in

c
o
m

e
,
lo

c
a
t
io

n
,
h
o
u
s
e

o
w
n
e
r
s
h
ip

)
o
f
w
ir
e
le

s
s

t
e
le

c
o
m

m
u
n
ic

a
t
io

n
u
s
e
r
s
.

D
a
t
a

p
r
o
v
id

e
d

b
y

T
e
r
a
d
a
t
a

C
e
n
t
e
r

fo
r

C
R
M

.

E
x
p
lo

r
a
t
o
r
y

d
a
t
a

a
n
a
ly

s
is
,
d
o
m

a
in

k
n
o
w
le

d
g
e

a
n
d

s
t
e
p
w
is
e
.

D
a
t
a

c
o
ll
e
c
t
e
d

o
n

a
3
-
m

o
n
t
h

p
e
r
io

d
,
c
h
u
r
n

e
v
a
lu

a
t
e
d

o
n

t
h
e

5
t
h

m
o
n
t
h
.

L
o
g
is
t
ic

R
e
g
r
e
s
s
io

n
a
n
d

D
T
s
.

T
o
p

d
e
c
il
e

li
ft

a
n
d

G
in

i
c
o
e
ff
ic

ie
n
t
,

w
it
h

t
w
o

v
a
li
d
a
t
io

n
d
a
t
a

s
e
t
s
.

[1
0
9
]

D
e
m

o
g
r
a
p
h
ic

s
,
u
s
a
g
e

le
v
e
l,

q
u
a
li
t
y

o
f
s
e
r
v
ic

e
a
n
d

m
a
r
k
e
t
in

g
fe

a
t
u
r
e
s

fr
o
m

w
ir
e
le

s
s

t
e
le

c
o
m

c
u
s
t
o
m

e
r
s
.

C
o
m

p
a
n
y

d
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
.

N
o
.

T
r
a
in

in
g

s
e
t
:
3

m
o
n
t
h
s

d
a
t
a
;
c
h
u
r
n

m
e
a
s
u
r
e
d

a
ft
e
r

5
m

o
n
t
h
s
.

D
T
s
.

A
c
c
u
r
a
c
y
.

[1
0
]

P
a
s
t

p
u
r
c
h
a
s
e

b
e
h
a
v
io

u
r
,
m

o
d
e
le

d
w
it
h

R
F
M

v
a
r
ia

b
le

s
fr
o
m

c
u
s
t
o
m

e
r
s

o
f
F
a
s
t
-
M

o
v
in

g
C
o
n
s
u
m

e
r

G
o
o
d
s

(
F
M

C
G

)
r
e
t
a
il

c
o
m

p
a
n
y
,
c
o
m

p
le

m
e
n
t
e
d

w
it
h
:

p
a
y
m

e
n
t

m
e
t
h
o
d
,
le

n
g
t
h

o
f
c
u
s
t
o
m

e
r
-
s
u
p
p
li
e
r

r
e
la

t
io

n
s
h
ip

,
s
h
o
p
p
in

g
b
e
h
a
v
io

u
r
,
p
r
o
m

o
t
io

n
a
l

b
e
h
a
v
io

u
r

a
n
d

b
r
a
n
d

p
u
r
c
h
a
s
e
.

C
o
m

p
a
n
y

d
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
.

A
ll
u
s
io

n
t
o

p
r
e
v
io

u
s

r
e
s
e
a
r
c
h
.

5
-
m

o
n
t
h
s

o
b
s
e
r
v
a
t
io

n
p
e
r
io

d
a
n
d

5
-
m

o
n
t
h
s

v
a
li
d
a
t
io

n
p
e
r
io

d
.

D
T
s
.

A
c
c
u
r
a
c
y

a
n
d

A
U
C
,
u
s
in

g
s
e
p
a
r
a
t
e

v
a
li
d
a
t
io

n
s
e
t
s
.



Intelligent Data Analysis Approaches to Churn as a Business Problem: a Survey 33
T
a
b
le

3
(C

o
n
ti
n
u
e
s
fr
o
m

th
e
p
re
v
io
u
s
ta
b
le
)
R
e
fe
re
n
c
e
s
o
n
a
b
a
n
d
o
n
m
e
n
t
p
re
d
ic
ti
o
n
m
o
d
e
ll
in
g
,
li
st
e
d
in

ch
ro
n
o
lo
g
ic
a
l
o
rd

e
r
(2
0
0
6
-2
0
0
9
)
a
n
d
c
o
rr
e
sp

o
n
d
in
g
to

th
e
u
se

o
f
st
a
n
d
a
rd

m
e
th

o
d
s
(2

o
u
t
o
f
3
,
c
o
n
ti
n
u
e
s
in

th
e
n
e
x
t
ta
b
le
).

R
e
f.

D
a
t
a

t
y
p
e

D
a
t
a

g
a
t
h
e
r
in

g
F
e
a
t
u
r
e

s
e
le
c
t
io

n
T
im

e
p
e
r
io

d
s

M
o
d
e
ll
in

g
t
e
c
h
n
iq

u
e
s

V
a
li
d
a
t
io

n
m

e
t
h
o
d

[4
4
]

T
r
a
n
s
a
c
t
io

n
a
n
d

c
o
n
t
r
a
c
t

d
a
t
a
:
d
e
m

o
g
r
a
p
h
ic

,
p
a
y
m

e
n
t
,
c
a
ll

d
e
t
a
il
s

a
n
d

c
u
s
t
o
m

e
r

s
e
r
v
ic

e
d
a
t
a
.

D
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
.

I
n
t
e
r
v
ie

w
s

w
it
h

e
x
p
e
r
t
s

a
n
d

c
u
s
t
o
m

e
r
s
;

z
-
t
e
s
t
.

D
a
t
a

c
o
ll
e
c
t
e
d

o
n

a
6

m
o
n
t
h

p
e
r
io

d
.
1

m
o
n
t
h

p
r
e
d
ic

t
io

n
.

D
T
s

(
C
5
.0

)
.

5
%

T
o
p
-
D

e
c
il
e

L
if
t

o
n

s
e
p
a
r
a
t
e

v
a
li
d
a
t
io

n
d
a
t
a

s
e
t
s
.

[5
9
]

G
e
n
d
e
r
,
a
g
e
,
m

a
r
r
ia

g
e

s
t
a
t
u
s
,
e
d
u
c
a
t
io

n
a
l
le

v
e
l,

o
c
c
u
p
a
t
io

n
,
jo

b
,
p
o
s
it
io

n
,
a
n
n
u
a
l
in

c
o
m

e
,

r
e
s
id

e
n
t
ia

l
s
t
a
t
u
s

a
n
d

c
r
e
d
it

li
m

it
s
,
fr
o
m

b
a
n
k
in

g
c
u
s
t
o
m

e
r
s
.

D
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
.

S
t
e
p
w
is
e

d
is
c
r
im

in
a
n
t

a
n
a
ly

s
is
.

N
o
t

s
p
e
c
if
ie

d
.

C
A
R
T

a
n
d

L
o
g
is
t
ic

R
e
g
r
e
s
s
io

n
.

A
c
c
u
r
a
c
y
.

[6
0
]

R
F
M

v
a
r
ia

b
le

s
,
m

in
u
t
e
s

o
f
c
u
s
t
o
m

e
r

c
a
r
e

c
a
ll
s
,

n
u
m

b
e
r

o
f
a
d
u
lt
s

in
t
h
e

h
o
u
s
e
h
o
ld

a
n
d

e
d
u
c
a
t
io

n
le

v
e
l,

fo
r

c
o
s
t
u
m

e
r
s

o
f
a

w
ir
e
le

s
s

t
e
le

c
o
m

m
u
n
ic

a
t
io

n
s

c
o
m

p
a
n
y
.

C
o
m

p
a
n
y

d
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
,
p
r
o
v
id

e
d

b
y

C
R
M

C
e
n
t
r
e
.

A
ll
u
s
io

n
t
o

p
r
e
v
io

u
s

r
e
s
e
a
r
c
h
.

T
r
a
in

in
g

d
a
d
a

fr
o
m

4
n
o
n
-
c
o
n
s
e
c
u
t
iv

e
m

o
n
t
h
s
;

v
a
li
d
a
t
io

n
d
a
t
a

fr
o
m

a
fu

t
u
r
e

p
o
in

t
in

t
im

e
.

D
T
s
.

T
o
p
-
d
e
c
il
e

li
ft

a
n
d

G
in

i
c
o
e
ff
ic

ie
n
t
.

[7
4
]

O
n

a
c
h
a
r
g
e

e
m

a
il

s
e
r
v
ic

e
:
c
u
s
t
o
m

e
r

a
c
c
o
u
n
t

d
a
t
a

(
s
t
o
r
a
g
e

b
o
u
g
h
t
,
le

n
g
t
h

o
f
u
s
in

g
a
n
d

s
e
r
v
ic

e
)
,

u
s
a
g
e

(
n
u
m

b
e
r

o
f
p
a
y
m

e
n
t
s

in
t
h
e

la
s
t

3
m

o
n
t
h
s
,

t
o
t
a
l
p
a
id

a
m

o
u
n
t
,
c
o
m

p
la

in
t
s
)

a
n
d

p
e
r
s
o
n
a
l

in
fo

r
m

a
t
io

n
(
a
g
e
,
p
h
o
n
e

n
u
m

b
e
r

p
r
o
v
id

e
d
)
.

C
o
m

p
a
n
y

d
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
.

A
d
v
is
e
d

b
y

e
m

p
lo

y
e
e
s

fa
m

il
ia

r
w
it
h

t
h
e

d
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
.

H
is
t
o
r
ic

a
l
t
r
a
in

in
g

d
a
t
a

t
e
s
t
e
d

w
it
h

p
r
e
v
io

u
s
ly

k
n
o
w
n

c
h
u
r
n

d
a
t
a
.

D
T
s
.

A
c
c
u
r
a
c
y
.

[1
7
]

C
li
e
n
t
-
c
o
m

p
a
n
y

in
t
e
r
a
c
t
io

n
s
,
r
e
n
e
w
a
l-
r
e
la

t
e
d

in
fo

r
m

a
t
io

n
,
s
o
c
io

-
d
e
m

o
g
r
a
p
h
ic

s
a
n
d

s
u
b
s
c
r
ip

t
io

n
-
d
e
s
c
r
ib

in
g

in
fo

r
m

a
t
io

n
r
e
la

t
e
d

t
o

s
u
b
s
c
r
ib

e
r
s

o
f
a

n
e
w
s
p
a
p
e
r

p
u
b
li
s
h
in

g
c
o
m

p
a
n
y
.

D
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
.

B
a
s
e
d

o
n

R
F

r
e
le

v
a
n
c
e

m
e
a
s
u
r
e
s
.

3
0

m
o
n
t
h
s

d
a
t
a

c
o
ll
e
c
t
io

n
a
n
d

1
y
e
a
r

p
r
e
d
ic

t
io

n
p
e
r
io

d
.

L
o
g
is
t
ic

R
e
g
r
e
s
s
io

n
.

C
r
o
s
s
-
v
a
li
d
a
t
io

n
w
it
h

a
c
c
u
r
a
c
y

a
n
d

A
U
C
.

[2
9
]

E
v
o
lu

t
io

n
in

t
im

e
o
f
t
h
e

R
F
M

v
a
r
ia

b
le

s
(
n
u
m

b
e
r

o
f

in
v
o
ic

e
s

la
s
t

m
o
n
t
h
,
a
m

o
u
n
t

in
v
o
ic

e
d
,
n
u
m

b
e
r

o
f

w
it
h
d
r
a
w
a
ls
)

r
e
la

t
e
d

t
o

t
r
a
n
s
a
c
t
io

n
s

o
f
a

fi
n
a
n
c
ia

l
c
o
m

p
a
n
y

c
u
s
t
o
m

e
r
s
.

C
o
m

p
a
n
y

d
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
.

A
ll
u
s
io

n
t
o

p
r
e
v
io

u
s

r
e
s
e
a
r
c
h
.

T
r
a
in

in
g

s
e
t
:
6

c
o
n
s
e
c
u
t
iv

e
m

o
n
t
h
s
;

v
a
li
d
a
t
io

n
:
n
e
x
t

3
m

o
n
t
h
s
.

L
o
g
is
t
ic

R
e
g
r
e
s
s
io

n
a
n
d

D
T
s
.

A
c
c
u
r
a
c
y
,
L
o
s
s

fu
n
c
t
io

n
a
n
d

A
U
C
.

[5
6
]

S
o
c
io

d
e
m

o
g
r
a
p
h
ic

(
a
g
e
,
le

v
e
l
o
f
s
t
u
d
ie

s
,
in

c
o
m

e
)

a
n
d

b
e
h
a
v
io

u
r
a
l
(
m

o
n
t
h
ly

c
r
e
d
it
,
n
u
m

b
e
r

o
f
c
a
r
d
s
,

w
e
b

t
r
a
n
s
a
c
t
io

n
s
,
m

a
r
g
in

)
d
a
t
a

fr
o
m

c
r
e
d
it

c
a
r
d

u
s
e
r
s
.

D
a
t
a
s
e
t

fr
o
m

t
h
e

B
u
s
in

e
s
s

I
n
t
e
ll
ig

e
n
c
e

C
u
p
,

U
n
iv

.
o
f
C
h
il
e
.

C
A
R
T
-
b
a
s
e
d
.

D
a
t
a

fr
o
m

3
c
o
n
s
e
c
u
t
iv

e
m

o
n
t
h
s
;
r
e
s
u
lt
s

t
e
s
t
e
d

d
u
r
in

g
t
h
e

s
u
b
s
e
q
u
e
n
t

y
e
a
r
.

D
T
s

(
J
4
8
)

a
n
d

L
o
g
is
t
ic

R
e
g
r
e
s
s
io

n
.

S
e
n
s
it
iv

it
y

a
n
d

a
c
c
u
r
a
c
y

v
a
lu

e
s
,
o
n

c
r
o
s
s
-
fo

ld
v
a
li
d
a
t
io

n
d
a
t
a

s
e
t
.

[4
1
]

H
e
n
le

y
s
e
g
m

e
n
t
s
,
b
r
o
a
d
b
a
n
d

u
s
a
g
e
,
d
ia

l
t
y
p
e
s
,

s
p
e
n
d

o
f
d
ia

l-
u
p
,
li
n
e
-
in

fo
r
m

a
t
io

n
,
b
il
li
n
g
,
p
a
y
m

e
n
t

a
n
d

a
c
c
o
u
n
t

in
fo

r
m

a
t
io

n
o
n

b
r
o
a
d
b
a
n
d

in
t
e
r
n
e
t

s
e
r
v
ic

e
s

c
u
s
t
o
m

e
r
s
.

C
o
m

p
a
n
y

d
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
.

D
o
m

a
in

k
n
o
w
le

d
g
e
.

N
o
.

L
o
g
is
t
ic

R
e
g
r
e
s
s
io

n
a
n
d

D
e
c
is
io

n
T
r
e
e
s
.

A
c
c
u
r
a
c
y
.

[6
1
]

U
s
a
g
e

d
a
t
a

fr
o
m

9
d
if
fe

r
e
n
t

d
a
t
a

s
e
t
s

c
o
r
r
e
s
p
o
n
d
in

g
t
o

d
if
fe

r
e
n
t

in
d
u
s
t
r
ie

s
:
3

c
r
e
d
it

c
o
m

p
a
n
ie

s
,
2

fr
o
m

t
h
e

m
a
il
-
o
r
d
e
r

in
d
u
s
t
r
y
,
a
n
d

1
fr
o
m

t
h
e

e
n
e
r
g
y

in
d
u
s
t
r
y
,
d
ir
e
c
t

m
a
r
k
e
t
in

g
,
fr
a
u
d

d
e
t
e
c
t
io

n
a
n
d

e
-
c
o
m

m
e
r
c
e
.

D
a
t
a
s
e
t
s

fr
o
m

U
C
I

M
L

R
e
p
o
s
it
o
r
y

a
n
d

t
h
e

a
n
n
u
a
l

D
M

C
u
p
.

R
e
c
u
r
s
iv

e
F
e
a
t
u
r
e

E
li
m

in
a
t
io

n
.

N
o

(
b
o
t
h

t
r
a
in

in
g

a
n
d

v
a
li
d
a
t
io

n
o
n

h
is
t
o
r
ic

a
l

d
a
t
a
)
.

L
o
g
is
t
ic

R
e
g
r
e
s
s
io

n
a
n
d

D
T
s
.

T
e
n
-
F
o
ld

C
r
o
s
s

v
a
li
d
a
t
io

n
o
n

A
U
C

v
a
lu

e
s
.

[6
3
]

T
h
r
e
e

in
d
e
p
e
n
d
e
n
t

d
a
t
a
s
e
t
s

r
e
la

t
e
d

t
o

t
e
le

c
o
m

in
d
u
s
t
r
y

c
o
n
t
a
in

in
g

u
s
a
g
e
,
b
il
li
n
g

a
n
d

s
o
c
io

d
e
m

o
g
r
a
p
h
ic

d
a
t
a
.

P
r
o
v
id

e
d

b
y

C
R
M

C
e
n
t
r
e

a
t

D
u
k
e

U
n
iv

e
r
s
it
y
.

O
w
n

m
e
t
h
o
d
,

in
t
e
g
r
a
t
in

g
D

o
m

a
in

K
n
o
w
le

d
g
e
.

D
a
t
a

c
o
ll
e
c
t
e
d

d
u
r
in

g
4

m
o
n
t
h
s
;
c
h
u
r
n

c
a
lc

u
la

t
e
d

o
n

t
h
e

3
1
-
6
0

d
a
y
s

a
ft
e
r

s
a
m

p
li
n
g
.

L
o
g
is
t
ic

R
e
g
r
e
s
s
io

n
a
n
d

D
e
c
is
io

n
T
r
e
e
s
.

K
-
fo

ld
C
V
,
a
c
c
u
r
a
c
y
,

s
e
n
s
it
iv

it
y
,

s
p
e
c
if
ic

it
y

a
n
d

A
U
C
.



34 David L. Garćıa et al.

T
a
b
le

4
(C

o
n
ti
n
u
e
s
fr
o
m

th
e
p
re
v
io
u
s
ta
b
le
)
R
e
fe
re
n
c
e
s
o
n
a
b
a
n
d
o
n
m
e
n
t
p
re
d
ic
ti
o
n
m
o
d
e
ll
in
g
,
li
st
e
d
in

ch
ro
n
o
lo
g
ic
a
l
o
rd

e
r
(2
0
1
0
-2
0
1
5
).

S
ta
n
d
a
rd

m
e
th

o
d
s
(3

o
u
t
o
f
3
).

R
e
f.

D
a
t
a

t
y
p
e

D
a
t
a

g
a
t
h
e
r
in

g
F
e
a
t
u
r
e

s
e
le
c
t
io

n
T
im

e
p
e
r
io

d
s

M
o
d
e
ll
in

g
t
e
c
h
n
iq

u
e
s

V
a
li
d
a
t
io

n
m

e
t
h
o
d

[6
2
]

U
s
a
g
e

(
a
v
e
r
a
g
e

m
o
n
t
h
ly

m
in

u
t
e
s

a
n
d

r
e
v
e
n
u
e
,
d
a
y
s

o
f
c
u
r
r
e
n
t

e
q
u
ip

m
e
n
t
,
fa

il
e
d

v
o
ic

e
c
a
ll
s
)

a
n
d

s
o
c
io

d
e
m

o
g
r
a
p
h
ic

a
l
(
a
r
e
a
,
e
t
h
n
ic

it
y
,
p
r
e
s
e
n
c
e

o
f

c
h
il
d

in
h
o
u
s
e
h
o
ld

)
d
a
t
a

fr
o
m

a
m

o
b
il
e

t
e
le

c
o
m

m
u
n
ic

a
t
io

n
s

c
o
m

p
a
n
y
.

D
a
t
a
s
e
t

u
s
e
d

in
t
h
e

c
h
u
r
n

t
o
u
r
n
a
m

e
n
t

b
y

D
u
k
e

U
n
iv

.

D
o
m

a
in

k
n
o
w
le

d
g
e

a
n
d

s
t
e
p
w
is
e

s
e
le

c
t
io

n
.

F
o
u
r

n
o
n
-
c
o
n
s
e
c
u
t
iv

e
m

o
n
t
h
s
;
c
h
u
r
n
e
r
s

le
a
v
e

1
t
o

2
m

o
n
t
h
s

a
ft
e
r

b
e
in

g
s
a
m

p
le

d
.

L
o
g
is
t
ic

R
e
g
r
e
s
s
io

n
a
n
d

D
T
s
.

A
c
c
u
r
a
c
y
,

s
e
n
s
it
iv

it
y
,

s
p
e
c
if
ic

it
y

a
n
d

A
U
C
.

C
r
o
s
s
-
fo

ld
v
a
li
d
a
t
io

n
.

[1
0
2
]

C
u
s
t
o
m

e
r

p
e
r
s
o
n
a
l
in

fo
r
m

a
t
io

n
,
c
r
e
d
it

c
a
r
d

b
a
s
ic

d
a
t
a
,
t
r
a
n
s
a
c
t
io

n
a
n
d

a
b
n
o
r
m

a
l
u
s
a
g
e

in
fo

r
m

a
t
io

n
.

C
o
m

p
a
n
y

d
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
.

D
o
m

a
in

k
n
o
w
le

d
g
e
.

1
2

m
o
n
t
h
s

o
b
s
e
r
v
a
t
io

n
p
e
r
io

d
a
n
d

1
2

m
o
n
t
h
s

t
e
s
t
in

g
p
e
r
io

d
.

L
o
g
is
t
ic

R
e
g
r
e
s
s
io

n
a
n
d

D
T
s
.

A
c
c
u
r
a
c
y
,
A
U
C
,

P
r
e
c
is
io

n
,
R
e
c
a
ll
,

M
e
a
n

A
b
s
o
lu

t
e

E
r
r
o
r

a
n
d

c
o
m

p
u
t
in

g
t
im

e
.

[7
6
]

C
u
s
t
o
m

e
r

p
e
r
s
o
n
a
l
in

fo
r
m

a
t
io

n
,
c
r
e
d
it

c
a
r
d

b
a
s
ic

d
a
t
a
,
t
r
a
n
s
a
c
t
io

n
a
n
d

a
b
n
o
r
m

a
l
u
s
a
g
e

in
fo

r
m

a
t
io

n
.

C
o
m

p
a
n
y

d
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
.

D
e
le

t
e

v
a
r
ia

b
le

s
w
it
h

h
ig

h
m

u
lt
ic

o
ll
in

e
a
r
it
y
.

1
2

m
o
n
t
h
s

o
b
s
e
r
v
a
t
io

n
p
e
r
io

d
a
n
d

1
2

m
o
n
t
h
s

t
e
s
t
in

g
p
e
r
io

d
.

L
o
g
is
t
ic

R
e
g
r
e
s
s
io

n
a
n
d

D
T
s
.

A
c
c
u
r
a
c
y

a
n
d

A
U
C
.

[9
7
]

S
o
c
io

d
e
m

o
g
r
a
p
h
ic

s
,
c
a
ll

b
e
h
a
v
io

u
r
,
fi
n
a
n
c
ia

l
a
n
d

m
a
r
k
e
t
in

g
r
e
la

t
e
d

v
a
r
ia

b
le

s
fr
o
m

e
le

v
e
n

w
ir
e
le

s
s

t
e
le

c
o
m

o
p
e
r
a
t
o
r
s
.

C
o
m

p
a
n
y

a
n
d

p
u
b
li
c

d
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
.

B
a
s
e
d

o
n

F
is
h
e
r

s
c
o
r
e
.

N
o

(
a
v
e
r
a
g
e
s

o
v
e
r

1
y
e
a
r

d
a
t
a
)
.

D
T
s
.

A
c
c
u
r
a
c
y
,

s
e
n
s
it
iv

it
y
,

s
p
e
c
if
ic

it
y
,
A
U
C
.

[6
9
]

H
is
t
o
r
ic

a
l
p
u
r
c
h
a
s
e

d
a
t
a
,
R
F
M

a
n
d

d
e
m

o
g
r
a
p
h
ic

s
D

a
t
a
b
a
s
e

S
t
e
p
w
is
e

s
e
le

c
t
io

n
T
w
o

y
e
a
r
s

o
f
d
a
t
a

L
o
g
is
t
ic

r
e
g
r
e
s
s
io

n
a
n
d

M
u
lt
iv

a
r
ia

t
e

A
d
a
p
t
iv

e
R
e
g
r
e
s
s
io

n
S
p
li
n
e
s

A
U
C

a
n
d

T
o
p
-
D

e
c
il
e

L
if
t
.
1
0
-
fo

ld
c
r
o
s
s
-
v
a
li
d
a
t
io

n
.

[3
1
]

C
u
s
t
o
m

e
r

b
e
h
a
v
io

r
,
d
e
m

o
g
r
a
p
h
ic

s
,

c
u
s
t
o
m

e
r
-
c
o
m

p
a
n
y

in
t
e
r
a
c
t
io

n
s
,
a
n
d

e
c
o
n
o
m

ic
in

d
ic

a
t
o
r
s

B
a
n
k
in

g
c
o
m

p
a
n
y

d
a
t
a
b
a
s
e

S
t
e
p
w
is
e

s
e
le

c
t
io

n
L
o
n
g
it
u
d
in

a
l
d
a
t
a

C
o
x

r
e
g
r
e
s
s
io

n
,

lo
g
is
t
ic

r
e
g
r
e
s
s
io

n
a
n
d

D
T
s

A
U
C

a
n
d

t
o
p

d
e
c
il
e

li
ft
.
B
o
o
t
s
t
r
a
p
p
in

g
.

[5
0
]

C
u
s
t
o
m

e
r

b
e
h
a
v
io

r
,
d
e
m

o
g
r
a
p
h
ic

s
a
n
d

u
s
a
g
e

d
a
t
a

T
e
le

c
o
m

m
u
n
ic

a
-

t
io

n
s

d
a
t
a
b
a
s
e

o
f

u
n
r
e
p
o
r
t
e
d

o
r
ig

in

F
e
a
t
u
r
e

s
e
le

c
t
io

n
t
h
r
o
u
g
h

e
x
h
a
u
s
t
iv

e
r
e
c
o
m

b
in

a
t
io

n
o
f

v
a
r
ia

b
le

s

N
o
t

r
e
p
o
r
t
e
d

M
u
lt
ip

le
D

T
m

o
d
e
ls

a
n
d

k
-
n
e
a
r
e
s
t

n
e
ig

h
b
o
u
r
s
,

c
o
m

p
a
r
e
d

w
it
h

a
lt
e
r
n
a
t
iv

e
m

e
t
h
o
d
s

a
s

s
t
a
n
d
-
a
lo

n
e

m
o
d
e
ls

o
r

h
y
b
r
id

iz
e
d

t
h
r
o
u
g
h

a
n

a
d

h
o
c

m
e
t
h
o
d

a
c
c
u
r
a
c
y
,
p
r
e
c
is
io

n
,

r
e
c
a
ll

a
n
d

F
-
s
c
o
r
e
.

S
in

g
le

t
r
a
in

in
g
-
t
e
s
t

s
p
li
t
.

[2
4
]

C
u
s
t
o
m

e
r

b
e
h
a
v
io

r
,
d
e
m

o
g
r
a
p
h
ic

s
a
n
d

u
s
a
g
e

d
a
t
a

C
r
e
d
it

c
a
r
d

o
r
ig

in
a
l
d
a
t
a
b
a
s
e

fr
o
m

C
h
il
e
a
n

b
a
n
k

R
e
c
u
r
s
iv

e
fe

a
t
u
r
e

e
li
m

in
a
t
io

n
a
s
s
o
c
ia

t
e
d

t
o

S
V
M

c
la

s
s
if
ie

r

N
o
t

r
e
p
o
r
t
e
d

N
ä
ıv

e
B
a
y
e
s

T
r
e
e

r
u
le

e
x
t
r
a
c
t
io

n
o
n

t
o
p

o
f
a

S
V
M

c
la

s
s
if
ie

r

a
c
c
u
r
a
c
y
,
s
e
n
s
it
iv

it
y
,

s
p
e
c
if
ic

it
y
.

T
r
a
in

in
g
-
t
e
s
t

s
p
li
t

w
it
h

1
0
-
fo

ld
C
V

fo
r

t
r
a
in

in
g
.

[9
3
]

U
s
a
g
e

d
a
t
a

in
t
h
e

t
e
le

c
o
m

m
u
n
ic

a
t
io

n
s

s
e
c
t
o
r

S
t
a
n
d
a
r
d

d
a
t
a
b
a
s
e

fr
o
m

t
h
e

U
C
I

m
a
c
h
in

e
le

a
r
n
in

g
r
e
p
o
s
it
o
r
y

N
o

N
o
t

d
e
c
la

r
e
d

C
5
.0

D
T

a
n
d

L
o
g
is
t
ic

r
e
g
r
e
s
s
io

n
,

c
o
m

p
a
r
e
d

w
it
h

a
lt
e
r
n
a
t
iv

e
m

e
t
h
o
d
s

P
r
e
c
is
io

n
,
r
e
c
a
ll
,

a
c
c
u
r
a
c
y

a
n
d

F
-
m

e
a
s
u
r
e

w
it
h

M
o
n
t
e

C
a
r
lo

-
b
a
s
e
d

c
r
o
s
s
-
v
a
li
d
a
t
io

n
.



Intelligent Data Analysis Approaches to Churn as a Business Problem: a Survey 35
T
a
b
le

5
R
e
fe
re
n
c
e
s
o
n
a
b
a
n
d
o
n
m
e
n
t
p
re
d
ic
ti
o
n
m
o
d
e
ll
in
g
,
li
st
e
d
in

ch
ro
n
o
lo
g
ic
a
l
o
rd

e
r
(2
0
0
0
-2
0
0
5
)
a
n
d
fo
r
th

e
u
se

o
f
C
I
m
e
th

o
d
s
(1

o
u
t
o
f
3
,
c
o
n
ti
n
u
e
s
in

th
e

n
e
x
t
ta
b
le
).

R
e
f.

D
a
t
a

t
y
p
e

D
a
t
a

g
a
t
h
e
r
in

g
F
e
a
t
u
r
e

s
e
le
c
t
io

n
T
im

e
p
e
r
io

d
s

M
o
d
e
ll
in

g
t
e
c
h
n
iq

u
e
s

V
a
li
d
a
t
io

n
m

e
t
h
o
d

[7
1
]

C
a
ll

d
e
t
a
il
s

a
n
d

q
u
a
li
t
y
,
fi
n
a
n
c
ia

l
a
n
d

s
e
r
v
ic

e
in

fo
r
m

a
t
io

n
a
n
d

d
e
m

o
g
r
a
p
h
ic

s
.

D
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
.

N
o
t

s
p
e
c
if
ie

d
.

3
m

o
n
t
h
s

o
b
s
e
r
v
a
t
io

n
a
n
d

2
m

o
n
t
h
s

p
r
e
d
ic

t
io

n
.

A
N
N
s
.

L
if
t

C
h
a
r
t

a
n
d

c
r
o
s
s
-
v
a
li
d
a
t
io

n
.

[2
1
]

B
il
li
n
g
,
s
e
r
v
ic

e
a
n
d

s
o
c
io

-
d
e
m

o
g
r
a
p
h
ic

d
a
t
a

o
n

c
e
ll

p
h
o
n
e

u
s
e
r
s
.

D
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
.

D
e
c
is
io

n
T
r
e
e
s

a
n
d

G
e
n
e
t
ic

A
lg

o
r
it
h
m

s
.

D
a
t
a

c
o
ll
e
c
t
e
d

m
o
n
t
h
ly

,
p
r
e
d
ic

t
in

g
fu

t
u
r
e

c
h
u
r
n
.

C
H
A
R
T

o
w
n

m
e
t
h
o
d
,
a
s

a
c
o
m

b
in

a
t
io

n
o
f
D

T
s

a
n
d

A
N
N
s
.

A
c
c
u
r
a
c
y

o
n

a
s
e
p
a
r
a
t
e

v
a
li
d
a
t
io

n
d
a
t
a

s
e
t
.

[3
]

4
1

S
E
R
V
Q

U
A
L
-
b
a
s
e
d

s
e
r
v
ic

e
q
u
a
li
t
y

v
a
r
ia

b
le

s
,

g
r
o
u
p
e
d

a
s

t
a
n
g
ib

le
s
,
r
e
li
a
b
il
it
y
,
r
e
s
p
o
n
s
iv

e
n
e
s
s
,

a
s
s
u
r
a
n
c
e

a
n
d

e
m

p
a
t
h
y
,
a
t

a
n

a
u
t
o
-
d
e
a
le

r
s
h
ip

n
e
t
w
o
r
k
.

S
u
r
v
e
y
.

A
ll
u
s
io

n
t
o

p
r
e
v
io

u
s

r
e
s
e
a
r
c
h
.

N
o

(
s
t
u
d
y

d
e
v
e
lo

p
e
d

a
t

o
n
e

s
in

g
le

p
o
in

t
in

t
im

e
)
.

A
N
N
s
.

L
e
a
s
t

a
v
e
r
a
g
e

e
r
r
o
r
,

le
a
s
t

r
o
o
t

m
e
a
n

s
q
u
a
r
e

e
r
r
o
r

a
n
d

a
c
c
u
r
a
c
y
.

[3
8
]

R
F
M

v
a
r
ia

b
le

s
in

t
h
e

o
n
li
n
e

r
e
t
a
il

in
d
u
s
t
r
y
.

D
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
.

N
o
t

s
p
e
c
if
ie

d
.

1
8

m
o
n
t
h
s
.

S
O

M
n
e
t
w
o
r
k
s
.

N
o
t

S
p
e
c
if
ie

d
.

[1
]

C
u
s
t
o
m

e
r

lo
c
a
li
s
a
t
io

n
,
c
u
s
t
o
m

e
r

t
y
p
e
,
p
a
y
m

e
n
t

m
e
t
h
o
d
,
s
e
r
v
ic

e
p
la

n
,
m

o
n
t
h
ly

u
s
e
,
n
u
m

b
e
r

o
f

c
a
ll
s

m
a
d
e

a
n
d

n
u
m

b
e
r

o
f
c
a
ll
s

a
b
n
o
r
m

a
ll
y

e
n
d
e
d

(
2
5
1

v
a
r
ia

b
le

s
)

D
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
.

I
n
t
e
r
v
ie

w
s

w
it
h

e
x
p
e
r
t
s
.

2
m

o
n
t
h
s

fo
r

t
r
a
in

in
g

a
n
d

1
m

o
n
t
h

fo
r

p
r
e
d
ic

t
io

n
.

D
M

E
L

a
lg

o
r
it
h
m

a
n
d

A
N
N
s
.

L
if
t

C
h
a
r
t

a
n
d

A
c
c
u
r
a
c
y

v
a
lu

e
s
.

[2
]

P
u
r
c
h
a
s
in

g
b
e
h
a
v
io

u
r
:
v
o
lu

m
e

o
f
p
u
r
c
h
a
s
e
s

d
u
r
in

g
fi
r
s
t

6
m

o
n
t
h
s

a
s

c
u
s
t
o
m

e
r
;
“
b
r
o
a
d
n
e
s
s
”

o
f
p
u
r
c
h
a
s
e
s
;
“
b
a
r
g
a
in

in
g

t
e
n
d
e
n
c
y
”

a
n
d

“
p
r
ic

e
s
e
n
s
it
iv

it
y
”
.

D
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
.

N
o
t

s
p
e
c
if
ie

d
.

Y
e
s

(
8

w
e
e
k
ly

p
e
r
io

d
s
)
.

B
a
y
e
s
ia

n
N
e
t
w
o
r
k
s
.

A
c
c
u
r
a
c
y

a
n
d

A
U
C
.

[2
6
]

B
il
li
n
g
,
c
o
n
s
u
m

e
r

u
s
a
g
e
,
d
e
m

o
g
r
a
p
h
ic

s
,
c
u
s
t
o
m

e
r

r
e
la

t
io

n
s
h
ip

a
n
d

m
a
r
k
e
t

d
a
t
a

fr
o
m

a
w
ir
e
le

s
s

t
e
lc

o
c
o
m

p
a
n
y
.

C
o
m

p
a
n
y

d
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
.

D
o
m

a
in

k
n
o
w
le

d
g
e
.

N
o

(
d
a
t
a

c
o
ll
e
c
t
e
d

d
u
r
in

g
9

m
o
n
t
h
s
)
.

M
L
P

A
N
N
,

N
e
u
r
o
-
F
u
z
z
y

S
y
s
t
e
m

s
a
n
d

G
A
s
.

T
e
n
-
fo

ld
c
r
o
s
s

v
a
li
d
a
t
io

n
.

[3
9
]

C
u
s
t
o
m

e
r

a
t
t
r
ib

u
t
e
s

a
n
d

c
r
e
d
it

c
a
r
d

u
s
a
g
e

fr
o
m

b
a
n
k
in

g
c
u
s
t
o
m

e
r
s
.

C
o
m

p
a
n
y

d
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
.

A
p
r
io
r
i
a
s
s
o
c
ia

t
io

n
o
v
e
r

t
h
e

d
if
fe

r
e
n
t

c
u
s
t
o
m

e
r

s
e
g
m

e
n
t
s
.

D
a
t
a

c
o
ll
e
c
t
e
d

in
a

1
2

m
o
n
t
h
s

p
e
r
io

d
;
n
o

p
r
e
d
ic

t
io

n
p
e
r
io

d
.

S
O

M
n
e
t
w
o
r
k
s
.

S
e
g
m

e
n
t
a
t
io

n
q
u
a
li
t
y
.

[4
5
]

S
o
c
io

-
d
e
m

o
g
r
a
p
h
ic

a
n
d

u
s
a
g
e

v
a
r
ia

b
le

s
.

D
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
.

R
2

m
e
t
h
o
d
.

N
o

(
6

m
o
n
t
h
s

d
a
t
a
)
.

A
r
t
if
ic

ia
l
N
e
u
r
a
l

N
e
t
w
o
r
k
s
.

L
if
t

C
h
a
r
t

a
n
d

c
r
o
s
s
-
v
a
li
d
a
t
io

n
.

[8
6
]

P
a
s
t

t
r
a
n
s
a
c
t
io

n
s

c
a
r
r
ie

d
b
y

t
h
e

c
o
s
t
u
m

e
r
.

D
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
.

N
o
t

s
p
e
c
if
ie

d
.

N
o

(
3

m
o
n
t
h
:
a
v
e
r
a
g
e
s

a
n
d

t
o
t
a
ls
)
.

K
-
m

e
a
n
s
,
S
O

M
n
e
t
w
o
r
k
s

a
n
d

F
u
z
z
y

K
-
m

e
a
n
s
.

I
n
tr
a
-c
la
s
s

m
e
t
h
o
d

fo
r

c
lu

s
t
e
r

c
o
m

p
a
c
t
n
e
s
s
.

[7
2
]

C
u
s
t
o
m

e
r

b
e
h
a
v
io

r
,
c
o
m

p
a
n
y

in
t
e
r
a
c
t
io

n
d
a
t
a

a
n
d

d
e
m

o
g
r
a
p
h
ic

s
fr
o
m

w
ir
e
le

s
s

t
e
le

c
o
m

m
u
n
ic

a
t
io

n
u
s
e
r
s
.

D
a
t
a

p
r
o
v
id

e
d

b
y

T
e
r
a
d
a
t
a

C
e
n
t
e
r

fo
r

C
R
M

.

E
x
p
lo

r
a
t
o
r
y

d
a
t
a

a
n
a
ly

s
is
,
d
o
m

a
in

k
n
o
w
le

d
g
e

a
n
d

s
t
e
p
w
is
e
.

D
a
t
a

c
o
ll
e
c
t
e
d

o
n

a
3
-
m

o
n
t
h

p
e
r
io

d
,
c
h
u
r
n

e
v
a
lu

a
t
e
d

o
n

t
h
e

5
t
h

m
o
n
t
h
.

A
N
N
s
.

T
o
p

d
e
c
il
e

li
ft

a
n
d

G
in

i
c
o
e
ff
ic

ie
n
t
,

w
it
h

t
w
o

v
a
li
d
a
t
io

n
d
a
t
a

s
e
t
s
.

[1
0
9
]

D
e
m

o
g
r
a
p
h
ic

s
,
u
s
a
g
e

le
v
e
l,

q
u
a
li
t
y

o
f
s
e
r
v
ic

e
a
n
d

m
a
r
k
e
t
in

g
fe

a
t
u
r
e
s

fr
o
m

w
ir
e
le

s
s

t
e
le

c
o
m

c
u
s
t
o
m

e
r
s
.

C
o
m

p
a
n
y

d
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
.

A
ll

t
h
e

fe
a
t
u
r
e
s

c
o
n
t
a
in

e
d

in
t
h
e

c
o
m

p
a
n
y

d
a
t
a

s
e
t

a
r
e

in
c
lu

d
e
d
.

T
h
r
e
e

m
o
n
t
h
s

t
r
a
in

in
g

d
a
t
a
;
c
h
u
r
n

m
e
a
s
u
r
e
d

a
ft
e
r

5
m

o
n
t
h
s
.

S
V
M

s
,
A
N
N
s

a
n
d

B
a
y
e
s
ia

n
N
e
t
w
o
r
k
s
.

A
c
c
u
r
a
c
y
.

[1
0
]

P
a
s
t

p
u
r
c
h
a
s
e

b
e
h
a
v
io

u
r
,
m

o
d
e
le

d
w
it
h

R
F
M

v
a
r
ia

b
le

s
fr
o
m

c
u
s
t
o
m

e
r
s

o
f
F
a
s
t
-
M

o
v
in

g
C
o
n
s
u
m

e
r

G
o
o
d
s

(
F
M

C
G

)
r
e
t
a
il

c
o
m

p
a
n
y
,

c
o
m

p
le

m
e
n
t
e
d

w
it
h
:
p
a
y
m

e
n
t

m
e
t
h
o
d
,
le

n
g
t
h

o
f

c
u
s
t
o
m

e
r
-
s
u
p
p
li
e
r

r
e
la

t
io

n
s
h
ip

,
s
h
o
p
p
in

g
b
e
h
a
v
io

u
r
,
p
r
o
m

o
t
io

n
a
l
b
e
h
a
v
io

u
r

a
n
d

b
r
a
n
d

p
u
r
c
h
a
s
e
.

C
o
m

p
a
n
y

d
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
.

A
u
t
o
m

a
t
ic

R
e
le

v
a
n
c
e

D
e
t
e
r
m

in
a
t
io

n
.

5
-
m

o
n
t
h
s

o
b
s
e
r
v
a
t
io

n
p
e
r
io

d
a
n
d

5
-
m

o
n
t
h
s

v
a
li
d
a
t
io

n
p
e
r
io

d
.

A
u
t
o
m

a
t
ic

R
e
le

v
a
n
c
e

D
e
t
e
r
m

in
a
t
io

n
A
N
N
s
.

A
c
c
u
r
a
c
y

a
n
d

A
U
C
,

u
s
in

g
s
e
p
a
r
a
t
e

v
a
li
d
a
t
io

n
s
e
t
s
.



36 David L. Garćıa et al.

T
a
b
le

6
(C

o
n
ti
n
u
e
s
fr
o
m

th
e
p
re
v
io
u
s
ta
b
le
)
R
e
fe
re
n
c
e
s
o
n
a
b
a
n
d
o
n
m
e
n
t
p
re
d
ic
ti
o
n
m
o
d
e
ll
in
g
,
li
st
e
d
in

ch
ro
n
o
lo
g
ic
a
l
o
rd

e
r
(2
0
0
6
-2
0
0
9
)
a
n
d
fo
r
C
I
m
e
th

o
d
s

(2
o
u
t
o
f
3
,
c
o
n
ti
n
u
e
s
in

th
e
n
e
x
t
ta
b
le
).

R
e
f.

D
a
t
a

t
y
p
e

D
a
t
a

g
a
t
h
e
r
in

g
F
e
a
t
u
r
e

s
e
le
c
t
io

n
T
im

e
p
e
r
io

d
s

M
o
d
e
ll
in

g
t
e
c
h
n
iq

u
e
s

V
a
li
d
a
t
io

n
m

e
t
h
o
d

[5
9
]

G
e
n
d
e
r
,
a
g
e
,
m

a
r
r
ia

g
e

s
t
a
t
u
s
,
e
d
u
c
a
t
io

n
a
l
le

v
e
l,

o
c
c
u
p
a
t
io

n
,
jo

b
,
p
o
s
it
io

n
,
a
n
n
u
a
l
in

c
o
m

e
,
r
e
s
id

e
n
t
ia

l
s
t
a
t
u
s

a
n
d

c
r
e
d
it

li
m

it
s
,
fr
o
m

b
a
n
k
in

g
c
u
s
t
o
m

e
r
s
.

D
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
.

S
t
e
p
w
is
e

d
is
c
r
im

in
a
n
t

a
n
a
ly

s
is
.

N
o
t

s
p
e
c
if
ie

d
.

S
V
M

s
a
n
d

A
N
N
s
.

A
c
c
u
r
a
c
y
.

[4
4
]

T
r
a
n
s
a
c
t
io

n
a
n
d

c
o
n
t
r
a
c
t

d
a
t
a
:
d
e
m

o
g
r
a
p
h
ic

,
p
a
y
m

e
n
t
,
c
a
ll

d
e
t
a
il
s

a
n
d

c
u
s
t
o
m

e
r

s
e
r
v
ic

e
d
a
t
a
.

D
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
.

I
n
t
e
r
v
ie

w
s

w
it
h

e
x
p
e
r
t
s

a
n
d

c
u
s
t
o
m

e
r
s
;
z
-
t
e
s
t
.

D
a
t
a

c
o
ll
e
c
t
e
d

o
n

a
6
-
m

o
n
t
h

p
e
r
io

d
.

1
-
m

o
n
t
h

p
r
e
d
ic

t
io

n
.

A
N
N
s
.

5
%

T
o
p
-
D

e
c
il
e

L
if
t

o
n

s
e
p
a
r
a
t
e

v
a
li
d
a
t
io

n
d
a
t
a

s
e
t
s
.

[1
7
]

C
li
e
n
t
-
c
o
m

p
a
n
y

in
t
e
r
a
c
t
io

n
s
,
r
e
n
e
w
a
l-
r
e
la

t
e
d

in
fo

r
m

a
t
io

n
,
s
o
c
io

-
d
e
m

o
g
r
a
p
h
ic

s
a
n
d

s
u
b
s
c
r
ip

t
io

n
-
d
e
s
c
r
ib

in
g

in
fo

r
m

a
t
io

n
r
e
la

t
e
d

t
o

s
u
b
s
c
r
ib

e
r
s

o
f
a

n
e
w
s
p
a
p
e
r

p
u
b
li
s
h
in

g
c
o
m

p
a
n
y
.

D
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
.

B
a
s
e
d

o
n

R
a
n
d
o
m

F
o
r
e
s
t

im
p
o
r
t
a
n
c
e

m
e
a
s
u
r
e
s
.

3
0

m
o
n
t
h
s

d
a
t
a

c
o
ll
e
c
t
io

n
a
n
d

1
-
y
e
a
r

p
r
e
d
ic

t
io

n
p
e
r
io

d
.

S
V
M

s
.

C
r
o
s
s
-
v
a
li
d
a
t
io

n
w
it
h

a
c
c
u
r
a
c
y

a
n
d

A
U
C
.

[3
3
]

D
a
t
a

r
e
la

t
e
d

t
o

c
u
s
t
o
m

e
r

r
e
p
a
ir
s

a
n
d

c
o
m

p
la

in
t
s
,

a
p
p
li
e
d

t
o

t
h
r
e
e

d
if
fe

r
e
n
t

c
a
s
e
s

r
e
la

t
e
d

t
o

t
e
le

c
o
m

m
u
n
ic

a
t
io

n
s

(
r
e
s
id

e
n
t
ia

l
m

o
b
il
e

p
h
o
n
e
,

b
r
o
a
d
b
a
n
d

m
o
b
il
e

p
h
o
n
e
,
b
u
s
in

e
s
s

la
n
d
li
n
e
)
.

D
a
t
a
b
a
s
e

I
n
t
e
r
v
ie

w
s

w
it
h

c
o
m

p
a
n
y

e
x
p
e
r
t
s
.

1
m

o
n
t
h

fo
r

t
r
a
in

in
g

a
n
d

1
2

fo
r

p
r
e
d
ic

t
io

n
.

A
N
N
s

A
c
c
u
r
a
c
y
.

[9
0
]

U
s
a
g
e

a
n
d

r
e
la

t
io

n
s
h
ip

v
a
r
ia

b
le

s
,
p
lu

s
d
e
m

o
g
r
a
p
h
ic

s
fr
o
m

w
ir
e
le

s
s

t
e
le

c
o
m

m
u
n
ic

a
t
io

n
s

c
u
s
t
o
m

e
r
s
.

D
a
t
a
b
a
s
e

p
r
o
v
id

e
d

b
y

t
h
e

C
e
n
t
e
r

fo
r

C
R
M

a
t

D
u
k
e

U
n
iv

e
r
s
it
y
.

I
n
t
e
r
v
ie

w
w
it
h

e
x
p
e
r
t
s
.

N
o
t

s
p
e
c
if
ie

d
.

S
V
M

s
.

A
c
c
u
r
a
c
y
,
w
it
h

a
8
0
%

t
r
a
in

in
g

d
a
t
a

s
e
t

a
n
d

2
0
%

v
a
li
d
a
t
io

n
d
a
t
a
s
e
t
.

[2
9
]

E
v
o
lu

t
io

n
in

t
im

e
o
f
t
h
e

R
F
M

v
a
r
ia

b
le

s
(
n
u
m

b
e
r

o
f

in
v
o
ic

e
s

la
s
t

m
o
n
t
h
,
a
m

o
u
n
t

in
v
o
ic

e
d
,
n
u
m

b
e
r

o
f

w
it
h
d
r
a
w
a
ls
)

r
e
la

t
e
d

t
o

t
r
a
n
s
a
c
t
io

n
s

o
f
a

fi
n
a
n
c
ia

l
c
o
m

p
a
n
y

c
u
s
t
o
m

e
r
s
.

C
o
m

p
a
n
y

d
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
.

A
ll
u
s
io

n
t
o

p
r
e
v
io

u
s

r
e
s
e
a
r
c
h
.

S
ix

c
o
n
s
e
c
u
t
iv

e
m

o
n
t
h
s

t
r
a
in

in
g

d
a
t
a
;

v
a
li
d
a
t
io

n
s
e
t
:
n
e
x
t

3
m

o
n
t
h
s
.

A
N
N
s
.

A
c
c
u
r
a
c
y
,
lo

s
s

fu
n
c
t
io

n
a
n
d

A
U
C
.

[5
6
]

S
o
c
io

-
d
e
m

o
g
r
a
p
h
ic

(
a
g
e
,
le

v
e
l
o
f
s
t
u
d
ie

s
,
in

c
o
m

e
)

a
n
d

b
e
h
a
v
io

u
r
a
l
(
m

o
n
t
h
ly

c
r
e
d
it
,
n
u
m

b
e
r

o
f
c
a
r
d
s
,

w
e
b

t
r
a
n
s
a
c
t
io

n
s
,
m

a
r
g
in

)
d
a
t
a

fr
o
m

c
r
e
d
it

c
a
r
d

u
s
e
r
s
.

D
a
t
a

s
e
t

fr
o
m

t
h
e

B
u
s
in

e
s
s

I
n
t
e
ll
ig

e
n
c
e

C
u
p
,
U
n
iv

.
o
f
C
h
il
e
.

S
V
M

s
.

T
h
r
e
e

c
o
n
s
e
c
u
t
iv

e
m

o
n
t
h
s

d
a
t
a
;
r
e
s
u
lt
s

t
e
s
t
e
d

o
v
e
r

s
u
b
s
e
q
u
e
n
t

y
e
a
r
.

S
V
M

-
b
a
s
e
d
.

S
e
n
s
it
iv

it
y

a
n
d

a
c
c
u
r
a
c
y

v
a
lu

e
s
,
o
n

c
r
o
s
s
-
v
a
li
d
a
t
io

n
d
a
t
a

s
e
t
.

[4
1
]

H
e
n
le

y
s
e
g
m

e
n
t
s
,
b
r
o
a
d
b
a
n
d

u
s
a
g
e
,
d
ia

l
t
y
p
e
s
,
s
p
e
n
d

o
f
d
ia

l-
u
p
,
li
n
e
-
in

fo
r
m

a
t
io

n
,
b
il
li
n
g
,
p
a
y
m

e
n
t

a
n
d

a
c
c
o
u
n
t

in
fo

r
m

a
t
io

n
o
n

b
r
o
a
d
b
a
n
d

in
t
e
r
n
e
t

s
e
r
v
ic

e
s

c
u
s
t
o
m

e
r
s
.

C
o
m

p
a
n
y

d
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
.

D
o
m

a
in

k
n
o
w
le

d
g
e
.

N
o
.

S
V
M

s
a
n
d

A
N
N
s
.

A
c
c
u
r
a
c
y
.

[6
1
]

U
s
a
g
e

d
a
t
a

o
n

9
d
if
fe

r
e
n
t

d
a
t
a

s
e
t
s

c
o
r
r
e
s
p
o
n
d
in

g
t
o

d
if
fe

r
e
n
t

in
d
u
s
t
r
ie

s
:
3

c
r
e
d
it

c
o
m

p
a
n
ie

s
,
2

fr
o
m

t
h
e

m
a
il
-
o
r
d
e
r

in
d
u
s
t
r
y
,
a
n
d

1
fr
o
m

t
h
e

e
n
e
r
g
y

in
d
u
s
t
r
y
,

d
ir
e
c
t

m
a
r
k
e
t
in

g
,
fr
a
u
d

d
e
t
e
c
t
io

n
a
n
d

e
-
c
o
m

m
e
r
c
e
.

D
a
t
a

s
e
t
s

fr
o
m

U
C
I

M
L

R
e
p
o
s
it
o
r
y

a
n
d

t
h
e

a
n
n
u
a
l
D

M
C
u
p
.

R
e
c
u
r
s
iv

e
F
e
a
t
u
r
e

E
li
m

in
a
t
io

n
.

N
o

(
b
o
t
h

t
r
a
in

in
g

a
n
d

v
a
li
d
a
t
io

n
o
n

h
is
t
o
r
ic

a
l
d
a
t
a
)
.

S
V
M

.
T
e
n
-
F
o
ld

C
r
o
s
s

v
a
li
d
a
t
io

n
o
n

A
U
C

v
a
lu

e
s
.

[9
2
]

C
R
M

v
a
r
ia

b
le

s
fr
o
m

a
t
e
le

c
o
m

m
u
n
ic

a
t
io

n
s

c
o
m

p
a
n
y
.

C
o
m

p
a
n
y

d
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
.

N
o
.

S
ix

m
o
n
t
h
s

d
a
t
a
;

c
h
u
r
n
e
r
s

le
a
v
e

1
-
2

m
o
n
t
h
s

a
ft
e
r

b
e
in

g
s
a
m

p
le

d
.

S
O

M
s

a
n
d

A
N
N
s
.

F
iv

e
-
fo

ld
c
r
o
s
s

v
a
li
d
a
t
io

n
.

[6
3
]

T
h
r
e
e

in
d
e
p
e
n
d
e
n
t

d
a
t
a

s
e
t
s

r
e
la

t
e
d

t
o

t
e
le

c
o
m

in
d
u
s
t
r
y

c
o
n
t
a
in

in
g

u
s
a
g
e
,
b
il
li
n
g

a
n
d

s
o
c
io

-
d
e
m

o
g
r
a
p
h
ic

d
a
t
a
.

P
r
o
v
id

e
d

b
y

C
R
M

C
e
n
t
r
e

a
t

D
u
k
e

U
n
iv

.

I
n
t
e
g
r
a
t
io

n
o
f

d
o
m

a
in

k
n
o
w
le

d
g
e

in
t
h
e

F
S

p
r
o
c
e
s
s
.

F
o
u
r

m
o
n
t
h
s

d
a
t
a
;

c
h
u
r
n

c
a
lc

u
la

t
e
d

o
n

t
h
e

3
1
-
6
0

d
a
y
s

p
e
r
io

d
a
ft
e
r

s
a
m

p
li
n
g
.

A
N
N
s
.

K
-
fo

ld
C
V
;
a
c
c
u
r
a
c
y
,

s
e
n
s
it
iv

it
y
,

s
p
e
c
if
ic

it
y

a
n
d

A
U
C
.



Intelligent Data Analysis Approaches to Churn as a Business Problem: a Survey 37
T
a
b
le

7
(C

o
n
ti
n
u
e
s
fr
o
m

p
re
v
io
u
s
ta
b
le
)
R
e
fe
re
n
c
e
s
o
n
a
b
a
n
d
o
n
m
e
n
t
p
re
d
ic
ti
o
n
m
o
d
e
ll
in
g
,
li
st
e
d
in

ch
ro
n
o
lo
g
ic
a
l
o
rd

e
r
(2
0
1
0
-2
0
1
5
)
a
n
d
u
si
n
g
C
I
m
e
th

o
d
s
(3

o
u
t
o
f
3
).

R
e
f.

D
a
t
a

t
y
p
e

D
a
t
a

g
a
t
h
e
r
in

g
F
e
a
t
u
r
e

s
e
le
c
t
io

n
T
im

e
p
e
r
io

d
s

M
o
d
e
ll
in

g
t
e
c
h
n
iq

u
e
s

V
a
li
d
a
t
io

n
m

e
t
h
o
d

[1
0
2
]

C
u
s
t
o
m

e
r

p
e
r
s
o
n
a
l
in

fo
r
m

a
t
io

n
,
c
r
e
d
it

c
a
r
d

b
a
s
ic

d
a
t
a
,
t
r
a
n
s
a
c
t
io

n
a
n
d

a
b
n
o
r
m

a
l
u
s
a
g
e

in
fo

r
m

a
t
io

n
.

C
o
m

p
a
n
y

d
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
.

D
o
m

a
in

k
n
o
w
le

d
g
e
.

1
2

m
o
n
t
h
s

o
b
s
e
r
v
a
t
io

n
p
e
r
io

d
a
n
d

1
2

m
o
n
t
h
s

t
e
s
t
in

g
p
e
r
io

d
.

B
a
y
e
s
ia

n
n
e
t
w
o
r
k
s

a
n
d

c
lu

s
t
e
r
in

g
-
b
a
s
e
d

c
la

s
s
if
ie

r
s
.

A
c
c
u
r
a
c
y
,
A
U
C
,

p
r
e
c
is
io

n
,
r
e
c
a
ll
,

m
e
a
n

a
b
s
o
lu

t
e

e
r
r
o
r

a
n
d

c
o
m

p
u
t
in

g
t
im

e
.

[5
4
]

C
u
s
t
o
m

e
r

a
v
e
r
a
g
e

a
n
d

t
r
e
n
d
s

in
c
a
ll

m
in

u
t
e
s
,

fr
e
q
u
e
n
c
y

o
f
c
a
ll
s

a
n
d

b
il
li
n
g
,
a
d
d
e
d

t
o

d
e
m

o
g
r
a
p
h
ic

s
a
s

p
la

c
e

o
f
r
e
s
id

e
n
c
e
,
a
g
e

a
n
d

t
a
r
if
f
t
y
p
e
,
fo

r
a

t
e
le

c
o
m

m
u
n
ic

a
t
io

n
s

c
o
m

p
a
n
y
.

C
o
m

p
a
n
y

D
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
.

D
o
m

a
in

k
n
o
w
le

d
g
e
.

N
o
t

s
p
e
c
if
ie

d
.

B
a
y
e
s
ia

n
N
e
t
w
o
r
k
s
.

A
c
c
u
r
a
c
y
.

[9
1
]

3
5

v
a
r
ia

b
le

s
fr
o
m

a
r
e
a
l
in

d
u
s
t
r
y

r
e
t
a
il
e
r
,
w
it
h

n
o

s
p
e
c
if
ic

a
t
io

n
o
n

t
h
e

k
in

d
o
f
fe

a
t
u
r
e
s

in
c
lu

d
e
d
.

C
o
m

p
a
n
y

D
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
.

N
o
t

s
p
e
c
if
ie

d
.

D
a
t
a

fr
o
m

1
3

c
o
n
s
e
c
u
t
iv

e
m

o
n
t
h
s
.

A
N
N
s
.

A
c
c
u
r
a
c
y
,
s
e
n
s
it
iv

it
y

a
n
d

s
p
e
c
if
ic

it
y
.

[9
7
]

S
o
c
io

d
e
m

o
g
r
a
p
h
ic

s
,
c
a
ll

b
e
h
a
v
io

u
r
,
fi
n
a
n
c
ia

l
a
n
d

m
a
r
k
e
t
in

g
r
e
la

t
e
d

v
a
r
ia

b
le

s
fr
o
m

e
le

v
e
n

w
ir
e
le

s
s

t
e
le

c
o
m

o
p
e
r
a
t
o
r
s
.

C
o
m

p
a
n
y

a
n
d

p
u
b
li
c

d
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
.

B
a
s
e
d

o
n

F
is
h
e
r

s
c
o
r
e
.

N
o

(
a
v
e
r
a
g
e
s

o
f
1

y
e
a
r

d
a
t
a
)
.

S
V
M

s
,
A
N
N
s
,

B
a
y
e
s
ia

n
N
e
t
w
o
r
k
s
.

A
c
c
u
r
a
c
y
,
s
e
n
s
it
iv

it
y
,

s
p
e
c
if
ic

it
y
,
A
U
C
.

[1
3
]

P
u
r
c
h
a
s
e

h
is
t
o
r
y

(
lo

n
g
it
u
d
in

a
l)

d
a
t
a

a
n
d

s
o
c
io

-
d
e
m

o
g
r
a
p
h
ic

(
s
t
a
t
ic

)
v
a
r
ia

b
le

s
o
n

t
h
r
e
e

d
if
fe

r
e
n
t

fi
e
ld

s
:
s
u
p
e
r
m

a
r
k
e
t
s
,
le

is
u
r
e

a
n
d

t
e
le

c
o
m

D
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
.

I
n
t
e
r
v
ie

w
s

w
it
h

e
x
p
e
r
t
s
.

1
-
y
e
a
r

d
a
t
a

c
o
ll
e
c
t
io

n
a
n
d

1
-
y
e
a
r

p
r
e
d
ic

t
io

n
,

w
it
h

s
e
a
s
o
n
a
l

o
v
e
r
la

p
p
in

g
.

S
V
M

s
.

A
U
C
.

[5
0
]

C
u
s
t
o
m

e
r

b
e
h
a
v
io

r
,
d
e
m

o
g
r
a
p
h
ic

s
a
n
d

u
s
a
g
e

d
a
t
a

T
e
le

c
o
m

m
u
n
ic

a
-

t
io

n
s

d
a
t
a
b
a
s
e

o
f

u
n
r
e
p
o
r
t
e
d

o
r
ig

in

F
e
a
t
u
r
e

s
e
le

c
t
io

n
t
h
r
o
u
g
h

e
x
h
a
u
s
t
iv

e
r
e
c
o
m

b
in

a
t
io

n
o
f

v
a
r
ia

b
le

s

N
o
t

r
e
p
o
r
t
e
d

A
N
N
s

a
n
d

S
V
M

s
w
it
h

d
if
fe

r
e
n
t

k
e
r
n
e
ls
,
a
s

s
t
a
n
d
-
a
lo

n
e

m
o
d
e
ls

o
r

h
y
b
r
id

iz
e
d

t
h
r
o
u
g
h

a
n

a
d

h
o
c

m
e
t
h
o
d

a
c
c
u
r
a
c
y
,
p
r
e
c
is
io

n
,

r
e
c
a
ll

a
n
d

F
-
s
c
o
r
e
.

S
in

g
le

t
r
a
in

in
g
-
t
e
s
t

s
p
li
t
.

[2
4
]

C
u
s
t
o
m

e
r

b
e
h
a
v
io

r
,
d
e
m

o
g
r
a
p
h
ic

s
a
n
d

u
s
a
g
e

d
a
t
a

C
r
e
d
it

c
a
r
d

o
r
ig

in
a
l
d
a
t
a
b
a
s
e

fr
o
m

C
h
il
e
a
n

b
a
n
k

R
e
c
u
r
s
iv

e
fe

a
t
u
r
e

e
li
m

in
a
t
io

n
a
s
s
o
c
ia

t
e
d

t
o

S
V
M

c
la

s
s
if
ie

r

N
o
t

r
e
p
o
r
t
e
d

N
ä
ıv

e
B
a
y
e
s

T
r
e
e

r
u
le

e
x
t
r
a
c
t
io

n
o
n

t
o
p

o
f
a

S
V
M

c
la

s
s
if
ie

r

a
c
c
u
r
a
c
y
,
s
e
n
s
it
iv

it
y
,

s
p
e
c
if
ic

it
y
.

T
r
a
in

in
g
-
t
e
s
t

s
p
li
t

w
it
h

1
0
-
fo

ld
C
V

fo
r

t
r
a
in

in
g
.

[1
0
6
]

U
s
a
g
e

d
a
t
a

fr
o
m

a
t
e
le

c
o
m

c
o
m

p
a
n
y

(
U
C
I

d
a
t
a
s
e
t
)

a
n
d

fr
o
m

a
c
r
e
d
it

c
a
r
d

b
u
s
in

e
s
s

o
f
a

C
h
in

e
s
e

b
a
n
k
.

T
w
o

d
a
t
a
s
e
t
s
,
o
n
e

fr
o
m

t
h
e

U
C
I

m
a
c
h
in

e
le

a
r
n
in

g
r
e
p
o
s
it
o
r
y
;
t
h
e

o
t
h
e
r

a
n

o
r
ig

in
a
l

d
a
t
a
b
a
s
e

fr
o
m

C
h
in

e
s
e

b
a
n
k
.

I
n
t
e
n
s
iv

e
t
w
o
-
s
t
a
g
e

fe
a
t
u
r
e

s
e
le

c
t
io

n
b
a
s
e
d

o
n

A
N
N
s
,
t
r
a
n
s
fe

r
le

a
r
n
in

g
a
n
d

M
u
t
u
a
l

I
n
fo

r
m

a
t
io

n
.

D
a
t
a

s
p
a
n
n
in

g
fr
o
m

M
a
y

t
o

D
e
c
e
m

b
e
r
,

2
0
1
0

(
C
h
in

e
s
e

b
a
n
k
)
.

E
n
s
e
m

b
le

le
a
r
n
in

g
w
it
h

S
V
M

s
a
s

b
a
s
e

c
la

s
s
if
ie

r
s
.
T
r
a
n
s
fe

r
le

a
r
n
in

g
.

s
e
n
s
it
iv

it
y
,

s
p
e
c
if
ic

it
y
,
A
U
C
.

[9
3
]

U
s
a
g
e

d
a
t
a

in
t
h
e

t
e
le

c
o
m

m
u
n
ic

a
t
io

n
s

s
e
c
t
o
r

S
t
a
n
d
a
r
d

d
a
t
a
b
a
s
e

fr
o
m

t
h
e

U
C
I

m
a
c
h
in

e
le

a
r
n
in

g
r
e
p
o
s
it
o
r
y

N
o

N
o
t

d
e
c
la

r
e
d

A
N
N
s

a
n
d

S
V
M

s
c
o
m

b
in

e
d

b
y

b
o
o
s
t
in

g
,
c
o
m

p
a
r
e
d

w
it
h

a
lt
e
r
n
a
t
iv

e
m

e
t
h
o
d
s

P
r
e
c
is
io

n
,
r
e
c
a
ll
,

a
c
c
u
r
a
c
y

a
n
d

F
-
m

e
a
s
u
r
e

w
it
h

M
o
n
t
e

C
a
r
lo

-
b
a
s
e
d

c
r
o
s
s
-
v
a
li
d
a
t
io

n
.

[7
]

R
e
v
e
n
u
e

a
n
d

u
s
a
g
e

d
a
t
a

in
t
h
e

m
o
b
il
e

t
e
le

c
o
m

m
u
n
ic

a
t
io

n
s

s
e
c
t
o
r

O
r
ig

in
a
l
d
a
t
a
b
a
s
e

fr
o
m

A
A
A

H
o
n
k

K
o
n
g
-
b
a
s
e
d

t
e
le

c
o
m

m
u
n
ic

a
-

t
io

n
s

c
o
m

p
a
n
y
.

N
o

1
-
y
e
a
r

d
a
t
a
,
fr
o
m

S
e
p
t
e
m

b
e
r

2
0
0
4

t
o

A
u
g
u
s
t

2
0
0
5
.

A
d
a
p
t
a
t
io

n
o
f
t
h
e

F
u
z
z
y

c
-
M

e
a
n
s

c
lu

s
t
e
r
in

g
a
lg

o
r
it
h
m

.

A
d
ju

s
t
e
d

S
C

in
d
e
x

fo
r

c
lu

s
t
e
r

v
a
li
d
it
y
.



38 David L. Garćıa et al.

T
a
b
le

8
R
e
fe
re
n
c
e
s
o
n
a
b
a
n
d
o
n
m
e
n
t
p
re
d
ic
ti
o
n
m
o
d
e
ll
in
g
,
li
st
e
d
in

ch
ro
n
o
lo
g
ic
a
l
o
rd

e
r
(2
0
0
0
-2
0
0
5
)
a
n
d
c
o
n
c
e
rn

in
g
th

e
u
se

o
f
a
lt
e
rn

a
ti
v
e
m
e
th

o
d
s
(1

o
u
t
o
f
2
,

c
o
n
ti
n
u
e
s
in

th
e
fo
ll
o
w
in
g
ta
b
le
).

R
e
f.

D
a
t
a

t
y
p
e

D
a
t
a

g
a
t
h
e
r
in

g
F
e
a
t
u
r
e

s
e
le
c
t
io

n
T
im

e
p
e
r
io

d
s

M
o
d
e
ll
in

g
t
e
c
h
n
iq

u
e
s

V
a
li
d
a
t
io

n
m

e
t
h
o
d

[8
0
]

R
F
M

v
a
r
ia

b
le

s
t
o

m
o
d
e
l
c
u
s
t
o
m

e
r
-
fi
r
m

r
e
la

t
io

n
s
h
ip

a
n
d

o
p
t
im

iz
e

m
a
r
k
e
t
in

g
e
x
p
e
n
d
it
u
r
e
,
w
h
ic
h

c
a
n

b
e

a
p
p
li
e
d

t
o

m
a
n
y

in
d
u
s
t
r
ie

s
.

A
r
t
if
ic

ia
l
d
a
t
a
.

R
F
M

v
a
r
ia

b
le

s
in

d
if
fe

r
e
n
t

e
x
a
m

p
le

s
.

N
o
t

S
p
e
c
if
ie

d
.

M
a
r
k
o
v

C
h
a
in

M
o
d
e
ll
in

g
.

N
o

v
a
li
d
a
t
io

n
s
t
a
g
e
:

t
h
e
o
r
e
t
ic

a
l
s
t
u
d
y
.

[1
4
]

T
r
a
n
s
a
c
t
io

n
d
a
t
a

(
fr
e
q
u
e
n
c
y

o
f
t
r
a
n
s
a
c
t
io

n
o
f

b
a
n
k
in

g
c
u
s
t
o
m

e
r
s

a
r
e

a
n
a
ly

s
e
d
)
.

D
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
.

R
u
le

e
x
t
r
a
c
t
io

n
-
b
a
s
e
d

s
e
le

c
t
io

n
.

D
a
t
a

fr
o
m

t
h
e

la
s
t

o
p
e
r
a
t
iv

e
m

o
n
t
h

fr
o
m

t
h
e

la
s
t

6
m

o
n
t
h
s
.

G
o
a
l-
o
r
ie

n
t
e
d

s
e
q
u
e
n
t
ia

l
p
a
t
t
e
r
n
.

C
o
m

p
u
t
a
t
io

n
a
l
e
ff
ic

ie
n
c
y

a
g
a
in

s
t

e
x
is
t
in

g
a
lg

o
r
it
h
m

s
.

[4
6
]

E
-
c
u
s
t
o
m

e
r

b
e
h
a
v
io

u
r
,
d
e
fi
n
in

g
c
u
s
t
o
m

e
r

u
s
a
g
e

t
h
r
o
u
g
h

t
h
e

w
e
b
s
it
e

a
s

a
m

ix
t
u
r
e

o
f
s
t
a
t
e
s
,

t
r
a
n
s
it
io

n
s

b
e
t
w
e
e
n

s
t
a
t
e
s
,
h
o
ld

in
g

t
im

e
,
w
a
it
in

g
t
im

e
a
n
d

t
o
t
a
l
t
im

e
s
p
e
n
t
;
u
s
in

g
w
e
b

a
n
a
ly

t
ic

s
.

V
is
it
o
r
’s

n
a
v
ig

a
t
io

n
a
l

d
a
t
a

c
o
ll
e
c
t
e
d

fr
o
m

t
h
e

w
e
b
s
it
e
.

D
o
m

a
in

k
n
o
w
le

d
g
e
.

N
o

(
d
a
t
a

c
o
ll
e
c
t
e
d

d
u
r
in

g
3

m
o
n
t
h
s

w
it
h

n
o

v
a
li
d
a
t
io

n
s
t
a
g
e
)
.

S
e
m

i-
M

a
r
k
o
v

P
r
o
c
e
s
s
e
s
.

N
o

v
a
li
d
a
t
io

n
s
t
a
g
e
.

[4
9
]

R
F
M

v
a
r
ia

b
le

s
t
o

s
e
g
m

e
n
t

c
u
s
t
o
m

e
r
s

fr
o
m

a
d
ir
e
c
t
-
m

a
il

s
e
t
t
in

g
fo

r
a

c
h
a
r
it
y

o
r
g
a
n
iz

a
t
io

n
:

n
u
m

b
e
r

o
f
n
o
n
-
a
n
s
w
e
r
e
d

m
a
il
s
,
%

r
e
s
p
o
n
s
e

in
t
h
e

la
s
t

2
y
e
a
r
s

a
n
d

o
v
e
r
a
ll
,
s
iz

e
o
f
r
e
s
p
o
n
s
e
s

in
t
h
e

la
s
t

2
y
e
a
r
s

a
n
d

o
v
e
r
a
ll
.

D
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
.

D
o
m

a
in

k
n
o
w
le

d
g
e
.

N
o
.

G
A
s

a
n
d

K
-
m

e
a
n
s

c
lu

s
t
e
r
in

g
.

V
a
li
d
a
t
io

n
b
a
s
e
d

o
n

t
h
e

r
e
a
l

e
ff
e
c
t
s

o
f
t
h
e

im
p
r
o
v
e
d

s
e
g
m

e
n
t
a
t
io

n
o
n

t
h
e

c
u
s
t
o
m

e
r

b
a
s
e
.

[9
5
]

C
u
s
t
o
m

e
r

b
e
h
a
v
io

u
r

in
fo

r
m

a
t
io

n
,

s
o
c
io

-
d
e
m

o
g
r
a
p
h
ic

in
fo

r
m

a
t
io

n
,
m

e
r
g
e
r

a
n
d

p
r
o
s
p
e
r
it
y

in
d
e
x
.

D
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
.

N
o
t

s
p
e
c
if
ie

d
.

7
7

y
e
a
r

d
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
.

L
e
n
g
t
h

o
f

s
u
b
-
p
e
r
io

d
s

a
r
e

n
o
t

s
p
e
c
if
ie

d
.

S
u
r
v
iv

a
l

a
n
a
ly

s
is
.

S
t
a
t
is
t
ic

a
l
r
e
le

v
a
n
c
e
.

[1
0
]

P
a
s
t

p
u
r
c
h
a
s
e

b
e
h
a
v
io

u
r
,
m

o
d
e
le

d
w
it
h

R
F
M

v
a
r
ia

b
le

s
fr
o
m

c
u
s
t
o
m

e
r
s

o
f
F
a
s
t
-
M

o
v
in

g
C
o
n
s
u
m

e
r

G
o
o
d
s

(
F
M

C
G

)
r
e
t
a
il

c
o
m

p
a
n
y
,
a
n
d

c
o
m

p
le

m
e
n
t
e
d

w
it
h
:
p
a
y
m

e
n
t
m

e
t
h
o
d
,
le

n
g
t
h

o
f
c
u
s
t
o
m

e
r
-
s
u
p
p
li
e
r

r
e
la

t
io

n
s
h
ip

,
s
h
o
p
p
in

g
b
e
h
a
v
io

u
r
,
p
r
o
m

o
t
io

n
a
l

b
e
h
a
v
io

u
r

a
n
d

b
r
a
n
d

p
u
r
c
h
a
s
e
.

C
o
m

p
a
n
y

d
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
.

A
ll
u
s
io

n
t
o

p
r
e
v
io

u
s

r
e
s
e
a
r
c
h
.

5
-
m

o
n
t
h
s

o
b
s
e
r
v
a
t
io

n
p
e
r
io

d
a
n
d

5
-
m

o
n
t
h
s

v
a
li
d
a
t
io

n
p
e
r
io

d
.

R
F
s
.

A
c
c
u
r
a
c
y

a
n
d

A
U
C
,
u
s
in

g
s
e
p
a
r
a
t
e

v
a
li
d
a
t
io

n
s
e
t
s
.

[5
8
]

P
a
s
t

c
u
s
t
o
m

e
r

b
e
h
a
v
io

r
,
d
e
m

o
g
r
a
p
h
ic

s
a
n
d

in
t
e
r
a
c
t
io

n
w
it
h

in
t
e
r
m

e
d
ia

r
ie

s
fr
o
m

b
a
n
k
in

g
a
n
d

in
s
u
r
a
n
c
e

c
u
s
t
o
m

e
r
s
.

C
o
m

p
a
n
y

d
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
.

D
o
m

a
in

k
n
o
w
le

d
g
e
.

D
a
t
a

c
o
ll
e
c
t
e
d

a
t

a
g
iv

e
n

d
a
t
e
,

e
v
a
lu

a
t
e
d

o
n

t
h
e

fo
ll
o
w
in

g
9

m
o
n
t
h
s
.

R
F
s
.

A
U
C

w
it
h

s
e
p
a
r
a
t
e

v
a
li
d
a
t
io

n
d
a
t
a
s
e
t
s
.

[6
6
]

R
F
M

v
a
r
ia

b
le

s
fr
o
m

c
u
s
t
o
m

e
r
s

o
f
a

h
a
r
d
w
a
r
e

r
e
t
a
il

c
o
m

p
a
n
y
.

C
o
m

p
a
n
y

d
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
.

A
n
a
ly

t
ic

a
l

H
ie

r
a
r
c
h
ic

a
l

P
r
o
c
e
s
s

a
n
d

in
t
e
r
v
ie

w
s

w
it
h

e
x
p
e
r
t
s
.

N
o

(
d
a
t
a

fr
o
m

t
h
e

2
p
r
e
v
io

u
s

y
e
a
r
s
)
.

P
r
e
fe

r
e
n
c
e
-
b
a
s
e
d

C
o
ll
a
b
o
r
a
t
iv

e
F
il
t
e
r
in

g
.

V
a
li
d
a
t
io

n
fo

c
u
s
s
e
d

o
n

t
h
e

g
o
o
d
n
e
s
s

o
f
t
h
e

s
e
g
m

e
n
t
a
t
io

n
.

[8
8
]

M
o
d
e
l
fo

r
o
p
t
im

iz
in

g
a

m
a
n
u
fa

c
t
u
r
in

g
fi
r
m

’s
p
r
o
fi
t
,
b
a
s
e
d

o
n

c
u
s
t
o
m

e
r

s
p
e
c
if
ic

a
t
io

n
s

a
n
d

p
r
o
c
e
s
s
in

g
t
im

e
,
b
a
c
k
lo

g
a
n
d

d
u
e
-
d
a
t
e

q
u
o
t
a
t
io

n
.

S
t
a
t
is
t
ic

a
ll
y

m
o
d
e
le

d
w
it
h

a
r
t
if
ic

ia
l
d
a
t
a
.

P
r
e
v
io

u
s

d
o
m

a
in

k
n
o
w
le

d
g
e
.

N
o
t

S
p
e
c
if
ie

d
.

D
is
c
r
e
t
e
-
t
im

e
S
e
m

i-
M

a
r
k
o
v

D
e
c
is
io

n
P
r
o
c
e
s
s
e
s
.

F
r
a
c
t
io

n
a
l
e
r
r
o
r
,
w
e
ig

h
t
e
d

a
b
s
o
lu

t
e

v
a
lu

e
a
n
d

w
e
ig

h
t
e
d

s
u
m

o
f
d
if
fe

r
e
n
c
e
s

o
n

t
h
e

le
a
d

t
im

e
s
.



Intelligent Data Analysis Approaches to Churn as a Business Problem: a Survey 39
T
a
b
le

9
(C

o
n
ti
n
u
e
s
fr
o
m

th
e
p
re
v
io
u
s
ta
b
le
)
R
e
fe
re
n
c
e
s
o
n

a
b
a
n
d
o
n
m
e
n
t
p
re
d
ic
ti
o
n

m
o
d
e
ll
in
g
,
li
st
e
d

in
ch

ro
n
o
lo
g
ic
a
l
o
rd

e
r
(2
0
0
6
-2
0
1
3
)
a
n
d

c
o
n
c
e
rn

in
g

a
lt
e
rn

a
ti
v
e
m
e
th

o
d
s
(2

o
u
t
o
f
2
).

R
e
f.

D
a
t
a

t
y
p
e

D
a
t
a

g
a
t
h
e
r
in

g
F
e
a
t
u
r
e

s
e
le
c
t
io

n
T
im

e
p
e
r
io

d
s

M
o
d
e
ll
in

g
t
e
c
h
n
iq

u
e
s

V
a
li
d
a
t
io

n
m

e
t
h
o
d

[8
1
]

P
u
r
c
h
a
s
e

b
e
h
a
v
io

u
r
,
s
e
e
n

a
s

a
s
e
q
u
e
n
c
e

o
f
t
h
e

h
is
t
o
r
ic

a
l
p
u
r
c
h
a
s
e
d

p
r
o
d
u
c
t
s

(
g
r
o
u
p
e
d

in
9

s
e
t
s

o
f

p
r
o
d
u
c
t
s
)

o
f
t
h
e

c
u
s
t
o
m

e
r
s

o
f
a

F
in

a
n
c
ia

l
S
e
r
v
ic

e
s

c
o
m

p
a
n
y
.

C
o
m

p
a
n
y

d
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
.

D
o
m

a
in

K
n
o
w
le

d
g
e
.

N
o
t

s
p
e
c
if
ie

d
.

M
ix

t
u
r
e

T
r
a
n
s
it
io

n
D

is
t
r
ib

u
t
io

n
a
n
d

M
a
r
k
o
v

c
h
a
in

s
.

L
o
g
-
li
k
e
li
h
o
o
d
.

S
e
p
a
r
a
t
e

v
a
li
d
a
t
io

n
d
a
t
a

s
e
t
s
.

[1
1
]

U
s
a
g
e

v
a
r
ia

b
le

s
o
n

c
u
s
t
o
m

e
r
s

fr
o
m

a
P
a
y
-
T
V

c
o
m

p
a
n
y
.

C
o
m

p
a
n
y

d
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
.

U
n
d
e
r
s
a
m

p
li
n
g
.

D
a
t
a

c
o
ll
e
c
t
io

n
a
t

a
s
p
e
c
if
ic

d
a
t
e
,

e
v
a
lu

a
t
io

n
d
u
r
in

g
t
h
e

s
u
b
s
e
q
u
e
n
t

y
e
a
r
.

M
a
r
k
o
v

C
h
a
in

s
a
n
d

R
F
s
.

A
c
c
u
r
a
c
y
,
A
U
C

a
n
d

L
if
t

C
h
a
r
t

w
it
h

c
r
o
s
s
-
v
a
li
d
a
t
io

n
.

[5
6
]

S
o
c
io

-
d
e
m

o
g
r
a
p
h
ic

(
a
g
e
,
le

v
e
l
o
f
s
t
u
d
ie

s
,
in

c
o
m

e
)

a
n
d

b
e
h
a
v
io

u
r
a
l
(
m

o
n
t
h
ly

c
r
e
d
it
,
n
u
m

b
e
r

o
f
c
a
r
d
s
,

w
e
b

t
r
a
n
s
a
c
t
io

n
s
,
m

a
r
g
in

)
d
a
t
a

fr
o
m

c
r
e
d
it

c
a
r
d

u
s
e
r
s
.

D
a
t
a

s
e
t

fr
o
m

t
h
e

B
u
s
in

e
s
s

I
n
t
e
ll
ig

e
n
c
e

C
u
p
,
U
n
iv

.
o
f

C
h
il
e
.

S
V
M

s
.

D
a
t
a

fr
o
m

3
c
o
n
s
e
c
u
t
iv

e
m

o
n
t
h
s
;

r
e
s
u
lt
s

t
e
s
t
e
d

d
u
r
in

g
t
h
e

s
u
b
s
e
q
u
e
n
t

y
e
a
r
.

R
F
s
.

S
e
n
s
it
iv

it
y

a
n
d

a
c
c
u
r
a
c
y
.

C
r
o
s
s
-
v
a
li
d
a
t
io

n
.

[1
7
]

C
li
e
n
t
-
c
o
m

p
a
n
y

in
t
e
r
a
c
t
io

n
s
,
r
e
n
e
w
a
l-
r
e
la

t
e
d

in
fo

r
m

a
t
io

n
,
s
o
c
io

-
d
e
m

o
g
r
a
p
h
ic

s
a
n
d

s
u
b
s
c
r
ip

t
io

n
-
d
e
s
c
r
ib

in
g

in
fo

r
m

a
t
io

n
r
e
la

t
e
d

t
o

s
u
b
s
c
r
ib

e
r
s

o
f
a

n
e
w
s
p
a
p
e
r

p
u
b
li
s
h
in

g
c
o
m

p
a
n
y
.

D
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
.

B
a
s
e
d

o
n

R
F

im
p
o
r
t
a
n
c
e

m
e
a
s
u
r
e
s
.

3
0

m
o
n
t
h
s

d
a
t
a

c
o
ll
e
c
t
io

n
a
n
d

1
y
e
a
r

p
r
e
d
ic

t
io

n
p
e
r
io

d
.

R
F
s
.

C
r
o
s
s
-
v
a
li
d
a
t
io

n
.

A
c
c
u
r
a
c
y

a
n
d

A
U
C
.

[1
0
5
]

V
a
r
ia

b
le

s
d
e
fi
n
in

g
t
h
e

p
e
r
fo

r
m

a
n
c
e

o
f
s
u
p
p
li
e
r
s

o
f

a
t
e
le

c
o
m

m
u
n
ic

a
t
io

n
s

c
o
m

p
a
n
y
.
Q

u
a
li
t
y

m
a
n
a
g
e
m

e
n
t

p
r
a
c
t
ic

e
s

a
n
d

s
y
s
t
e
m

s
,
d
o
c
u
m

e
n
t
a
t
io

n
a
n
d

s
e
lf
-
a
u
d
it
,
p
r
o
c
e
s
s

a
n
d

m
a
n
u
fa

c
t
u
r
in

g
c
a
p
a
b
il
it
y
,
m

a
n
a
g
e
m

e
n
t

o
f
t
h
e

fi
r
m

,
e
t
c
.

C
o
m

p
a
n
y

d
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
,

a
v
a
il
a
b
le

in
p
r
e
v
io

u
s

s
t
u
d
ie

s
.

P
r
im

a
r
y

fe
a
t
u
r
e
s

in
t
h
e

d
a
t
a

s
e
t
.

V
a
li
d
a
t
io

n
a
n
d

t
e
s
t

d
a
t
a

s
e
t
s

c
o
r
r
e
s
p
o
n
d

t
o

d
if
fe

r
e
n
t

s
u
p
p
li
e
r
s

o
n

d
if
fe

r
e
n
t

p
e
r
io

d
s
.

H
y
b
r
id

m
o
d
e
l

c
o
m

b
in

in
g

D
a
t
a

E
n
v
e
lo

p
m

e
n
t

A
n
a
ly

s
is
,
D

T
s

a
n
d

A
N
N
s
.

F
o
u
r
-
fo

ld
c
r
o
s
s

v
a
li
d
a
t
io

n
;

a
c
c
u
r
a
c
y
.

[2
3
]

D
e
m

o
g
r
a
p
h
ic

s
,
h
is
t
o
r
ic

a
l
t
r
a
n
s
a
c
t
io

n
a
l
in

fo
r
m

a
t
io

n
a
n
d

fi
n
a
n
c
ia

l
v
a
r
ia

b
le

s
o
n

d
if
fe

r
e
n
t

c
a
s
e
s

(
s
u
p
e
r
m

a
r
k
e
t
s
,
b
a
n
k
in

g
,
t
e
le

c
o
m

a
n
d

m
a
il
in

g
s
e
r
v
ic

e
s
)
.

D
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
.

U
n
d
e
r
s
a
m

p
li
n
g
.

1
m

o
n
t
h

d
a
t
a

c
o
ll
e
c
t
io

n
a
n
d

1
y
e
a
r

p
e
r
fo

r
m

a
n
c
e

p
e
r
io

d
.

E
n
s
e
m

b
le

C
la

s
s
if
ie

r
s

(
G

A
M

e
n
s
)
.

A
c
c
u
r
a
c
y
,
A
U
C
,

T
o
p

D
e
c
il
e

L
if
t

a
n
d

L
if
t

I
n
d
e
x
.

[9
7
]

S
o
c
io

-
d
e
m

o
g
r
a
p
h
ic

s
,
c
a
ll

b
e
h
a
v
io

u
r
,
fi
n
a
n
c
ia

l
a
n
d

m
a
r
k
e
t
in

g
r
e
la

t
e
d

v
a
r
ia

b
le

s
fr
o
m

e
le

v
e
n

w
ir
e
le

s
s

t
e
le

c
o
m

o
p
e
r
a
t
o
r
s
.

C
o
m

p
a
n
y

a
n
d

p
u
b
li
c

d
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
.

B
a
s
e
d

o
n

F
is
h
e
r

s
c
o
r
e
.

N
o

(
a
v
e
r
a
g
e
s

o
f
1

y
e
a
r

d
a
t
a
)
.

E
n
s
e
m

b
le

m
e
t
h
o
d
s
.

A
c
c
u
r
a
c
y
,

s
e
n
s
it
iv

it
y
,

s
p
e
c
if
ic

it
y
,
A
U
C
.

[1
0
8
]

U
s
a
g
e

t
im

e
,
lo

c
a
t
io

n
a
n
d

c
u
s
t
o
m

e
r
s
’
u
n
d
e
r
ly

in
g

s
o
c
ia

l
n
e
t
w
o
r
k

t
o

p
r
e
d
ic

t
t
h
e
ir

c
h
u
r
n

fr
o
m

a
m

o
b
il
e

o
p
e
r
a
t
o
r
.

C
o
m

p
a
n
y

D
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
.

R
e
s
e
a
r
c
h

o
n

p
r
e
v
io

u
s

li
t
e
r
a
t
u
r
e
.

T
r
a
in

in
g

d
a
t
a
:
3

c
o
n
s
e
c
u
t
iv

e
m

o
n
t
h
s
;

c
h
u
r
n

p
r
e
d
ic

t
e
d

c
o
m

p
a
r
in

g
v
a
r
ia

t
io

n
b
e
t
w
e
e
n

p
e
r
io

d
s
.

H
y
b
r
id

m
o
d
e
ls
,

c
o
m

b
in

in
g

D
T
s
,

G
A
s

a
n
d

G
a
m

e
T
h
e
o
r
y
.

A
c
c
u
r
a
c
y
.

[1
6
]

R
F
M

v
a
r
ia

b
le

s
t
o

d
e
fi
n
e

p
a
s
t

c
u
s
t
o
m

e
r

b
e
h
a
v
io

u
r

fo
r

a
n

o
n
li
n
e
-
g
a
m

in
g

w
e
b
s
it
e
.

C
o
m

p
a
n
y

d
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
.

V
a
r
ia

b
le

im
p
o
r
t
a
n
c
e

s
c
o
r
e
,
r
e
la

t
e
d

t
o

it
s

p
r
e
d
ic

t
iv

e
a
c
c
u
r
a
c
y
.

1
7

m
o
n
t
h
s

t
r
a
in

in
g

d
a
t
a
,
4

m
o
n
t
h
s

fo
r

c
h
u
r
n

m
e
a
s
u
r
e
m

e
n
t
.

E
n
s
e
m

b
le

m
o
d
e
ls
:

R
F
s

a
n
d

G
A
M

e
n
s
.

T
o
p
-
D

e
c
il
e

L
if
t

a
n
d

L
if
t

I
n
d
e
x
.



40 David L. Garćıa et al.

T
a
b
le

1
0

R
e
fe
re
n
c
e
s
o
n
a
b
a
n
d
o
n
m
e
n
t
p
re
d
ic
ti
o
n
m
o
d
e
ll
in
g
,
li
st
e
d
in

ch
ro
n
o
lo
g
ic
a
l
o
rd

e
r
(2
0
0
0
-2
0
0
9
)
fo
r
th

e
te
le
c
o
m
m
u
n
ic
a
ti
o
n
s
a
p
p
li
c
a
ti
o
n
a
re
a
(1

o
u
t
o
f
2
,

c
o
n
ti
n
u
e
s
in

th
e
n
e
x
t
ta
b
le
).

R
e
f.

D
a
t
a

t
y
p
e

D
a
t
a

g
a
t
h
e
r
in

g
F
e
a
t
u
r
e

s
e
le
c
t
io

n

T
im

e
p
e
r
io

d
s

M
o
d
e
ll
in

g
t
e
c
h
n
iq

u
e
s

V
a
li
d
a
t
io

n
m

e
t
h
o
d

[2
1
]

B
il
li
n
g
,
s
e
r
v
ic

e
a
n
d

s
o
c
io

-
d
e
m

o
g
r
a
p
h
ic

d
a
t
a

fr
o
m

c
e
ll

p
h
o
n
e

u
s
e
r
s
.

D
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
.

D
T
s

a
n
d

G
A
s
.

M
o
n
t
h
ly

d
a
t
a
.

C
o
m

b
in

a
t
io

n
o
f

D
T
s

a
n
d

A
N
N
s
.

A
c
c
u
r
a
c
y

o
n

v
a
li
d
a
t
io

n
s
e
t
.

[7
1
]

C
a
ll

d
e
t
a
il
s

a
n
d

q
u
a
li
t
y
,
fi
n
a
n
c
ia

l
a
n
d

s
e
r
v
ic

e
in

fo
r
m

a
t
io

n
a
n
d

d
e
m

o
g
r
a
p
h
ic

s
.

D
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
.

N
o
t

s
p
e
c
if
ie

d
.

3
m

o
n
t
h
s

o
b
s
e
r
v
a
t
io

n
a
n
d

2
m

o
n
t
h
s

p
r
e
d
ic

t
io

n
.

L
o
g
is
t
ic

R
e
g
r
e
s
s
io

n
,
D

T
s

(
C
5
.0

)
a
n
d

A
N
N
s
.

L
if
t

C
h
a
r
t

a
n
d

C
r
o
s
s
-
v
a
li
d
a
t
io

n
.

[7
3
]

U
s
a
g
e

d
a
t
a

o
n

t
e
le

c
o
m

c
u
s
t
o
m

e
r
s
.

D
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
.

D
T
s
.

N
o
t

s
p
e
c
if
ie

d
.

D
T
s

(
C
4
.5

)
.

C
r
o
s
s
-
v
a
li
d
a
t
io

n
.

[1
0
3
]

V
a
r
ia

b
le

s
r
e
la

t
e
d

t
o

t
h
e

c
o
n
t
r
a
c
t

a
n
d

c
o
n
s
u
m

p
t
io

n
.

D
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
.

I
n
t
e
r
v
ie

w
s

w
it
h

e
x
p
e
r
t
s
.

O
b
s
e
r
v
a
t
io

n
,
r
e
t
e
n
t
io

n
a
n
d

p
r
e
d
ic

t
io

n
p
e
r
io

d
s
.

D
T
s

(
C
4
.5

)
.

A
c
c
u
r
a
c
y

a
n
d

s
e
n
s
it
iv

it
y
.

[1
]

C
u
s
t
o
m

e
r

lo
c
a
li
s
a
t
io

n
a
n
d

t
y
p
e
,
p
a
y
m

e
n
t

m
e
t
h
o
d
,

s
e
r
v
ic

e
p
la

n
,
m

o
n
t
h
ly

u
s
e
,
n
u
m

b
e
r

o
f
c
a
ll
s

m
a
d
e

a
n
d

a
b
n
o
r
m

a
ll
y

e
n
d
e
d
.

D
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
.

I
n
t
e
r
v
ie

w
s

w
it
h

e
x
p
e
r
t
s
.

T
w
o

m
o
n
t
h
s

t
r
a
in

in
g
;

o
n
e

m
o
n
t
h

p
r
e
d
ic

t
io

n
.

D
M

E
L
,
D

T
s

(
C
4
.5

)
a
n
d

A
N
N
s

L
if
t

C
h
a
r
t

a
n
d

a
c
c
u
r
a
c
y
.

[2
6
]

B
il
li
n
g
,
c
o
n
s
u
m

e
r

u
s
a
g
e
,
d
e
m

o
g
r
a
p
h
ic

s
,
c
u
s
t
o
m

e
r

r
e
la

t
io

n
s
h
ip

a
n
d

m
a
r
k
e
t
d
a
t
a

fr
o
m

a
w
ir
e
le

s
s

t
e
lc

o
c
o
m

p
a
n
y
.

C
o
m

p
a
n
y

d
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
.

D
o
m

a
in

k
n
o
w
le

d
g
e
.

N
o

(
d
a
t
a

c
o
ll
e
c
t
e
d

o
v
e
r

9
m

o
n
t
h
s
)
.

D
T
s
,
A
N
N
s
,

N
e
u
r
o
-
F
u
z
z
y

S
y
s
t
e
m

s
a
n
d

G
A
s
.

T
e
n
-
fo

ld
c
r
o
s
s

v
a
li
d
a
t
io

n
.

[4
5
]

S
o
c
io

-
d
e
m

o
g
r
a
p
h
ic

a
n
d

u
s
a
g
e

v
a
r
ia

b
le

s
.

D
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
.

R
2

m
e
t
h
o
d
.

N
o

(
6

m
o
n
t
h
s

d
a
t
a
)
.

A
N
N
s
,
D

T
s

a
n
d

L
o
g
is
t
ic

R
e
g
r
e
s
s
io

n
.

L
if
t

C
h
a
r
t

a
n
d

c
r
o
s
s

v
a
li
d
a
t
io

n
.

[5
1
]

C
o
m

p
a
n
y

s
e
r
v
ic

e
,
d
e
m

o
g
r
a
p
h
ic

a
n
d

s
e
r
v
ic

e
u
s
e

c
h
a
r
a
c
t
e
r
is
t
ic

s
.

S
u
r
v
e
y
.

N
o
t

s
p
e
c
if
ie

d
.

N
o
.

L
o
g
is
t
ic

R
e
g
r
e
s
s
io

n
.

L
o
g

li
k
e
li
h
o
o
d
.

[7
2
]

C
u
s
t
o
m

e
r

b
e
h
a
v
io

r
,
c
o
m

p
a
n
y

in
t
e
r
a
c
t
io

n
d
a
t
a

a
n
d

d
e
m

o
g
r
a
p
h
ic

s
fr
o
m

w
ir
e
le

s
s

t
e
le

c
o
m

m
u
n
ic

a
t
io

n
u
s
e
r
s
.

D
a
t
a

p
r
o
v
id

e
d

b
y

T
e
r
a
d
a
t
a

C
e
n
t
e
r

fo
r

C
R
M

.

D
o
m

a
in

k
n
o
w
le

d
g
e

a
n
d

s
t
e
p
w
is
e
.

T
h
r
e
e
-
m

o
n
t
h

d
a
t
a
;

c
h
u
r
n

e
v
a
lu

a
t
e
d

o
n

t
h
e

5
t
h

m
o
n
t
h
.

L
o
g
is
t
ic

R
e
g
r
e
s
s
io

n
,
D

T
s

a
n
d

A
N
N
s
.

T
o
p

d
e
c
il
e

li
ft

a
n
d

G
in

i
c
o
e
ff
ic

ie
n
t
;
t
w
o

v
a
li
d
a
t
io

n
s
e
t
s
.

[1
0
9
]

D
e
m

o
g
r
a
p
h
ic

s
,
u
s
a
g
e

le
v
e
l,

q
u
a
li
t
y

o
f
s
e
r
v
ic

e
a
n
d

m
a
r
k
e
t
in

g
fe

a
t
u
r
e
s

fr
o
m

w
ir
e
le

s
s

t
e
le

c
o
m

c
u
s
t
o
m

e
r
s
.

C
o
m

p
a
n
y

d
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
.

N
o
.

3
-
m

o
n
t
h
s

t
r
a
in

in
g
;

c
h
u
r
n

m
e
a
s
u
r
e
d

a
ft
e
r

5
m

o
n
t
h
s
.

S
V
M

s
,
A
N
N
s
,
D

T
s

a
n
d

B
a
y
e
s
ia

n
N
e
t
w
o
r
k
s
.

A
c
c
u
r
a
c
y
.

[4
4
]

T
r
a
n
s
a
c
t
io

n
a
n
d

c
o
n
t
r
a
c
t

d
a
t
a
:
d
e
m

o
g
r
a
p
h
ic

,
p
a
y
m

e
n
t
,
c
a
ll

d
e
t
a
il
s

a
n
d

c
u
s
t
o
m

e
r

s
e
r
v
ic

e
d
a
t
a
.

D
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
.

I
n
t
e
r
v
ie

w
s

w
it
h

e
x
p
e
r
t
s

a
n
d

c
u
s
t
o
m

e
r
s
;
z
-
t
e
s
t
.

6
-
m

o
n
t
h
s

d
a
t
a
;

1
-
m

o
n
t
h

p
r
e
d
ic

t
io

n
.

D
T
s

(
C
5
.0

)
,
A
N
N
.

5
%

T
o
p
-
D

e
c
il
e

L
if
t

o
n

s
e
p
a
r
a
t
e

v
a
li
d
a
t
io

n
s
e
t
s
.

[6
0
]

R
F
M

v
a
r
ia

b
le

s
,
m

in
u
t
e
s

o
f
c
u
s
t
o
m

e
r

c
a
r
e

c
a
ll
s
,

n
u
m

b
e
r

o
f
a
d
u
lt
s

in
t
h
e

h
o
u
s
e
h
o
ld

a
n
d

e
d
u
c
a
t
io

n
le

v
e
l,

fr
o
m

w
ir
e
le

s
s

t
e
le

c
o
m

c
u
s
t
o
m

e
r
s
.

C
o
m

p
a
n
y

d
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
,

p
r
o
v
id

e
d

b
y

C
R
M

C
e
n
t
r
e

a
t

D
u
k
e

U
.

A
ll
u
s
io

n
t
o

p
r
e
v
io

u
s

r
e
s
e
a
r
c
h
.

T
r
a
in

in
g

d
a
t
a
:
4

n
o
n
-
c
o
n
s
e
c
u
t
iv

e
m

o
n
t
h
s
;
v
a
li
d
a
t
io

n
w
it
h

fu
t
u
r
e

d
a
t
a
.

D
T
s
.

T
o
p
-
d
e
c
il
e

li
ft

a
n
d

G
in

i
c
o
e
ff
ic

ie
n
t
.

[9
0
]

U
s
a
g
e

v
a
r
ia

b
le

s
,
r
e
la

t
io

n
s
h
ip

a
n
d

d
e
m

o
g
r
a
p
h
ic

s
fr
o
m

w
ir
e
le

s
s

t
e
le

c
o
m

m
u
n
ic

a
t
io

n
s

c
u
s
t
o
m

e
r
s
.

D
a
t
a
b
a
s
e

p
r
o
v
id

e
d

b
y

t
h
e

C
e
n
t
e
r

fo
r

C
R
M

a
t

D
u
k
e

U
.

I
n
t
e
r
v
ie

w
w
it
h

e
x
p
e
r
t
s
.

N
o
t

s
p
e
c
if
ie

d
.

S
V
M

s
.

A
c
c
u
r
a
c
y
;
8
0
%

t
r
a
in

in
g

/
2
0
%

v
a
li
d
a
t
io

n
.

[3
3
]

C
u
s
t
o
m

e
r

r
e
p
a
ir
s

a
n
d

c
o
m

p
la

in
t
s

d
a
t
a

fr
o
m

3
t
e
le

c
o
m

m
u
n
ic

a
t
io

n
s

s
c
e
n
a
r
io

s
(
r
e
s
id

e
n
t
ia

l
m

o
b
il
e
,

b
r
o
a
d
b
a
n
d

m
o
b
il
e
,
b
u
s
in

e
s
s

la
n
d
li
n
e
)
.

D
a
t
a
b
a
s
e

I
n
t
e
r
v
ie

w
s

w
it
h

c
o
m

p
a
n
y

e
x
p
e
r
t
s
.

1
-
m

o
n
t
h

t
r
a
in

in
g

a
n
d

1
2
-
m

o
n
t
h

p
r
e
d
ic

t
io

n
.

A
N
N
s

A
c
c
u
r
a
c
y
.

[9
2
]

C
R
M

v
a
r
ia

b
le

s
fr
o
m

a
t
e
le

c
o
m

m
u
n
ic

a
t
io

n
s

c
o
m

p
a
n
y
.

C
o
m

p
a
n
y

d
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
.

P
r
im

a
r
y

fe
a
t
u
r
e
s

p
r
o
v
id

e
d

b
y

t
h
e

c
o
m

p
a
n
y
.

S
ix

m
o
n
t
h
s

d
a
t
a
;

c
h
u
r
n
e
r
s

le
a
v
e

1
-
2

m
o
n
t
h
s

a
ft
e
r

s
a
m

p
le

d
.

A
N
N
s

a
n
d

S
O

M
.

F
iv

e
-
fo

ld
c
r
o
s
s

v
a
li
d
a
t
io

n
.

[1
0
5
]

V
a
r
ia

b
le

s
d
e
fi
n
in

g
t
e
le

c
o
m

m
u
n
ic

a
t
io

n
s

c
o
m

p
a
n
y

s
u
p
p
li
e
r
s
’
p
e
r
fo

r
m

a
n
c
e
.
Q

u
a
li
t
y

m
a
n
a
g
e
m

e
n
t

p
r
a
c
t
ic

e
s
,
d
o
c
u
m

e
n
t
a
t
io

n
a
n
d

s
e
lf
-
a
u
d
it
,
p
r
o
c
e
s
s

a
n
d

m
a
n
u
fa

c
t
u
r
in

g
c
a
p
a
b
il
it
y
,
e
t
c
.

C
o
m

p
a
n
y

d
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
,

a
v
a
il
a
b
le

in
p
r
e
v
io

u
s

s
t
u
d
ie

s
.

P
r
im

a
r
y

fe
a
t
u
r
e
s

in
t
h
e

d
a
t
a

s
e
t
.

V
a
li
d
a
t
io

n
a
n
d

t
e
s
t

s
e
t
s

c
o
r
r
e
s
p
o
n
d

t
o

d
if
fe

r
e
n
t

s
u
p
p
li
e
r
s

o
n

d
if
fe

r
e
n
t

p
e
r
io

d
s
.

H
y
b
r
id

m
o
d
e
l:

D
a
t
a

E
n
v
e
lo

p
m

e
n
t

A
n
a
ly

s
is
,
D

T
s

a
n
d

A
N
N
s
.

F
o
u
r
-
fo

ld
c
r
o
s
s

v
a
li
d
a
t
io

n
;
a
c
c
u
r
a
c
y
.

[6
3
]

T
h
r
e
e

in
d
e
p
e
n
d
e
n
t

d
a
t
a

s
e
t
s

r
e
la

t
e
d

t
o

t
e
le

c
o
m

in
d
u
s
t
r
y

c
o
n
t
a
in

in
g

u
s
a
g
e
,
b
il
li
n
g

a
n
d

s
o
c
io

-
d
e
m

o
g
r
a
p
h
ic

d
a
t
a
.

P
r
o
v
id

e
d

b
y

C
R
M

C
e
n
t
r
e

a
t

D
u
k
e

U
n
iv

.

D
o
m

a
in

k
n
o
w
le

d
g
e
-
b
a
s
e
d
.

4
-
m

o
n
t
h
s

d
a
t
a
;
c
h
u
r
n

c
a
lc

u
la

t
e
d

1
-
2

m
o
n
t
h
s

a
ft
e
r

s
a
m

p
li
n
g
.

L
o
g
is
t
ic

R
e
g
r
e
s
s
io

n
,
D

T
s

a
n
d

A
N
N
s
.

K
-
fo

ld
C
V
;
a
c
c
u
r
a
c
y
,

s
e
n
s
it
iv

it
y
,
s
p
e
c
if
ic

it
y

a
n
d

A
U
C
.



Intelligent Data Analysis Approaches to Churn as a Business Problem: a Survey 41
T
a
b
le

1
1

(C
o
n
ti
n
u
e
s
fr
o
m

p
re
v
io
u
s
ta
b
le
)
R
e
fe
re
n
c
e
s
o
n
a
b
a
n
d
o
n
m
e
n
t
p
re
d
ic
ti
o
n
m
o
d
e
ll
in
g
,
li
st
e
d
in

ch
ro
n
o
lo
g
ic
a
l
o
rd

e
r
(2
0
1
0
-2
0
1
5
)
fo
r
th

e
te
le
c
o
m
m
u
n
ic
a
ti
o
n
s

a
p
p
li
c
a
ti
o
n
a
re
a
(2

o
u
t
o
f
2
).

R
e
f.

D
a
t
a

t
y
p
e

D
a
t
a

g
a
t
h
e
r
in

g
F
e
a
t
u
r
e

s
e
le
c
t
io

n
T
im

e
p
e
r
io

d
s

M
o
d
e
ll
in

g
t
e
c
h
n
iq

u
e
s

V
a
li
d
a
t
io

n
m

e
t
h
o
d

[2
3
]

D
e
m

o
g
r
a
p
h
ic

s
,
h
is
t
o
r
ic

a
l
t
r
a
n
s
a
c
t
io

n
a
l
in

fo
r
m

a
t
io

n
a
n
d

fi
n
a
n
c
ia

l
v
a
r
ia

b
le

s
o
n

d
if
fe

r
e
n
t

s
c
e
n
a
r
io

s
(
s
u
p
e
r
m

a
r
k
e
t
s
,
b
a
n
k
in

g
,
t
e
le

c
o
m

a
n
d

m
a
il
in

g
s
e
r
v
ic

e
s
)
.

D
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
.

U
n
d
e
r
s
a
m

p
li
n
g
.

1
m

o
n
t
h

d
a
t
a

c
o
ll
e
c
t
io

n
a
n
d

1
y
e
a
r

p
e
r
fo

r
m

a
n
c
e

p
e
r
io

d
.

E
n
s
e
m

b
le

C
la

s
s
if
ie

r
s

(
G

A
M

e
n
s
)

A
c
c
u
r
a
c
y
,
A
U
C
,
T
o
p

D
e
c
il
e

L
if
t

a
n
d

L
if
t

I
n
d
e
x
.

[5
4
]

C
u
s
t
o
m

e
r

u
s
a
g
e

a
n
d

d
e
m

o
g
r
a
p
h
ic

s
fr
o
m

a
t
e
le

c
o
m

c
o
m

p
a
n
y
.

C
o
m

p
a
n
y

D
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
.

D
o
m

a
in

k
n
o
w
le

d
g
e
.

N
o
t

s
p
e
c
if
ie

d
.

B
a
y
e
s
ia

n
N
e
t
w
o
r
k
s
.

A
c
c
u
r
a
c
y
.

[6
2
]

U
s
a
g
e

a
n
d

s
o
c
io

-
d
e
m

o
g
r
a
p
h
ic

d
a
t
a

fr
o
m

a
m

o
b
il
e

t
e
le

c
o
m

m
u
n
ic

a
t
io

n
s

c
o
m

p
a
n
y
.

D
a
t
a

s
e
t

u
s
e
d

in
t
h
e

c
h
u
r
n

t
o
u
r
n
a
m

e
n
t

b
y

D
u
k
e

U
n
iv

.

D
o
m

a
in

K
n
o
w
le

d
g
e

a
n
d

S
t
e
p
w
is
e

s
e
le

c
t
io

n
.

4
n
o
n
-
c
o
n
s
e
c
u
t
iv

e
m

o
n
t
h
s

d
a
t
a
;
c
h
u
r
n
e
r
s

le
a
v
e

t
h
e

c
o
m

p
a
n
y

1
-
2

m
o
n
t
h
s

a
ft
e
r

s
a
m

p
le

d
.

L
o
g
is
t
ic

R
e
g
r
e
s
s
io

n
a
n
d

D
T
s
.

A
c
c
u
r
a
c
y
,
s
e
n
s
it
iv

it
y
,

s
p
e
c
if
ic

it
y

a
n
d

A
U
C
.

C
r
o
s
s
-
v
a
li
d
a
t
io

n
.

[9
7
]

S
o
c
io

-
d
e
m

o
g
r
a
p
h
ic

s
,
c
a
ll

b
e
h
a
v
io

u
r
,
fi
n
a
n
c
ia

l
a
n
d

m
a
r
k
e
t
in

g
r
e
la

t
e
d

v
a
r
ia

b
le

s
fr
o
m

e
le

v
e
n

w
ir
e
le

s
s

t
e
le

c
o
m

o
p
e
r
a
t
o
r
s
.

C
o
m

p
a
n
y

a
n
d

p
u
b
li
c

d
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
.

B
a
s
e
d

o
n

F
is
h
e
r

s
c
o
r
e
.

N
o

(
a
v
e
r
a
g
e
s

o
f
1

y
e
a
r

d
a
t
a
)
.

D
T
s
,
e
n
s
e
m

b
le

s
,
A
N
N
s
,

B
a
y
e
s
ia

n
N
e
t
w
o
r
k
s
,

S
V
M

s
.

A
c
c
u
r
a
c
y
,
s
e
n
s
it
iv

it
y
,

s
p
e
c
if
ic

it
y
,
A
U
C
.

[1
0
8
]

U
s
a
g
e

t
im

e
,
lo

c
a
t
io

n
a
n
d

c
u
s
t
o
m

e
r
s
’
u
n
d
e
r
ly

in
g

s
o
c
ia

l
n
e
t
w
o
r
k

t
o

p
r
e
d
ic

t
t
h
e
ir

c
h
u
r
n

fr
o
m

a
m

o
b
il
e

o
p
e
r
a
t
o
r
.

C
o
m

p
a
n
y

D
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
.

R
e
s
e
a
r
c
h

o
n

p
r
e
v
io

u
s

li
t
e
r
a
t
u
r
e
.

3
c
o
n
s
e
c
u
t
iv

e
m

o
n
t
h
s

d
a
t
a
;
c
h
u
r
n

p
r
e
d
ic

t
e
d

c
o
m

p
a
r
in

g
p
e
r
io

d
v
a
r
ia

t
io

n
s

.

H
y
b
r
id

m
o
d
e
ls
,

c
o
m

b
in

in
g

D
T
s
,
G

A
s

a
n
d

G
a
m

e
T
h
e
o
r
y
.

A
c
c
u
r
a
c
y
.

[1
3
]

P
u
r
c
h
a
s
e

h
is
t
o
r
y

(
lo

n
g
it
u
d
in

a
l)

d
a
t
a

a
n
d

s
o
c
io

-
d
e
m

o
g
r
a
p
h
ic

(
s
t
a
t
ic

)
v
a
r
ia

b
le

s
o
n

t
h
r
e
e

d
if
fe

r
e
n
t

fi
e
ld

s
:
s
u
p
e
r
m

a
r
k
e
t
s
,
le

is
u
r
e

a
n
d

t
e
le

c
o
m

D
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
.

I
n
t
e
r
v
ie

w
s

w
it
h

e
x
p
e
r
t
s
.

1
-
y
e
a
r

d
a
t
a

c
o
ll
e
c
t
io

n
a
n
d

1
-
y
e
a
r

p
r
e
d
ic

t
io

n
,

w
it
h

s
e
a
s
o
n
a
l

o
v
e
r
la

p
p
in

g
.

S
V
M

s
.

A
U
C
.

[5
0
]

C
u
s
t
o
m

e
r

b
e
h
a
v
io

r
,
d
e
m

o
g
r
a
p
h
ic

s
a
n
d

u
s
a
g
e

d
a
t
a

T
e
le

c
o
m

m
u
n
ic

a
-

t
io

n
s

d
a
t
a
b
a
s
e

o
f

u
n
r
e
p
o
r
t
e
d

o
r
ig

in

F
e
a
t
u
r
e

s
e
le

c
t
io

n
t
h
r
o
u
g
h

e
x
h
a
u
s
t
iv

e
r
e
c
o
m

b
in

a
t
io

n
o
f

v
a
r
ia

b
le

s

N
o
t

r
e
p
o
r
t
e
d

M
u
lt
ip

le
D

T
m

o
d
e
ls
,

A
N
N
s
,
k
-
n
e
a
r
e
s
t

n
e
ig

h
b
o
u
r
s

a
n
d

S
V
M

s
,

a
s

s
t
a
n
d
-
a
lo

n
e

m
o
d
e
ls

o
r

h
y
b
r
id

iz
e
d

t
h
r
o
u
g
h

a
n

a
d

h
o
c

m
e
t
h
o
d

a
c
c
u
r
a
c
y
,
p
r
e
c
is
io

n
,

r
e
c
a
ll

a
n
d

F
-
s
c
o
r
e
.

S
in

g
le

t
r
a
in

in
g
-
t
e
s
t

s
p
li
t
.

[1
0
6
]

U
s
a
g
e

d
a
t
a

fr
o
m

a
t
e
le

c
o
m

c
o
m

p
a
n
y

(
U
C
I
d
a
t
a
s
e
t
)
.

S
t
a
n
d
a
r
d

d
a
t
a
s
e
t

fr
o
m

t
h
e

U
C
I

m
a
c
h
in

e
le

a
r
n
in

g
r
e
p
o
s
it
o
r
y
.

I
n
t
e
n
s
iv

e
t
w
o
-
s
t
a
g
e

fe
a
t
u
r
e

s
e
le

c
t
io

n
b
a
s
e
d

o
n

A
N
N
s
,
t
r
a
n
s
fe

r
le

a
r
n
in

g
a
n
d

M
u
t
u
a
l

I
n
fo

r
m

a
t
io

n
.

D
a
t
a

s
p
a
n
n
in

g
fr
o
m

M
a
y

t
o

D
e
c
e
m

b
e
r
,
2
0
1
0

(
C
h
in

e
s
e

b
a
n
k
)
.

E
n
s
e
m

b
le

le
a
r
n
in

g
w
it
h

S
V
M

s
a
s

b
a
s
e

c
la

s
s
if
ie

r
s
.
T
r
a
n
s
fe

r
le

a
r
n
in

g
.

s
e
n
s
it
iv

it
y
,
s
p
e
c
if
ic

it
y
,

A
U
C
.

[9
3
]

U
s
a
g
e

d
a
t
a

in
t
h
e

t
e
le

c
o
m

m
u
n
ic

a
t
io

n
s

s
e
c
t
o
r

S
t
a
n
d
a
r
d

d
a
t
a
b
a
s
e

fr
o
m

t
h
e

U
C
I
m

a
c
h
in

e
le

a
r
n
in

g
r
e
p
o
s
it
o
r
y

N
o

N
o
t

d
e
c
la

r
e
d

L
o
g
is
t
ic

R
e
g
r
e
s
s
io

n
,

N
ä
ıv

e
B
a
y
e
s
,
D

T
s
,

A
N
N
s

a
n
d

S
V
M

s
c
o
m

b
in

e
d

b
y

b
o
o
s
t
in

g

P
r
e
c
is
io

n
,
r
e
c
a
ll
,

a
c
c
u
r
a
c
y

a
n
d

F
-
m

e
a
s
u
r
e

w
it
h

M
o
n
t
e

C
a
r
lo

-
b
a
s
e
d

c
r
o
s
s
-
v
a
li
d
a
t
io

n
.

[7
]

R
e
v
e
n
u
e

a
n
d

u
s
a
g
e

d
a
t
a

in
t
h
e

m
o
b
il
e

t
e
le

c
o
m

m
u
n
ic

a
t
io

n
s

s
e
c
t
o
r

O
r
ig

in
a
l

d
a
t
a
b
a
s
e

fr
o
m

A
A
A

H
o
n
k

K
o
n
g
-
b
a
s
e
d

t
e
le

c
o
m

m
u
n
ic

a
-

t
io

n
s

c
o
m

p
a
n
y
.

N
o

1
-
y
e
a
r

d
a
t
a
,
fr
o
m

S
e
p
t
e
m

b
e
r

2
0
0
4

t
o

A
u
g
u
s
t

2
0
0
5
.

A
d
a
p
t
a
t
io

n
o
f
t
h
e

F
u
z
z
y

c
-
M

e
a
n
s

c
lu

s
t
e
r
in

g
a
lg

o
r
it
h
m

.

A
d
ju

s
t
e
d

S
C

in
d
e
x

fo
r

c
lu

s
t
e
r

v
a
li
d
it
y
.



42 David L. Garćıa et al.

T
a
b
le

1
2

R
e
fe
re
n
c
e
s
o
n
a
b
a
n
d
o
n
m
e
n
t
p
re
d
ic
ti
o
n
m
o
d
e
ll
in
g
,
li
st
e
d
in

ch
ro
n
o
lo
g
ic
a
l
o
rd

e
r
(2
0
0
1
-2
0
1
5
)
fo
r
th

e
B
a
n
k
in
g
a
n
d
F
in
a
n
c
ia
l
S
e
rv
ic
e
s
fi
e
ld
.

R
e
f.

D
a
t
a

t
y
p
e

D
a
t
a

g
a
t
h
e
r
in

g
F
e
a
t
u
r
e

s
e
le
c
t
io

n
T
im

e
p
e
r
io

d
s

M
o
d
e
ll
in

g
t
e
c
h
n
iq

u
e
s

V
a
li
d
a
t
io

n
m

e
t
h
o
d

[1
0
0
]

H
is
t
o
r
ic

a
l
p
u
r
c
h
a
s
e

b
e
h
a
v
io

r
,

s
o
c
io

-
d
e
m

o
g
r
a
p
h
ic

s
a
n
d

a
c
t
u
a
l
p
u
r
c
h
a
s
e

o
n

b
a
n
k
in

g
c
u
s
t
o
m

e
r
s
.

S
u
r
v
e
y
.

D
o
m

a
in

K
n
o
w
le

d
g
e
.

N
o

(
s
u
r
v
e
y

a
t

t
h
e

m
o
m

e
n
t

o
f
la

s
t

p
u
r
c
h
a
s
e
)
.

R
e
g
r
e
s
s
io

n
.

A
c
c
u
r
a
c
y
.

[1
4
]

T
r
a
n
s
a
c
t
io

n
d
a
t
a

(
fr
e
q
u
e
n
c
y

o
f
t
r
a
n
s
a
c
t
io

n
o
f

b
a
n
k
in

g
c
u
s
t
o
m

e
r
s
)
.

D
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
.

R
u
le

e
x
t
r
a
c
t
io

n
-
b
a
s
e
d
.

L
a
s
t

o
p
e
r
a
t
iv

e
m

o
n
t
h

fr
o
m

t
h
e

la
s
t

6
m

o
n
t
h
s
.

G
o
a
l
o
r
ie

n
t
e
d

s
e
q
u
e
n
t
ia

l
p
a
t
t
e
r
n
.

C
o
m

p
u
t
a
t
io

n
a
l

e
ff
ic

ie
n
c
y

a
g
a
in

s
t

e
x
is
t
in

g
a
lg

o
r
it
h
m

s
.

[8
6
]

P
a
s
t

t
r
a
n
s
a
c
t
io

n
s

c
a
r
r
ie

d
b
y

t
h
e

c
o
s
t
u
m

e
r
.

D
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
.

N
o
t

s
p
e
c
if
ie

d
.

N
o

(
3

m
o
n
t
h
:
a
v
e
r
a
g
e
s

a
n
d

t
o
t
a
ls
)
.

K
-
m

e
a
n
s
,
S
O

M
a
n
d

F
u
z
z
y

K
-
m

e
a
n
s
.

I
n
t
r
a
-
c
la

s
s

m
e
t
h
o
d

fo
r

c
lu

s
t
e
r

c
o
m

p
a
c
t
n
e
s
s
.

[9
5
]

C
u
s
t
o
m

e
r

b
e
h
a
v
io

u
r

in
fo

r
m

a
t
io

n
,

s
o
c
io

-
d
e
m

o
g
r
a
p
h
ic

in
fo

r
m

a
t
io

n
,
m

e
r
g
e
r

a
n
d

p
r
o
s
p
e
r
it
y

in
d
e
x
.

D
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
.

N
o
t

s
p
e
c
if
ie

d
.

7
7

y
e
a
r

d
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
.

S
u
r
v
iv

a
l
a
n
a
ly

s
is
.

S
t
a
t
is
t
ic

a
l
r
e
le

v
a
n
c
e
.

[3
9
]

C
u
s
t
o
m

e
r

a
t
t
r
ib

u
t
e
s

a
n
d

c
r
e
d
it

c
a
r
d

u
s
a
g
e

fr
o
m

b
a
n
k
in

g
c
u
s
t
o
m

e
r
s
.

C
o
m

p
a
n
y

d
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
.

A
p
r
io

r
i
a
s
s
o
c
ia

t
io

n
.

1
2

m
o
n
t
h
s

d
a
t
a
;
n
o

p
r
e
d
ic

t
io

n
p
e
r
io

d
.

S
O

M
.

G
o
o
d
n
e
s
s

o
f

s
e
g
m

e
n
t
a
t
io

n
.

[5
8
]

P
a
s
t

c
u
s
t
o
m

e
r

b
e
h
a
v
io

r
,
d
e
m

o
g
r
a
p
h
ic

s
a
n
d

in
t
e
r
a
c
t
io

n
w
it
h

in
t
e
r
m

e
d
ia

r
ie

s
fo

r
b
a
n
k
in

g
a
n
d

in
s
u
r
a
n
c
e

c
u
s
t
o
m

e
r
s
.

C
o
m

p
a
n
y

d
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
.

D
o
m

a
in

k
n
o
w
le

d
g
e
.

D
a
t
a

c
o
ll
e
c
t
e
d

a
t

g
iv

e
n

d
a
t
e
,
e
v
a
lu

a
t
e
d

o
v
e
r

n
e
x
t

9
m

o
n
t
h
s
.

R
F
s
.

A
U
C

w
it
h

s
e
p
a
r
a
t
e

v
a
li
d
a
t
io

n
d
a
t
a

s
e
t
s
.

[8
1
]

P
u
r
c
h
a
s
e

b
e
h
a
v
io

u
r
,
s
e
e
n

a
s

a
s
e
q
u
e
n
c
e

o
f
t
h
e

h
is
t
o
r
ic

a
l
p
u
r
c
h
a
s
e
d

p
r
o
d
u
c
t
s

(
g
r
o
u
p
e
d

in
9

s
e
t
s

o
f
p
r
o
d
u
c
t
s
)
.

C
o
m

p
a
n
y

d
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
.

D
o
m

a
in

K
n
o
w
le

d
g
e
.

N
o
t

s
p
e
c
if
ie

d
.

M
ix

t
u
r
e

t
r
a
n
s
it
io

n
d
is
t
r
ib

u
t
io

n
a
n
d

M
a
r
k
o
v

c
h
a
in

s
.

L
o
g
-
li
k
e
li
h
o
o
d
.

S
e
p
a
r
a
t
e

v
a
li
d
a
t
io

n
d
a
t
a

s
e
t
s
.

[5
9
]

s
o
c
io

-
d
e
m

o
g
r
a
p
h
ic

s
a
n
d

c
r
e
d
it

li
m

it
s

fr
o
m

b
a
n
k
in

g
c
u
s
t
o
m

e
r
s
.

D
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
.

S
t
e
p
w
is
e

d
is
c
r
im

in
a
n
t

a
n
a
ly

s
is
.

N
o
t

s
p
e
c
if
ie

d
.

C
A
R
T
,
L
o
g
is
t
ic

r
e
g
r
e
s
s
io

n
,
A
N
N
s

a
n
d

S
V
M

s
.

A
c
c
u
r
a
c
y
.

[2
9
]

E
v
o
lu

t
io

n
in

t
im

e
o
f
t
h
e

R
F
M

v
a
r
ia

b
le

s
r
e
la

t
e
d

t
o

t
r
a
n
s
a
c
t
io

n
s

o
f
a

fi
n
a
n
c
ia

l
c
o
m

p
a
n
y

c
u
s
t
o
m

e
r
s
.

C
o
m

p
a
n
y

d
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
.

A
ll
u
s
io

n
t
o

p
r
e
v
io

u
s

r
e
s
e
a
r
c
h
.

6
c
o
n
s
e
c
u
t
iv

e
m

o
n
t
h
s

t
r
a
in

in
g

d
a
t
a
;
n
e
x
t

3
m

o
n
t
h
s

v
a
li
d
a
t
io

n
.

L
o
g
is
t
ic

R
e
g
r
e
s
s
io

n
,

D
T
s

a
n
d

A
N
N
s
.

A
c
c
u
r
a
c
y
,
L
o
s
s

fu
n
c
t
io

n
a
n
d

A
U
C
.

[5
6
]

S
o
c
io

-
d
e
m

o
g
r
a
p
h
ic

a
n
d

b
e
h
a
v
io

u
r
a
l
d
a
t
a

fr
o
m

c
r
e
d
it

c
a
r
d

u
s
e
r
s
.

D
a
t
a
s
e
t

fr
o
m

t
h
e

B
u
s
in

e
s
s

I
n
t
e
ll
ig

e
n
c
e

C
u
p
,

U
n
iv

.
C
h
il
e
.

C
A
R
T
.

3
c
o
n
s
e
c
u
t
iv

e
m

o
n
t
h
s

d
a
t
a
;
t
e
s
t
e
d

d
u
r
in

g
t
h
e

s
u
b
s
e
q
u
e
n
t

y
e
a
r
.

D
T
s

(
J
4
8
)
,
L
o
g
is
t
ic

R
e
g
r
e
s
s
io

n
,
R
F
s

a
n
d

S
V
M

s
.

S
e
n
s
it
iv

it
y

a
n
d

a
c
c
u
r
a
c
y
;

c
r
o
s
s
-
v
a
li
d
a
t
io

n
.

[1
0
2
]

C
u
s
t
o
m

e
r

p
e
r
s
o
n
a
l
in

fo
r
m

a
t
io

n
,
c
r
e
d
it

c
a
r
d

b
a
s
ic

d
a
t
a
,
t
r
a
n
s
a
c
t
io

n
a
n
d

a
b
n
o
r
m

a
l
u
s
a
g
e

in
fo

r
m

a
t
io

n
.

C
o
m

p
a
n
y

d
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
.

D
o
m

a
in

k
n
o
w
le

d
g
e
.

1
2
-
m

o
n
t
h
s

t
r
a
in

in
g

a
n
d

1
2
-
m

o
n
t
h
s

t
e
s
t

d
a
t
a
.

D
T
s
,
L
o
g
is
t
ic

r
e
g
r
e
s
s
io

n
,
B
a
y
e
s
ia

n
N
e
t
w
o
r
k
s

a
n
d

c
lu

s
t
e
r
in

g
-
b
a
s
e
d

c
la

s
s
if
ie

r
s
.

A
c
c
u
r
a
c
y
,
A
U
C
,

p
r
e
c
is
io

n
,
r
e
c
a
ll
,
m

e
a
n

a
b
s
o
lu

t
e

e
r
r
o
r

a
n
d

c
o
m

p
u
t
in

g
t
im

e
.

[7
6
]

C
u
s
t
o
m

e
r

p
e
r
s
o
n
a
l
in

fo
r
m

a
t
io

n
,
c
r
e
d
it

c
a
r
d

b
a
s
ic

d
a
t
a
,
t
r
a
n
s
a
c
t
io

n
a
n
d

a
b
n
o
r
m

a
l
u
s
a
g
e

in
fo

r
m

a
t
io

n
.

C
o
m

p
a
n
y

d
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
.

m
u
lt
ic

o
ll
in

e
a
r
it
y
-

b
a
s
e
d

s
e
le

c
t
io

n
.

1
2
-
m

o
n
t
h
s

t
r
a
in

in
g

a
n
d

1
2
-
m

o
n
t
h
s

t
e
s
t
in

g
.

L
o
g
is
t
ic

R
e
g
r
e
s
s
io

n
a
n
d

D
T
s
.

A
c
c
u
r
a
c
y

a
n
d

A
U
C
.

[3
1
]

C
u
s
t
o
m

e
r

b
e
h
a
v
io

r
,
d
e
m

o
g
r
a
p
h
ic

s
,

c
u
s
t
o
m

e
r
-
c
o
m

p
a
n
y

in
t
e
r
a
c
t
io

n
s
,
a
n
d

e
c
o
n
o
m

ic
in

d
ic

a
t
o
r
s

B
a
n
k
in

g
c
o
m

p
a
n
y

d
a
t
a
b
a
s
e

S
t
e
p
w
is
e

s
e
le

c
t
io

n
L
o
n
g
it
u
d
in

a
l
d
a
t
a

C
o
x

r
e
g
r
e
s
s
io

n
,

lo
g
is
t
ic

r
e
g
r
e
s
s
io

n
a
n
d

D
T
s

A
U
C

a
n
d

t
o
p

d
e
c
il
e

li
ft
.
B
o
o
t
s
t
r
a
p
p
in

g
.

[2
4
]

C
u
s
t
o
m

e
r

b
e
h
a
v
io

r
,
d
e
m

o
g
r
a
p
h
ic

s
a
n
d

u
s
a
g
e

d
a
t
a

C
r
e
d
it

c
a
r
d

o
r
ig

in
a
l
d
a
t
a
b
a
s
e

fr
o
m

C
h
il
e
a
n

b
a
n
k

R
e
c
u
r
s
iv

e
fe

a
t
u
r
e

e
li
m

in
a
t
io

n
a
s
s
o
c
ia

t
e
d

t
o

S
V
M

c
la

s
s
if
ie

r

N
o
t

r
e
p
o
r
t
e
d

N
ä
ıv

e
B
a
y
e
s

T
r
e
e

r
u
le

e
x
t
r
a
c
t
io

n
o
n

t
o
p

o
f
a

S
V
M

c
la

s
s
if
ie

r

a
c
c
u
r
a
c
y
,
s
e
n
s
it
iv

it
y
,

s
p
e
c
if
ic

it
y
.

T
r
a
in

in
g
-
t
e
s
t

s
p
li
t

w
it
h

1
0
-
fo

ld
C
V

fo
r

t
r
a
in

in
g
.

[1
0
6
]

U
s
a
g
e

d
a
t
a

fr
o
m

a
c
r
e
d
it

c
a
r
d

b
u
s
in

e
s
s

o
f
a

C
h
in

e
s
e

b
a
n
k
.

O
r
ig

in
a
l
d
a
t
a
s
e
t

fr
o
m

c
r
e
d
it

c
a
r
d

b
u
s
in

e
s
s

o
f
a

C
h
in

e
s
e

b
a
n
k
.

I
n
t
e
n
s
iv

e
t
w
o
-
s
t
a
g
e

fe
a
t
u
r
e

s
e
le

c
t
io

n
b
a
s
e
d

o
n

A
N
N
s
,

t
r
a
n
s
fe

r
le

a
r
n
in

g
a
n
d

M
u
t
u
a
l
I
n
fo

r
m

a
t
io

n
.

D
a
t
a

s
p
a
n
n
in

g
fr
o
m

M
a
y

t
o

D
e
c
e
m

b
e
r
,
2
0
1
0

(
C
h
in

e
s
e

b
a
n
k
)
.

E
n
s
e
m

b
le

le
a
r
n
in

g
w
it
h

S
V
M

s
a
s

b
a
s
e

c
la

s
s
if
ie

r
s
.
T
r
a
n
s
fe

r
le

a
r
n
in

g
.

s
e
n
s
it
iv

it
y
,
s
p
e
c
if
ic

it
y
,

A
U
C
.



Intelligent Data Analysis Approaches to Churn as a Business Problem: a Survey 43
T
a
b
le

1
3

R
e
fe
re
n
c
e
s
o
n

a
b
a
n
d
o
n
m
e
n
t
p
re
d
ic
ti
o
n

m
o
d
e
ll
in
g
,
li
st
e
d

in
ch

ro
n
o
lo
g
ic
a
l
o
rd

e
r
fo
r
th

e
R
e
ta
il

(2
0
0
2
-2
0
1
3
),

M
a
il

a
n
d

D
e
li
v
e
ry

S
e
rv
ic
e
s
(2
0
0
2
-2
0
0
4
)

a
n
d
O
th

e
r
(n

e
x
t
ta
b
le
)
fi
e
ld
s
o
f
a
p
p
li
c
a
ti
o
n
(1

o
u
t
o
f
2
).

R
e
f.

D
a
t
a

t
y
p
e

D
a
t
a

g
a
t
h
e
r
in

g
F
e
a
t
u
r
e

s
e
le
c
t
io

n
T
im

e
p
e
r
io

d
s

M
o
d
e
ll
in

g
t
e
c
h
n
iq

u
e
s

V
a
li
d
a
t
io

n
m

e
t
h
o
d

R
e
t
a
il

[3
8
]

R
F
M

v
a
r
ia

b
le

s
in

t
h
e

o
n
li
n
e

r
e
t
a
il

in
d
u
s
t
r
y
.

D
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
.

N
o
t

s
p
e
c
if
ie

d
.

1
8

m
o
n
t
h
s
.

S
O

M
n
e
t
w
o
r
k
s
.

N
o
t

S
p
e
c
if
ie

d
.

[2
]

P
u
r
c
h
a
s
in

g
b
e
h
a
v
io

u
r
:
v
o
lu

m
e

o
f
p
u
r
c
h
a
s
e
s

d
u
r
in

g
fi
r
s
t

6
m

o
n
t
h
s

a
s

c
u
s
t
o
m

e
r
;
“
b
r
o
a
d
n
e
s
s
”

o
f

p
u
r
c
h
a
s
e
s
;
“
b
a
r
g
a
in

in
g

t
e
n
d
e
n
c
y
”

a
n
d

“
p
r
ic

e
s
e
n
s
it
iv

it
y
”
.

D
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
.

N
o
t

s
p
e
c
if
ie

d
.

Y
e
s

(
8

w
e
e
k
ly

p
e
r
io

d
s
)
.

B
a
y
e
s
ia

n
N
e
t
w
o
r
k
s
.

A
c
c
u
r
a
c
y

a
n
d

A
U
C
.

[1
0
]

P
a
s
t

p
u
r
c
h
a
s
e

b
e
h
a
v
io

u
r
,
m

o
d
e
le

d
w
it
h

R
F
M

v
a
r
ia

b
le

s
fr
o
m

c
u
s
t
o
m

e
r
s

o
f
F
a
s
t
-
M

o
v
in

g
C
o
n
s
u
m

e
r

G
o
o
d
s

(
F
M

C
G

)
r
e
t
a
il

c
o
m

p
a
n
y
,
a
n
d

c
o
m

p
le

m
e
n
t
e
d

w
it
h
:
p
a
y
m

e
n
t

m
e
t
h
o
d
,
le

n
g
t
h

o
f
c
u
s
t
o
m

e
r
-
s
u
p
p
li
e
r

r
e
la

t
io

n
s
h
ip

,
s
h
o
p
p
in

g
a
n
d

p
r
o
m

o
t
io

n
a
l
b
e
h
a
v
io

u
r

a
n
d

b
r
a
n
d

p
u
r
c
h
a
s
e
.

C
o
m

p
a
n
y

d
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
.

A
ll
u
s
io

n
t
o

p
r
e
v
io

u
s

r
e
s
e
a
r
c
h
.

5
-
m

o
n
t
h
s

o
b
s
e
r
v
a
t
io

n
p
e
r
io

d
a
n
d

5
-
m

o
n
t
h
s

v
a
li
d
a
t
io

n
p
e
r
io

d
.

R
F
s
,
A
u
t
o
m

a
t
ic

R
e
le

v
a
n
c
e

D
e
t
e
r
m

in
a
t
io

n
A
N
N
s

a
n
d

L
o
g
is
t
ic

R
e
g
r
e
s
s
io

n
.

A
c
c
u
r
a
c
y

a
n
d

A
U
C
,

u
s
in

g
s
e
p
a
r
a
t
e

v
a
li
d
a
t
io

n
s
e
t
s
.

[6
6
]

R
F
M

v
a
r
ia

b
le

s
fr
o
m

c
u
s
t
o
m

e
r
s

o
f
a

h
a
r
d
w
a
r
e

r
e
t
a
il

c
o
m

p
a
n
y
.

C
o
m

p
a
n
y

d
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
.

A
n
a
ly

t
ic

a
l

H
ie

r
a
r
c
h
ic

a
l

P
r
o
c
e
s
s

a
n
d

in
t
e
r
v
ie

w
s

w
it
h

e
x
p
e
r
t
s
.

N
o

(
d
a
t
a

fr
o
m

t
h
e

2
p
r
e
v
io

u
s

y
e
a
r
s
)
.

P
r
e
fe

r
e
n
c
e
-
b
a
s
e
d

C
o
ll
a
b
o
r
a
t
iv

e
F
il
t
e
r
in

g
fo

r
c
u
s
t
o
m

e
r

c
lu

s
t
e
r
in

g
.

V
a
li
d
a
t
io

n
fo

c
u
s
s
e
d

o
n

t
h
e

g
o
o
d
n
e
s
s

o
f
t
h
e

s
e
g
m

e
n
t
a
t
io

n
.

[2
3
]

D
e
m

o
g
r
a
p
h
ic

s
,
h
is
t
o
r
ic

a
l
t
r
a
n
s
a
c
t
io

n
a
l
in

fo
r
m

a
t
io

n
a
n
d

fi
n
a
n
c
ia

l
v
a
r
ia

b
le

s
o
n

d
if
fe

r
e
n
t

c
a
s
e
s

(
s
u
p
e
r
m

a
r
k
e
t
s
,
b
a
n
k
in

g
,
t
e
le

c
o
m

a
n
d

m
a
il
in

g
s
e
r
v
ic

e
s
)
.

D
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
.

U
n
d
e
r
s
a
m

p
li
n
g
.

1
m

o
n
t
h

d
a
t
a

c
o
ll
e
c
t
io

n
a
n
d

1
y
e
a
r

t
e
s
t

p
e
r
io

d
.

E
n
s
e
m

b
le

C
la

s
s
if
ie

r
s

(
G

A
M

e
n
s
)

A
c
c
u
r
a
c
y
,
A
U
C
,
T
o
p

D
e
c
il
e

L
if
t

a
n
d

L
if
t

I
n
d
e
x
.

[9
1
]

3
5

v
a
r
ia

b
le

s
fr
o
m

a
r
e
a
l
in

d
u
s
t
r
y

r
e
t
a
il
e
r
,
w
it
h

n
o

s
p
e
c
if
ic

a
t
io

n
o
n

t
h
e

k
in

d
o
f
fe

a
t
u
r
e
s

in
c
lu

d
e
d
.

C
o
m

p
a
n
y

D
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
.

N
o
t

s
p
e
c
if
ie

d
.

D
a
t
a

fr
o
m

1
3

c
o
n
s
e
c
u
t
iv

e
m

o
n
t
h
s
.

A
N
N
s
.

A
c
c
u
r
a
c
y
,
s
e
n
s
it
iv

it
y

a
n
d

s
p
e
c
if
ic

it
y
.

[6
9
]

H
is
t
o
r
ic

a
l
p
u
r
c
h
a
s
e

d
a
t
a
,
R
F
M

a
n
d

d
e
m

o
g
r
a
p
h
ic

s
D

a
t
a
b
a
s
e

S
t
e
p
w
is
e

s
e
le

c
t
io

n
T
w
o

y
e
a
r
s

o
f
d
a
t
a

L
o
g
is
t
ic

r
e
g
r
e
s
s
io

n
a
n
d

M
A
R
S

A
U
C

a
n
d

T
o
p
-
D

e
c
il
e

L
if
t
.
1
0
-
fo

ld
c
r
o
s
s
-
v
a
li
d
a
t
io

n
.

M
a
il

a
n
d

d
e
li
v
e
r
y

s
e
r
v
ic
e
s

[3
]

4
1

S
E
R
V
Q

U
A
L
-
b
a
s
e
d

s
e
r
v
ic

e
q
u
a
li
t
y

v
a
r
ia

b
le

s
,

g
r
o
u
p
e
d

a
s

t
a
n
g
ib

le
s
,
r
e
li
a
b
il
it
y
,
r
e
s
p
o
n
s
iv

e
n
e
s
s
,

a
s
s
u
r
a
n
c
e

a
n
d

e
m

p
a
t
h
y
,
a
t

a
n

a
u
t
o
-
d
e
a
le

r
s
h
ip

n
e
t
w
o
r
k
.

S
u
r
v
e
y
.

A
ll
u
s
io

n
t
o

p
r
e
v
io

u
s

r
e
s
e
a
r
c
h
.

N
o

(
s
t
u
d
y

d
e
v
e
lo

p
e
d

a
t

o
n
e

s
in

g
le

p
o
in

t
in

t
im

e
)
.

A
N
N
s
.

L
e
a
s
t

a
v
e
r
a
g
e

a
n
d

r
o
o
t

m
e
a
n

s
q
u
a
r
e

e
r
r
o
r
s
;

a
c
c
u
r
a
c
y
.

[9
4
]

R
F
M

,
b
e
h
a
v
io

u
r
a
l
(
s
p
e
c
if
ic

s
o
f
t
h
e

c
o
m

p
a
n
y
,

p
r
e
d
ic

t
io

n
o
f
w
h
e
t
h
e
r

p
u
r
c
h
a
s
e

b
y

p
o
s
t

w
il
l
b
e

r
e
p
e
a
t
e
d

o
r

n
o
t
)

a
n
d

n
o
n
-
b
e
h
a
v
io

u
r
a
l
(
s
a
t
is
fa

c
t
io

n
)
.

S
u
r
v
e
y

a
n
d

D
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
.

S
e
q
u
e
n
t
ia

l
S
e
a
r
c
h

A
lg

o
r
it
h
m

.
4

y
e
a
r

h
is
t
o
r
ic

a
l

d
a
t
a

p
lu

s
o
n
e

s
u
r
v
e
y
.
6

m
o
n
t
h
s

p
r
e
d
ic

t
io

n
.

L
o
g
is
t
ic

R
e
g
r
e
s
s
io

n
.

A
c
c
u
r
a
c
y

a
n
d

A
U
C
.

[4
9
]

R
F
M

v
a
r
ia

b
le

s
t
o

s
e
g
m

e
n
t

c
u
s
t
o
m

e
r
s

fr
o
m

a
d
ir
e
c
t
-
m

a
il

s
e
t
t
in

g
fo

r
a

c
h
a
r
it
y

o
r
g
a
n
iz

a
t
io

n
.

D
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
.

D
o
m

a
in

k
n
o
w
le

d
g
e
.

N
o
.

G
A
s

a
n
d

K
-
m

e
a
n
s

c
lu

s
t
e
r
in

g
.

V
a
li
d
a
t
io

n
b
a
s
e
d

o
n

im
p
r
o
v
e
m

e
n
t

o
f

c
u
s
t
o
m

e
r

s
e
g
m

e
n
t
a
t
io

n
.



44 David L. Garćıa et al.

T
a
b
le

1
4

(C
o
n
ti
n
u
e
s
fr
o
m

p
re
v
io
u
s
ta
b
le
)
R
e
fe
re
n
c
e
s
o
n
a
b
a
n
d
o
n
m
e
n
t
p
re
d
ic
ti
o
n
m
o
d
e
ll
in
g
,
li
st
e
d
in

ch
ro
n
o
lo
g
ic
a
l
o
rd

e
r
fo
r
R
e
ta
il
(p

re
v
io
u
s
ta
b
le
)
,
M
a
il
a
n
d

D
e
li
v
e
ry

S
e
rv
ic
e
s
(2
0
0
6
-2
0
1
0
)
a
n
d
O
th

e
r
(2
0
0
0
-2
0
1
3
)
a
p
p
li
c
a
ti
o
n
a
re
a
s
(2

o
u
t
o
f
2
).

R
e
f.

D
a
t
a

t
y
p
e

D
a
t
a

g
a
t
h
e
r
in

g
F
e
a
t
u
r
e

s
e
le
c
t
io

n
T
im

e
p
e
r
io

d
s

M
o
d
e
ll
in

g
t
e
c
h
n
iq

u
e
s

V
a
li
d
a
t
io

n
m

e
t
h
o
d

M
a
il

a
n
d

d
e
li
v
e
r
y

s
e
r
v
ic
e
s

[7
4
]

O
n

a
c
h
a
r
g
e

e
m

a
il

s
e
r
v
ic

e
,
c
u
s
t
o
m

e
r

a
c
c
o
u
n
t

d
a
t
a
,

u
s
a
g
e

a
n
d

p
e
r
s
o
n
a
l
in

fo
r
m

a
t
io

n
.

C
o
m

p
a
n
y

d
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
.

A
d
v
is
e
d

b
y

c
o
m

p
a
n
y

e
m

p
lo

y
e
e
s
.

H
is
t
o
r
ic

a
l
t
r
a
in

in
g

d
a
t
a

t
e
s
t
e
d

w
it
h

c
h
u
r
n

d
a
t
a
.

D
T
s
.

A
c
c
u
r
a
c
y
.

[1
7
]

C
li
e
n
t
-
c
o
m

p
a
n
y

in
t
e
r
a
c
t
io

n
s
,
r
e
n
e
w
a
l-
r
e
la

t
e
d

in
fo

r
m

a
t
io

n
,
s
o
c
io

-
d
e
m

o
g
r
a
p
h
ic

s
a
n
d

s
u
b
s
c
r
ip

t
io

n
-
d
e
s
c
r
ib

in
g

in
fo

r
m

a
t
io

n
r
e
la

t
e
d

t
o

s
u
b
s
c
r
ib

e
r
s

o
f
a

n
e
w
s
p
a
p
e
r

p
u
b
li
s
h
in

g
c
o
m

p
a
n
y
.

D
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
.

R
F
-
b
a
s
e
d

im
p
o
r
t
a
n
c
e

m
e
a
s
u
r
e
s
.

3
0

m
o
n
t
h
s

d
a
t
a

c
o
ll
e
c
t
io

n
a
n
d

1
y
e
a
r

p
r
e
d
ic

t
io

n
p
e
r
io

d
.

S
V
M

s
,
L
o
g
is
t
ic

R
e
g
r
e
s
s
io

n
,
R
F
s
.

C
r
o
s
s
-
v
a
li
d
a
t
io

n
;

a
c
c
u
r
a
c
y

a
n
d

A
U
C
.

[2
3
]

D
e
m

o
g
r
a
p
h
ic

s
,
h
is
t
o
r
ic

a
l
t
r
a
n
s
a
c
t
io

n
a
l
in

fo
r
m

a
t
io

n
a
n
d

fi
n
a
n
c
ia

l
v
a
r
ia

b
le

s
o
n

d
if
fe

r
e
n
t

s
c
e
n
a
r
io

s
(
s
u
p
e
r
m

a
r
k
e
t
s
,
b
a
n
k
in

g
,
t
e
le

c
o
m

a
n
d

m
a
il
in

g
s
e
r
v
ic

e
s
)
.

D
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
.

U
n
d
e
r
s
a
m

p
li
n
g
.

1
m

o
n
t
h

d
a
t
a

c
o
ll
e
c
t
io

n
a
n
d

1
y
e
a
r

p
e
r
fo

r
m

a
n
c
e

p
e
r
io

d
.

E
n
s
e
m

b
le

C
la

s
s
if
ie

r
s

(
G

A
M

e
n
s
)

A
c
c
u
r
a
c
y
,
A
U
C
,
T
o
p

D
e
c
il
e

L
if
t

a
n
d

L
if
t

I
n
d
e
x
.

O
t
h
e
r
s

[8
0
]

R
F
M

v
a
r
ia

b
le

s
t
o

m
o
d
e
l
c
u
s
t
o
m

e
r
-
fi
r
m

r
e
la

t
io

n
s
h
ip

a
n
d

o
p
t
im

iz
e

m
a
r
k
e
t
in

g
e
x
p
e
n
d
it
u
r
e
,
w
h
ic
h

c
a
n

b
e

a
p
p
li
e
d

t
o

m
a
n
y

in
d
u
s
t
r
ie

s
.

A
r
t
if
ic

ia
l
d
a
t
a
.

R
F
M

v
a
r
ia

b
le

s
.

N
o
t

S
p
e
c
if
ie

d
.

M
a
r
k
o
v

C
h
a
in

M
o
d
e
ll
in

g
.

N
o

v
a
li
d
a
t
io

n
:

t
h
e
o
r
e
t
ic

a
l
s
t
u
d
y
.

[4
6
]

E
-
c
u
s
t
o
m

e
r

b
e
h
a
v
io

u
r
,
d
e
fi
n
in

g
it
s

c
u
s
t
o
m

e
r

u
s
a
g
e

t
h
r
o
u
g
h

t
h
e

w
e
b
s
it
e

a
s

a
m

ix
t
u
r
e

o
f
s
t
a
t
e
s
,

t
r
a
n
s
it
io

n
s

b
e
t
w
e
e
n

s
t
a
t
e
s
,
h
o
ld

in
g

t
im

e
,
w
a
it
in

g
t
im

e
a
n
d

t
o
t
a
l
t
im

e
s
p
e
n
t
.

V
is
it
o
r
’s

n
a
v
ig

a
t
io

n
a
l

d
a
t
a

c
o
ll
e
c
t
e
d

fr
o
m

w
e
b
s
it
e
.

D
o
m

a
in

k
n
o
w
le

d
g
e
.

T
h
r
e
e

m
o
n
t
h
s

d
a
t
a

w
it
h

n
o

v
a
li
d
a
t
io

n
.

S
e
m

i-
M

a
r
k
o
v

P
r
o
c
e
s
s
e
s
.

N
o

v
a
li
d
a
t
io

n
s
t
a
g
e
.

[8
8
]

M
o
d
e
l
fo

r
o
p
t
im

iz
in

g
a

m
a
n
u
fa

c
t
u
r
in

g
fi
r
m

’s
p
r
o
fi
t
,

b
a
s
e
d

o
n

c
u
s
t
o
m

e
r

s
p
e
c
if
ic

a
t
io

n
s

a
n
d

p
r
o
c
e
s
s
in

g
t
im

e
,
b
a
c
k
lo

g
a
n
d

d
u
e
-
d
a
t
e

q
u
o
t
a
t
io

n
.

A
r
t
if
ic

ia
l
d
a
t
a
.

P
r
e
v
io

u
s

d
o
m

a
in

k
n
o
w
le

d
g
e
.

N
o
t

S
p
e
c
if
ie

d
.

D
is
c
r
e
t
e
-
t
im

e
S
e
m

i-
M

a
r
k
o
v

D
e
c
is
io

n
P
r
o
c
e
s
s
e
s
.

F
r
a
c
t
io

n
a
l
e
r
r
o
r
,

w
e
ig

h
t
e
d

a
b
s
o
lu

t
e

v
a
lu

e
a
n
d

w
e
ig

h
t
e
d

s
u
m

o
f

d
if
fe

r
e
n
c
e
s

o
n

t
h
e

le
a
d

t
im

e
s
.

[1
1
]

U
s
a
g
e

v
a
r
ia

b
le

s
o
n

c
u
s
t
o
m

e
r
s

fr
o
m

a
P
a
y
-
T
V

c
o
m

p
a
n
y
.

C
o
m

p
a
n
y

d
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
.

U
n
d
e
r
s
a
m

p
li
n
g
.

D
a
t
a

c
o
ll
e
c
t
io

n
a
t

a
s
p
e
c
if
ic

d
a
t
e
,

e
v
a
lu

a
t
io

n
d
u
r
in

g
t
h
e

s
u
b
s
e
q
u
e
n
t

y
e
a
r
.

M
a
r
k
o
v

C
h
a
in

s
,

R
F
s

a
n
d

L
o
g
is
t
ic

R
e
g
r
e
s
s
io

n
.

A
c
c
u
r
a
c
y
,
A
U
C

a
n
d

L
if
t

C
h
a
r
t
;
c
r
o
s
s

v
a
li
d
a
t
io

n
.

[4
1
]

H
e
n
le

y
s
e
g
m

e
n
t
s
,
b
r
o
a
d
b
a
n
d

u
s
a
g
e
,
b
il
li
n
g
,
p
a
y
m

e
n
t
,

e
t
c
.
fr
o
m

in
t
e
r
n
e
t

s
e
r
v
ic

e
s

c
u
s
t
o
m

e
r
s
.

C
o
m

p
a
n
y

d
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
.

D
o
m

a
in

k
n
o
w
le

d
g
e
.

N
o
.

L
o
g
is
t
ic

R
e
g
r
e
s
s
io

n
,
D

T
s
,

A
N
N
s

a
n
d

S
V
M

s
.

A
c
c
u
r
a
c
y
.

[6
1
]

U
s
a
g
e

d
a
t
a

fr
o
m

9
d
if
fe

r
e
n
t

in
d
u
s
t
r
ie

s
:
3

c
r
e
d
it

c
o
m

p
a
n
ie

s
,
2

fr
o
m

t
h
e

m
a
il
-
o
r
d
e
r

in
d
u
s
t
r
y
,
a
n
d

1
fr
o
m

t
h
e

e
n
e
r
g
y

in
d
u
s
t
r
y
,
d
ir
e
c
t

m
a
r
k
e
t
in

g
,
fr
a
u
d

d
e
t
e
c
t
io

n
a
n
d

e
-
c
o
m

m
e
r
c
e
.

D
a
t
a
s
e
t
s

fr
o
m

t
h
e

U
C
I
M

L
R
e
p
o
s
it
o
r
y

a
n
d

t
h
e

a
n
n
u
a
l

D
M

C
u
p
.

R
e
c
u
r
s
iv

e
F
e
a
t
u
r
e

E
li
m

in
a
t
io

n
.

N
o

(
t
r
a
in

in
g

a
n
d

v
a
li
d
a
t
io

n
o
n

h
is
t
o
r
ic

a
l
d
a
t
a
)
.

S
V
M

,
L
o
g
is
t
ic

R
e
g
r
e
s
s
io

n
a
n
d

D
T
s
.

T
e
n
-
fo

ld
c
r
o
s
s

v
a
li
d
a
t
io

n
.
A
U
C
.

[1
3
]

P
u
r
c
h
a
s
e

h
is
t
o
r
y

(
lo

n
g
it
u
d
in

a
l)

d
a
t
a

a
n
d

s
o
c
io

d
e
m

o
g
r
a
p
h
ic

(
s
t
a
t
ic

)
v
a
r
ia

b
le

s
o
n

t
h
r
e
e

d
if
fe

r
e
n
t

fi
e
ld

s
:
s
u
p
e
r
m

a
r
k
e
t
s
,
le

is
u
r
e

a
n
d

t
e
le

c
o
m

D
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
.

I
n
t
e
r
v
ie

w
s

w
it
h

e
x
p
e
r
t
s
.

1
-
y
e
a
r

d
a
t
a

c
o
ll
e
c
t
io

n
a
n
d

1
-
y
e
a
r

p
r
e
d
ic

t
io

n
,

w
it
h

s
e
a
s
o
n
a
l

o
v
e
r
la

p
p
in

g
.

S
V
M

s
.

A
U
C
.

[1
6
]

R
F
M

v
a
r
ia

b
le

s
t
o

d
e
fi
n
e

p
a
s
t

c
u
s
t
o
m

e
r

b
e
h
a
v
io

u
r

fo
r

a
n

o
n
li
n
e
-
g
a
m

in
g

w
e
b
s
it
e
.

C
o
m

p
a
n
y

d
a
t
a
b
a
s
e
.

P
r
e
d
ic

t
iv

e
a
c
c
u
r
a
c
y
-
r
e
la

t
e
d

im
p
o
r
t
a
n
c
e

s
c
o
r
e
.

1
7

m
o
n
t
h
s

t
r
a
in

in
g

d
a
t
a
;
4

m
o
n
t
h
s

fo
r

c
h
u
r
n

m
e
a
s
u
r
e
m

e
n
t
.

R
F
s

a
n
d

G
A
M

e
n
s
.

T
o
p
-
D

e
c
il
e

L
if
t

a
n
d

L
if
t

I
n
d
e
x
.




