











































Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research 55 (2016) 1-15 Submitted 11/15; published 01/16

Introduction to the Special Issue on Cross-Language
Algorithms and Applications

Marta R. Costa-jussà marta.ruiz@upc.edu
TALP Research Center
Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya
Jordi Girona 1–3, 08034, Barcelona

Srinivas Bangalore sbangalore@interactions.net
Interactions Labs
41 Spring Street,
Murray Hill, NJ 07974, USA

Patrik Lambert patrik.lambert@upf.edu
Computational Linguistics Group
Universitat Pompeu Fabra
Roc Boronat 138, 08018 Barcelona, Spain

Llúıs Màrquez lmarquez@qf.org.qa
Qatar Computing Research Institute
Hamad Bin Khalifa University
Tornado Tower (10th floor), PO.Box 5825,
West Bay, Doha, Qatar

Elena Montiel-Ponsoda elena.montiel@upm.es
Ontology Engineering Group

Universidad Politécnica de Madrid

Campus de Montegancedo s/n, Boadilla del Monte,

28660 Madrid

Abstract

With the increasingly global nature of our everyday interactions, the need for multilin-
gual technologies to support efficient and effective information access and communication
cannot be overemphasized. Computational modeling of language has been the focus of
Natural Language Processing, a subdiscipline of Artificial Intelligence. One of the current
challenges for this discipline is to design methodologies and algorithms that are cross-
language in order to create multilingual technologies rapidly. The goal of this JAIR special
issue on Cross-Language Algorithms and Applications (CLAA) is to present leading re-
search in this area, with emphasis on developing unifying themes that could lead to the
development of the science of multi- and cross-lingualism. In this introduction, we provide
the reader with the motivation for this special issue and summarize the contributions of the
papers that have been included. The selected papers cover a broad range of cross-lingual
technologies including machine translation, domain and language adaptation for sentiment
analysis, cross-language lexical resources, dependency parsing, information retrieval and
knowledge representation. We anticipate that this special issue will serve as an invaluable
resource for researchers interested in topics of cross-lingual natural language processing.

c©2016 AI Access Foundation. All rights reserved.



Costa-jussà, Bangalore, Lambert, Màrquez & Montiel-Ponsoda

1. Introduction

Due to the increasingly global nature of our society, it is commonplace for each of us to
encounter information in a multitude of languages and to communicate across languages in
our everyday lives. The rapid growth of multilinguality in our information-driven society
is reflected in the number of languages being used on the Internet. In about a decade,
the Internet has transformed from being a predominantly English information source to
the linguistically variegated information source that it is today. Multilingual access and
processing pose novel challenges to the core Artificial Intelligence discipline of speech and
natural language processing which, when solved, can provide transformational technologies
for information access to a broader population.

The complexity of processing multiple languages in a computational model emerges
not only due to different syntactic structures for the same concept, but also from different
underlying conceptual structures. These challenges necessitate the development of cross-
language natural language processing tools that are able to translate or link these structures
and concepts across different languages.

Cross-language extensions of popular applications and tasks such as information re-
trieval, question answering, sentiment analysis and lexical disambiguation, among others,
have been developed to respond to the present needs of the global society. Similarly, mul-
tilingual resources and novel ways to represent multilingual knowledge have emerged and
spread in recent years. Researchers and developers have made considerable advances in
these applications by leveraging relevant data available in diverse languages. With multi-
lingual processing becoming a key research issue, and given its interdisciplinary nature, a
range of approaches from both linguistic and statistical perspectives have been explored in
order to create viable cross-lingual technology.

Interestingly, the challenges of cross-lingual natural language processing appeals to both
academic and industrial research. It provides new business opportunities by breaking down
language barriers that fragment the potential market. These opportunities include, for in-
stance, the possibility for companies and institutions to learn about what users at different
locations think of their products (cross-language sentiment analysis), to perform document
search in multiple languages (cross-language information retrieval and question answering),
to link knowledge bases of clients using different languages (cross-language knowledge rep-
resentation), or to expand the market to several linguistically diverse markets (machine
translation and localization).

The importance of cross-lingual natural language processing can be clearly seen from
the attention it has received at recent workshops, invited talks, and publications at the
community’s premier conferences—Association of Computational Linguistics (ACL), Eu-
ropean Association of Computational Linguistics (EACL), North American Association of
Computational Linguistics (NAACL), Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
(EMNLP), International Conference on Computational Linguistics (COLING), Extended
Semantic Web Conference (ESWC), International Semantic Web Conference (ISWC), In-
ternational Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC), and International
Conference on Knowledge Capture (KCAP). In the past eighteen months, about one in
every five papers at these conferences was related to cross-language algorithms and applica-
tions (figures vary from 17% to 25%, with an average of 20.4%). A recently published book

2



Special Issue on Cross-Language Algorithms and Applications

has focused on multilingual natural language processing techniques (Bikel & Zitouni, 2012)
and further highlights the importance of this research area. This book comprehensively
presents, in more than 600 pages, the basic theory and the most relevant techniques for 16
different aspects of multilingual natural language processing.

1.1 Cross-Language Algorithms and Applications Special Issue

This special issue is intended to provide a broad view of some of the recent advances
and current research directions being pursued in the area of multilingual natural language
processing from the linguistic, computational and language resource creation perspectives.
Active research from multiple recent workshops in the area (e.g., HyTra, see Costa-juss,
Banchs, Rapp, Lambert, Eberle & Babych, 2013; WMT, see Bojar, Chatterjee, Federmann,
Haddow, Huck, Hokamp, Koehn, Loncheva, Monz, Negri, Post, Scarton, Specia & Turchi,
2015; CLEF, see Forner, Moller, Paredes, Rosso & Stein, 2013; Promise, see Bener, Minku
& Turhan, 2014; MSW, see Gracia, MacGrae & Vulcu, 2015; and AKBC, see Suchanek,
Riedel, Singh & Talukdar, 2012) spanning cross-language natural language applications,
tools of crowdsourcing for resource creation, and deeper relationships between bridging
language barriers and other modalities of perception are summarized in this special issue.

In response to our solicitation of papers in late 2014, we received 34 research papers
on a variety of cross-lingual technologies applied to language processing tasks. Each of
these papers was carefully reviewed by at least three reviewers drawn from a pool of over
100 reviewers. Based on their reviews and extensive follow up discussions, we selected 8
high quality papers that offer exciting research directions which span a range of topics
in cross-lingual language processing including machine translation, domain and language
adaptation for sentiment and cross-language lexical resources, dependency parsing, infor-
mation retrieval and knowledge representation. This introduction covers exactly the eight
papers that were accepted for the special issue during the official timeline. The papers are
summarized in Section 2, organized by topic. In an attempt to accommodate a broader
sample of interesting papers on cross-language algorithms and applications, other papers
appropriate for the topic that did not meet the special issue deadlines will be also added to
the same JAIR web page1 when accepted by the journal.

Finally, we intended the special issue to not be a disconnected melange of success stories,
but provide an underlying theme that unifies the research directions in this area. We hope
that this collection provides the reader an opportunity to observe similarities and differences
across topics, algorithms and applications. We anticipate that the scientific community
will view cross-lingual speech and language processing as a fertile and productive field of
research, that has the potential for developing science and technologies which will have a
lasting impact on our everyday lives.

2. Special Issue Overview

In this section, we survey the topics that cover the papers in this special issue and the
papers themselves. These topics are machine translation, domain and language adaptation

1. http://www.jair.org/specialtrack-claa.html

3



Costa-jussà, Bangalore, Lambert, Màrquez & Montiel-Ponsoda

for sentiment analysis and cross-language lexical resources, dependency parsing, information
retrieval and knowledge representation.

2.1 Machine Translation

A key technology for the multilingual information society is Machine Translation (MT)—
where a source language speech or text is automatically converted into a target language
speech or text.

With Web content being generated in multiple languages and with Internet users be-
coming linguistically diverse, machine translation provides the cheapest and quickest way to
understand this multilingual information. Besides being a core application necessary for a
multilingual world, machine translation has been shown to be a highly relevant component
technology in many cross-language natural language processing tasks, such as sentiment
analysis, information retrieval and knowledge representation.

Historically, machine translation approaches can be categorized into rule-driven and
data-driven approaches. Rule-based machine translation (Hutchins & Sommers, 1992) re-
quires deep linguistic knowledge of the language pairs involved in the translation and a sig-
nificant amount of human labor. Since the rules are based on linguistic intuitions, it is easier
to identify issues and extend them. More recently, there have been data-driven approaches
that learn translation models with minimal human supervision from very large bilingual
parallel corpora—texts where source text is paired with the target text (Sánchez-Mart́ınez
& Forcada, 2009). Data-driven translation systems find the most probable target text given
the source text. These systems have been extended to phrase-based, syntax-based, hier-
archical phrase-based and neural-based systems in order to capture longer contexts in a
sentence. Phrase-based systems (Koehn, Och, & Marcu, 2003) use sequences of words as
bilingual units, called phrases, whose probability is computed through a log-linear combi-
nation of feature functions including the translation and language models. Syntax-based
systems use syntactic units extracted by parse trees (Quirk, Menezes, & Cherry, 2005).
Hierarchical phrase-based systems combine phrase-based and syntax-based approaches by
using synchronous context-free grammars (Chiang, 2007). Neural-based end-to-end trans-
lation systems typically use a encoder-decoder approach to learn embedded representations
of the input sentence (encoder), which are then used as context to generate the words in
the translation (decoder) (Bahdanau, Cho, & Bengio, 2015).

The boundaries between rule-based and statistical machine translation have narrowed
through the proposals of hybrid machine translation systems (Costa-jussà, 2015). In this
special issue, there are two research papers in machine translation that combine rules,
statistics and machine learning.

Integrating Rules and Dictionaries from Shallow-Transfer Machine Trans-
lation into Phrase-Based Statistical Machine Translation by Sánchez-Cartagena,
Pérez-Ortiz and Sánchez-Mart́ınez presents a hybrid approach to machine translation by
integrating rules and dictionaries from a shallow-transfer system (in particular, Apertium,
see Armentano-Oller & Forcada, 2006) into a phrase-based system (in particular, Moses,
see Koehn, Hoang, Birch, Callison-Burch, Federico, Bertoldi, Cowan, Shen, Moran, Zens,
Dyer, Bojar, Constantin & Herbst, 2007). Deep linguistic knowledge from rule-based sys-
tems is transferred into the statistical system. This integration is especially useful when

4



Special Issue on Cross-Language Algorithms and Applications

the parallel corpus available for training the phrase-based system is small or when trans-
lating out-of-domain texts. The authors discuss different methods for enriching translation
tables (including previous work by the same authors and other references). Finally, it is
worth mentioning that the approach that used Apertium’s rules was one of the best-ranked
systems in the WMT 2011 international evaluation campaign for Spanish-English (Sánchez-
Cartagena, Sánchez-Mart́ınez, & Pérez-Ortiz, 2011).

Two relevant features of this paper are: (i) the integration of rules and statistics pre-
sented, which takes advantage of a deep knowledge of the underlying rule-based system,
especially in the way linguistic resources are used by the rule-based system when segment-
ing the source-language sentences; (ii) a complete analysis of the hybrid system, including
automatic and manual evaluation, different corpora sizes, domains and language pairs, and
a comparison to another popular hybrid MT system (Eisele, Federmann, Uszkoreit, Saint-
Amand, Kay, Jellinghaus, Hunsicker, Herrmann, & Chen, 2008).

Cross-Lingual Bridges with Models of Lexical Borrowing by Tsvetkov and Dyer
introduces a hybrid model of lexical borrowing, which is demonstrated in machine transla-
tion to alleviate the problem of lexical coverage in low-resourced languages. The authors
start from the hypothesis that all languages borrow terms from other languages at some point
in their existence. They propose a computational model of linguistic borrowing, intended
to identify donor words in a resource-rich language given a loan word in a resource-poor
language. The model develops a set of morpho-phonological transformations by combin-
ing linguistic constraints using optimality theory and machine learning to score loanword
candidates. This model consists of three parts: (i) conversion of orthographic word forms
to pronunciations,(ii) generation of loan word pronunciation candidates, and (iii) rank-
ing of generated candidates using optimality-theoretic constraints. The first two steps are
rule-based while the third is learned from data.

The lexical borrowing model is applied to Swahili-English, Maltese-English, and Romani-
an-English MT. The authors leverage the model in an indirect way. For instance, for improv-
ing the resource-poor Swahili-English MT system, they identify translation candidates for
out-of-vocabulary (OOV) Swahili words borrowed from Arabic, using an Arabic-to-Swahili
borrowing model and a resource-rich Arabic-English MT system. The experimental results
show that this approach effectively reduces the impact of OOV source words and improves
translation quality significantly.

If one considers lexical borrowing as a different task than transliteration and cognate
identification then this could be the first computational model of lexical borrowing used in
a downstream natural language processing application.

2.2 Domain and Language Adaptation for Sentiment

There is a rapidly growing repository of user-generated, subjective texts on the Internet in
the form of blogs, social networks, information channels and consumer sites expressing opin-
ions on various issues, sentiment towards products, and services and personal perspectives
about events.

Sentiment analysis is the task of analyzing opinions, sentiments or emotions expressed
towards entities such as products, services, organizations, issues, and the various attributes
of these entities (Liu, 2012). The two main sentiment analysis approaches presented in the

5



Costa-jussà, Bangalore, Lambert, Màrquez & Montiel-Ponsoda

literature are a machine learning approach (mostly supervised learning) and an opinion-
lexicon-based approach, based on rules.

When necessary resources—the training data, the subjective text to be analyzed and the
analysis outcome—are not all available in the required language, cross-language sentiment
analysis methods are needed to bootstrap a system. The main cross-language sentiment
analysis approaches described in the literature are via lexicon transfer, via corpus trans-
fer, via test translation and via joint classification. In the lexicon transfer approach, a
source sentiment lexicon is transferred into the target language and a lexicon-based classi-
fier is built in the target language (Mihalcea, Banea, & Wiebe, 2007). The corpus transfer
approach consists of transferring a source training corpus into the target language and
building a corpus-based classifier in the target language (Banea, Mihalcea, & Wiebe, 2008).
In the test translation approach, test sentences from the target language are translated into
the source language and they are classified using a source language classifier (Bautin, Vija-
yarenu, & Skiena, 2008). Work on joint classification includes co-training (Wan, 2009), joint
learning (Lu, Tan, Cardie, & K. Tsou, 2011) or structural correspondence learning (Wei &
Pal, 2010; Prettenhofer & Stein, 2010).

Some authors have already studied the impact on automatic sentiment analysis of trans-
ferring lexicons or corpora via machine translation (Mihalcea et al., 2007; Banea et al.,
2008).

How Translation Alters Sentiment by Mohammad, Salameh and Kiritchenko goes
a step further in the analysis in two respects. First, the authors conduct a systematic
evaluation of the impact of automatic and manual translation on both automatic and manual
sentiment analysis. Second, the authors perform a qualitative and quantitative analysis to
understand the reasons for the obtained results. In summary, this paper provides a deeper
understanding of how sentiments are altered in common cross-language settings.

The experiments are performed using an Arabic sentiment analysis system and an
English–Arabic machine translation system, both showing state-of-the-art performance.
The authors first show that automatic sentiment analysis of English translations (even com-
ing from MT) can achieve competitive results. Interestingly, they also show that automatic
sentiment analysis of automatic translations outperforms the manual sentiment annotation
of the automatically translated text. The qualitative and quantitative analysis of the results
also reveals interesting facts. For example, sentiment expressions are often mistranslated
into neutral expressions. The automatic sentiment analysis system can recover from consis-
tent translation errors by learning true sentiments from mistranslated words. Some common
causes of translation failing to preserve sentiments are sarcasm, metaphoric expressions, and
incorrect word-reordering.

Distributional Correspondence Indexing for Cross-Lingual and Cross-Domain
Classification by Esuli, Moreo and Sebastiani proposes a novel domain adaptation method,
also evaluated on language adaptation. This paper explores a more general and com-
plex formulation of the domain adaptation problem that combines the cross-domain and
cross-language settings. The proposed adaptation method, called Distributional Corre-
spondence Indexing, is inspired by Structural Correspondence Learning but follows a dif-
ferent, simpler approach, with a more direct application of the distributional hypothesis.
This approach assumes that terms across domains and/or languages show similar distri-
butional properties relative to a small set of “pivot” terms, which behave similarly across

6



Special Issue on Cross-Language Algorithms and Applications

domains/languages. The authors show that this approach outperforms existing methods
for cross-domain/language sentiment classification, at a lower computational cost.

Since digital documents in an increasing variety of topics and languages are produced,
often with a need to be processed immediately, better solutions to tackle the bottleneck
of scarcity of training data are of increasing importance. The idea of leveraging resources
from a language to learn a classifier in another language is similar to transfer learning in
domain adaptation. The contribution of this paper goes in the direction of unifying domain
and language adaptation in the same framework.

2.3 Lexical Resources

More and more natural language applications such as question-answering, sentiment analy-
sis, or document classification, to mention but a few, demand lexical knowledge in different
natural languages, termed here cross-language lexical resources, and also well-known as
multilingual lexical resources. These range from non-structured resources such as paral-
lel corpora (EU JRC-Acquis Corpus, see Steinberger, Pouliquen, Widiger, Ignat, Erjavec,
Tufis, & Varga, 2006), glossaries (e.g., IFLA Multilingual Glossary for Art Librarians, see
Libraries, 1996) or machine-readable dictionaries (Oxford online dictionaries2), to more
structured resources such as terminological databases (IATE3), thesauri (AGROVOC 4),
lexicons (EuroWordNet, see Vossen, 1998; MultiWordNet, see Pianta, Bentivogli, & Gi-
rardi, 2002), or ontologies (e.g., EUROVOC in SKOS, see Smedt & Vatanat, 2009; or FAO
geopolitical ontology, see Kim, Iglesias-Sucasas, & Viollier, 2013).

The creation of such multilingual resources involves manual and costly processes, which
is why many approaches pursue the automation of several steps in the development process.
Without the aim of being exhaustive, we briefly describe typical approaches or methods
that result in multilingual lexical resources. (i) The well-known family of multilingual
wordnets developed around the Princeton English WordNet (Fellbaum, 1998). Basically, two
approaches are followed: (a) a merging approach in which wordnets are created separately
and mapped afterwards to the English WordNet, with the difficulties that the mapping task
involves; and (b) an expansion approach in which the English WordNet is translated into
the corresponding target languages, facilitating the subsequent mapping task. (ii) Online-
collaborative resources, as for example, Wiktionary5. They take advantage of the wisdom
of the crowd and also of Internet bots that automatically generate entries, as well as of
algorithms that import lexical information from machine readable dictionaries. Similarly,
Wikipedia and the whole family of Wikimedia projects have been created in a collaborative
manner and constitute de facto multilingual resources thanks to the hyperlinks among
entries in different languages. Other resources built in a similar way or that take advantage
of the structured information contained in them include YAGO (Mahdisoltani, Biega, &
Suchanek, 2015) and BabeLNet (Navigli & Ponzetto, 2012). (iii) Mono- and multilingual
content and linguistic datasets exposed and linked according to the Linked Data paradigm6,
a set of best practices for publishing structured data and linking it to other datasets. Some

2. http://www.oxforddictionaries.com
3. http://iate.europa.eu
4. http://aims.fao.org/vest-registry/vocabularies/agrovoc-multilingual-agricultural-thesaurus
5. https://www.wiktionary.org
6. http://linkeddata.org

7



Costa-jussà, Bangalore, Lambert, Màrquez & Montiel-Ponsoda

of the resources published as linked data are multilingual and others are monolingual, but
once linked to other datasets in the same or close domains, they become a multilingual graph
of navigable data. The mapping or linking step is crucial in this approach. (iv) Translation
resources can also be considered as a subtype of lexical resources and are also used for the
purposes of obtaining multilingual data, be it as a source for translations, or as a means
for mapping or linking monolingual resources (for more details on machine translation see
section 2.1).

In this sense, it has been sufficiently demonstrated that quality and coverage of such
lexical and translation resources are vital for applications built on top of them, and that
the performance of those applications depends directly on them. The paper included in
this special issue not only describes and analyzes some of these resources in detail, but also
evaluates their coverage and correctness in the context of ontology mapping.

Effectiveness of Automatic Translations for Cross-lingual Ontology Mapping
by Abu Helou and Palmonari presents a large-scale study on the effectiveness of several
lexical and translation resources for the purpose of obtaining candidate matches between
ontology concepts lexicalized in different languages. Many works on cross-language ontology
mapping rely on multilingual or translation resources to obtain translation candidates for
concept lexicalization in the source ontology, which subsequently support the selection of
potential matches in the target ontology. This paper evaluates a machine translation ser-
vice, GoogleTranslate7, and a multilingual encyclopedic dictionary and semantic network,
BabelNet8, for correctness and coverage of the suggested translations and mapping selec-
tion capabilities (word-disambiguation). The evaluation is based on wordnets in different
natural languages (Arabic, Italian, Slovene and Spanish) and manual alignments provided
for each wordnet and the English WordNet. They perform three experiments taking into
account various types of lexical units (monosemous words, polysemous words, one-word
units or multiple-word units), and define specific measures (translation correctness, word
sense coverage, synset coverage and synonym coverage) that serve to better evaluate the
quality of translations. The results of the experiments provide insights into the coverage
and correctness that these resources provide, the effect of combining the results from both
resources, the impact of taking into account translation directionality, and the differences
in word categories between mapped lexicalizations, among others.

The results of this paper can be directly applied to improve the cross-language ontology
mapping task, but can also contribute to speed up the development of multilingual lexical
resources, in general, or help in the building of a truly multilingual Linked Open Data
Cloud, in particular.

2.4 Cross-Language Dependency Parsing

A natural language application that relies on language processing tools such as part-of-
speech taggers and parsers is confronted with a significant challenge of scaling to new
languages, when such languages may not have the same set of tools. Building such tools
in a desired language requires manual annotation of sufficient amounts of texts that ma-
chine learning programs can be trained on. Annotation efforts have been undertaken and

7. https://translate.google.com
8. http://babelnet.org

8



Special Issue on Cross-Language Algorithms and Applications

invaluable resources of varying amounts of texts have been created during the past decades
for certain languages, for example, Penn Treebank (Marcus, Marcinkiewicz, & Santorini,
1993), French Treebank (Abeillé, 2003), NEGRA Treebank (Skut, Brants, & Uszkoreit,
1998), Prague Dependency Treebank (Hajič, Böhmová, Hajičová, & Vidová-Hladká, 2000).
However, the task of such annotation effort is time-consuming, expensive and requires highly
skilled personnel.

In the late nineties, with the availability of texts in a pair of languages as realized in
parallel text corpora, researchers (Bangalore, 1998; Yarowsky, Ngai, & Wicentowski, 2001)
explored the idea of transferring annotations from one language in the pair to the second
language in the pair in order to rapidly create an annotated resource to train language
processing tools for the second language. This line of research has been followed by a number
of researchers for projecting a variety of annotations between language corpora and using
the annotated corpus to bootstrap language processing tools for the target language. Of
particular interest is the projection of annotations for part-of-speech tags, phrase structure
annotations, and dependency structure annotations.

Synthetic Treebanking for Cross-lingual Dependency Parsing by Tiedemann
and Agić presents a detailed discussion of the options to transplant dependency trees from
one language to another in order to train dependency parsers in the target language. The
paper introduces two options of bootstrapping a dependency parser for a language: a model
transfer approach where a dependency parsing model is transferred to the new language, and
an annotation transfer approach; the paper then advocates the annotation transfer approach
through the creation of synthetic treebanks. The paper provides a comprehensive analysis of
the various options for creating such a synthetic treebank using a parallel corpus including:
(i) projecting a parser’s output of the source text onto the target text and (ii) translating an
existing high quality treebank in a source language to a target language. The central idea
in creating synthetic treebanks involves the use of statistical machine translation models,
both phrase-based and syntax-based, in order to translate the texts of the source language
treebanks into the target language, and then project the source language structures to the
translated target language sentence mediated by the word alignment information produced
from the translation process. The challenges of reconciling the dependency structures when
the lexical translations are richer than one-to-one are discussed at length. The paper reports
extensive parsing accuracy results from parsers trained on projected treebanks for a large
set of language pairs, and studies the correlation between the quality of translation model
and the quality of the target language parser.

2.5 Cross-Language Information Retrieval

With the increase in number of webpages in multiple languages, a search query on the
Web needs to retrieve webpages authored in languages other than the language of the
query. Cross-language information retrieval is a technology at the intersection of machine
translation and information retrieval that addresses this challenge.

Cross-language information retrieval has employed different strategies for matching a
query with a set of multilingual documents: cognate-based matching (Montalvo, Mart́ınez,
Casillas, & Fresno, 2007), matching by query and document translation, and matching by
mapping to an interlingua (Banchs & Costa-jussà, 2013). The most popular of these ap-

9



Costa-jussà, Bangalore, Lambert, Màrquez & Montiel-Ponsoda

proaches is query translation and it can be addressed by either employing bilingual dictionar-
ies (Hedlund, Airio, Keskustalo, Lehtokangas, Pirkola, & Jarvelin, 2004) or using machine
translation (Kishida, 2008). Approaches that combine both techniques can be found in the
work of in the work of Zhang, Jones, and Zhang (2008), for example. The quality of query
translation can be indirectly observed in the final retrieval results. Kishida (2008) shows
with a regressive model that both ease of search of a given query and translation quality
can explain about 60% of the variation in the performance. Kettunen (2009) shows that
for long topics, the correlations between achieved retrieval results and machine translation
metrics are high (almost 90%) and for short topics the correlation is lower but still clear
(almost 60%). Cross-language video retrieval, another related cross-language information
retrieval task, involves automatic speech recognition.

An Investigation of Cross-Lingual Information Retrieval for User-Generated
Internet Video by Khwileh, Jones and Ganguly presents one of the first use-cases for cross-
language video retrieval for social media content. The paper focuses on all the challenges
associated with user generated informal content (i.e., noise, sparseness of metadata, content
with very different lengths, informal language register, etc.) rather than on professionally
produced content. Noise and errors propagate through each step of the processing: from
speech recognition to automatic translation and query expansion. The authors use the
query translation approach to bridge the vocabulary gap between the user’s query and
the relevant content in a video application. Automatic translation is done using Google
Translate and retrieval and expansion is done with the Divergence From Randomness IR
model. They explore the effectiveness of three different sources of information: transcripts
from automatic speech recognition, video titles, and descriptions. Among the three sources,
leveraging video titles improves retrieval performance in their experiments. In addition,
the authors propose an adaptive query expansion technique that automatically selects the
most reliable source for expansion based on a well established query performance prediction
technique. Results show that this approach is more robust for this particular setting.

2.6 Cross-Language Knowledge Representation

Knowledge representation systems aim to formalize representations of the world, or of a
certain domain of knowledge, in such a way that they are interpretable by computers. This
is achieved by identifying the domain concepts and the relations that exist among them, and
by representing all this information in a formal framework, e.g., using the Description Logic
formalism. Knowledge representation systems are intended to be language-independent
meaning representations. However, different representations of the same domain of knowl-
edge can co-exist, since those who design a certain knowledge representation may have a
particular vision of the world, specific interests, or do it with a certain application in mind,
among other factors.

One of the difficulties of cross-language knowledge representation regards the conceptual
differences that can be observed across languages and cultures. Indeed, certain representa-
tions are prone to reflect cultural particularities that are not shared or understood in the
same way by other cultural systems. This involves the existence of certain concepts that
do not exist in other knowledge systems, or are not relevant to them, or are at different
granularity levels in the representation of concepts (Espinoza, Montiel-Ponsoda, & Gómez-

10



Special Issue on Cross-Language Algorithms and Applications

Pérez, 2009). For all these reasons, cross-language knowledge representation is a challenge
in the current multilingual Web. Two main approaches have been followed to obtain knowl-
edge representation systems that support several languages: (i) inclusion of lexicalizations
in several natural languages to describe the concepts and relations formalized in a certain
knowledge representation system; (ii) existence of several knowledge representation systems
whose concepts and relations are expressed for a different natural language, which are then
linked or mapped to establish correspondences or equivalences between them. The former
approach is commonly applied in internationalized or standardized domains, whereas the
latter is typical in culturally-influenced domains, as termed by Cimiano, Montiel-Ponsoda,
Buitelaar, Espinoza, and Gmez-Prez (2010).

In our globalized and interconnected world, cross-language information access is of in-
creasing importance. While several approaches to cross-language document similarity have
been reported, including machine translation, probabilistic topic models, classification or
matrix factorization, there is little previous work on the task of linking documents across
languages that refer to the same events (Pouliquen, Steinberger, Ignat, Ksper, & Tem-
nikova, 2004; Pouliquen, Steinberger, & Deguernel, 2008; Leban, Fortuna, Brank, & Gro-
belnik, 2014). This is actually a difficult and computationally expensive task, especially
when many language pairs are involved, and only a very small number of real-life working
systems performing this task exist. One example of an existing service providing cross-
language cluster linking is the European Media Monitor (EMM) (Pouliquen et al., 2008).
This special issue includes a contribution tackling this task, in which topic modeling is
used to represent the knowledge expressed in documents, and the linking task is based on
similarity-based and entity-related features.

News Across Languages - Cross-Lingual Document Similarity and Event
Tracking by Rupnik, Muhic, Leban, Skraba, Fortuna and Grobelnik addresses the prob-
lem of event tracking in a large multilingual stream, and, more specifically, how to link
collections of articles in different languages which refer to the same event. The authors
consider major languages and also less-resourced languages. The approach is based on rep-
resentations of documents analogous to multilingual topics, which are valid over multiple
languages. These representations are learned using Wikipedia as a training corpus. They
are then used to compute cross-language similarities between documents regardless of lan-
guage. The posterior cross-language cluster linking is performed in two steps. First, to
speed-up the process, the similarity function is used to identify a small set of potential
linking candidates for each cluster. Then, the final decision is taken based on a supervised
classification model whose features include similarity-based and entity-related features. In
a comprehensive experimental study, the authors show canonical correlation analysis to
be the best-performing method to compute multilingual similarities. Moreover, they show
that similarity-based features can greatly benefit from additional semantic extraction-based
features.

Acknowledgements

The authors want to thank Dan Roth, Mark Sammons and an anonymous reviewer for
their useful comments and suggestions on previous versions of this document. This work
has been supported by the 7th Framework Program of the European Commission through

11



Costa-jussà, Bangalore, Lambert, Màrquez & Montiel-Ponsoda

the International Outgoing Fellowship Marie Curie Action (IMTraP-2011-29951), the Intra-
European Fellowship CrossLingMind-2011-300828 and the project LIDER (610782); the
European Regional Development Fund (ERDF/FEDER); and the Spanish Ministerio de
Economı́a y Competitividad through the SpeechTech4All project (TEC2012-38939-C03-02)
and the project “4V: volumen, velocidad, variedad y validez en la gestión innovadora de
datos” (TIN2013-46238-C4-2-R).

References

Abeillé, A. (2003). Treebanks: Building and Using Parsed Corpora. Springer.

Armentano-Oller, C., & Forcada, M. L. (2006). Open-source machine translation between
small languages: Catalan and aranese occitan. In Workshop on Strategies for devel-
oping machine translation for minority languages, pp. 51–54.

Bahdanau, D., Cho, K., & Bengio, Y. (2015). Neural Machine Translation by Jointly
Learning to Align and Translate. CoRR, abs/1409.0473.

Banchs, R., & Costa-jussà, M. R. (2013). Cross-Language Document Retrieval by using
Non-linear Semantic Mapping. Applied Artificial Intelligence Journal, 27 (9), 781–
802.

Banea, C., Mihalcea, R., & Wiebe, J. (2008). A Bootstrapping Method for Building Sub-
jectivity Lexicons for Languages with Scarce Resources. In Proceedings of the Inter-
national Conference on Linguistic Resources and Evaluation (LREC), pp. 2764–2767,
Marrakech, Morocco.

Bangalore, S. (1998). Transplanting Supertags from English to Spanish. In Proceedings of
the TAG+4 Workshop.

Bautin, M., Vijayarenu, L., & Skiena, S. (2008). International Sentiment Analysis for News
and Blogs. In Proc. of the International Conference on Weblogs and Social Media,
pp. 19–26, Seattle, U.S.A.

Bener, A., Minku, L., & Turhan, B. (Eds.). (2014). PROMISE ’14: Proceedings of the 10th
International Conference on Predictive Models in Software Engineering, New York,
NY, USA. ACM.

Bikel, D., & Zitouni, I. (2012). Multilingual Natural Language Processing Applications:
From Theory to Practice. IBM Press.

Bojar, O., Chatterjee, R., Federmann, C., Haddow, B., Huck, M., Hokamp, C., Koehn, P.,
Logacheva, V., Monz, C., Negri, M., Post, M., Scarton, C., Specia, L., & Turchi, M.
(2015). Findings of the 2015 Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation. In Pro-
ceedings of the Tenth Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation, pp. 1–46, Lisbon,
Portugal.

Chiang, D. (2007). Hierarchical Phrase-Based Translation. Computational Linguistics,
33 (2), 201–228.

Cimiano, P., Montiel-Ponsoda, E., Buitelaar, P., Espinoza, M., & Gómez-Pérez, A. (2010).
A Note on Ontology Localization. Journal of Applied Ontology, 5(2), 127–137.

12



Special Issue on Cross-Language Algorithms and Applications

Costa-jussà, M. R. (2015). How Much Hybridization Does Machine Translation Need?.
Journal of the American Society for Information Technology (JASIST), 6 (10), 2160–
2165.

Costa-jussà, M. R., Banchs, R., Rapp, R., Lambert, P., Eberle, K., & Babych, B. (2013).
Workshop on hybrid approaches to translation: Overview and developments. In Pro-
ceedings of the Second Workshop on Hybrid Approaches to Translation, pp. 1–6, Sofia,
Bulgaria.

Eisele, A., Federmann, C., Uszkoreit, H., Saint-Amand, H., Kay, M., Jellinghaus, M., Hun-
sicker, S., Herrmann, T., & Chen, Y. (2008). Hybrid Architectures for Multi-Engine
Machine Translation. In Proceedings of Translating and the Computer 30. ASLIB/IMI,
ASLIB.

Espinoza, M., Montiel-Ponsoda, E., & Gómez-Pérez, A. (2009). Ontology Localization. In
Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Knowledge Capture (KCAP09),
pp. 33–40.

Fellbaum, C. (Ed.). (1998). WordNet: An Electronic Lexical Database. MIT Press.

Forner, P., Moller, H., Paredes, R., Rosso, P., & Stein, B. (2013). Information Access
Evaluation. Multilinguality, Multimodality, and Visualization. Springer.

Gracia, J., MacCrae, J., & Vulcu, G. (Eds.). (2015). Proceedings of the Fourth Workshop
on the Multilingual Semantic Web. CEUR.

Hajič, J., Böhmová, A., Hajičová, E., & Vidová-Hladká, B. (2000). The Prague Depen-
dency Treebank: A Three-Level Annotation Scenario. In Abeillé, A. (Ed.), Treebanks:
Building and Using Parsed Corpora, pp. 103–127. Amsterdam:Kluwer.

Hedlund, T., Airio, E., Keskustalo, H., Lehtokangas, R., Pirkola, A., & Jarvelin, K. (2004).
Dictionary-based Cross-Language Information Retrieval: Learning Experiences from
CLEF 2000-2002. Information Retrieval, 7 (1), 99–119.

Hutchins, W. J., & Sommers, H. L. (1992). An Introduction to Machine Translation, Vol.
362. Academic Press, New York.

Kettunen, K. (2009). Choosing the Best MT Programs for CLIR Purposes—Can MT
Metrics Be Helpful?. In Proceedings of the 31th European Conference on IR Research
on Advances in Information Retrieval, pp. 706–712.

Kim, S., Iglesias-Sucasas, M., & Viollier, V. (2013). The FAO Geopolitical Ontology: A Ref-
erence for country-Based Information. Journal of Agricultural and Food Information,
14 (1).

Kishida, K. (2008). Prediction of Performance of Cross-language Information Retrieval Us-
ing Automatic Evaluation of Translation. Library and Information Science Research,
30 (2), 138–144.

Koehn, P., Och, F., & Marcu, D. (2003). Statistical Phrase-Based Translation. In Pro-
ceedings of the Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics on Human Language Technology (NAACL-HLT), pp. 48–
54.

13



Costa-jussà, Bangalore, Lambert, Màrquez & Montiel-Ponsoda

Koehn, P., Hoang, H., Birch, A., Callison-Burch, C., Federico, M., Bertoldi, N., Cowan,
B., Shen, W., Moran, C., Zens, R., Dyer, C., Bojar, O., Constantin, A., & Herbst, E.
(2007). Moses: Open Source Toolkit for Statistical Machine Translation. In Proceedings
of the 45th Annual Meeting of the ACL on Interactive Poster and Demonstration
Sessions, ACL ’07, pp. 177–180.

Leban, G., Fortuna, B., Brank, J., & Grobelnik, M. (2014). Event registry: Learning about
world events from news. In Proceedings of the Companion Publication of the 23rd
International Conference on World Wide Web Companion (WWW Companion’14),
pp. 107–110, Seoul, Korea.

Libraries, I. S. o. A. (Ed.). (1996). Multilingual Glossary for Art Librarians: English with
Indexes in Dutch, French, German, Italian, Spanish and Swedish. De Gruyter.

Liu, B. (2012). Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining. Synthesis Lectures on Human
Language Technologies. Morgan & Claypool Publishers.

Lu, B., Tan, C., Cardie, C., & K. Tsou, B. (2011). Joint Bilingual Sentiment Classification
with Unlabeled Parallel Corpora. In Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (ACL-HLT), pp.
320–330, Portland, Oregon, USA.

Mahdisoltani, F., Biega, J., & Suchanek, F. M. (2015). YAGO3: A Knowledge Base from
Multilingual Wikipedias. In Proceedings of the Conference on Innovative Data Systems
Research (CIDR 2015).

Marcus, M. P., Marcinkiewicz, M. A., & Santorini, B. (1993). Building a Large Annotated
Corpus of English: The Penn Treebank. Computational Linguistics, 19 (2), 313–330.

Mihalcea, R., Banea, C., & Wiebe, J. (2007). Learning Multilingual Subjective Language via
Cross-Lingual Projections. In Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (ACL), pp. 976–983, Prague, Czech Republic.

Montalvo, S., Mart́ınez, R., Casillas, A., & Fresno, V. (2007). Multilingual News Clustering:
Feature Translation vs. Identification of Cognate Named Entities. Pattern Recognition
Letters, 28 (16), 2305–2311.

Navigli, R., & Ponzetto, S. P. (2012). BabelNet: The Automatic Construction, Evalua-
tion and Application of a Wide-Coverage Multilingual Semantic Network. Artificial
Intelligence, 193, 217–250.

Pianta, E., Bentivogli, L., & Girardi, C. (2002). MultiWordNet: developing an aligned
multilingual database. In Proceedings of the Frist International Conference on Global
WordNet.

Pouliquen, B., Steinberger, R., & Deguernel, O. (2008). Story Tracking: Linking Similar
News Over Time and Across Languages. In Proceedings of the COLING 2008 Work-
shop on Multi-source Multilingual Information Extraction and Summarization, pp.
49–56, Manchester, UK.

Pouliquen, B., Steinberger, R., Ignat, C., Ksper, E., & Temnikova, I. (2004). Multilingual
and cross-lingual news topic tracking. In Proceedings of the International Conference
on Computational Linguistics (COLING), pp. 959–965, Geneva, Switzerland. COL-
ING.

14



Special Issue on Cross-Language Algorithms and Applications

Prettenhofer, P., & Stein, B. (2010). Cross-Language Text Classification Using Structural
Correspondence Learning. In Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (ACL), pp. 1118–1127, Uppsala, Sweden.

Quirk, C., Menezes, A., & Cherry, C. (2005). Dependency Treelet Translation: Syntactically
Informed Phrasal SMT. In Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (ACL), pp. 271–279.

Sánchez-Cartagena, V. M., Sánchez-Mart́ınez, F., & Pérez-Ortiz, J. A. (2011). The Uni-
versitat d’Alacant hybrid machine translation system for WMT 2011. In Proceedings
of the Sixth Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation, pp. 457–463, Edinburgh,
Scotland.

Sánchez-Mart́ınez, F., & Forcada, M. L. (2009). Inferring Shallow-Transfer Machine Trans-
lation Rules from Small Parallel Corpora. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research,
34, 605–635.

Skut, W., Brants, T., & Uszkoreit, H. (1998). A Linguistically Interpreted Corpus of German
Newspaper Text. In Proceedings of the ESSLLI Workshop on Recent Advances in
Corpus Annotation, Saarbrucken, Germany.

Smedt, J. D., & Vatanat, B. (2009). https://lists.w3.org/archives/public/public-esw-
thes/2010feb/att-0023/ontology.html..

Steinberger, R., Pouliquen, B., Widiger, A., Ignat, C., Erjavec, T., Tufis, D., & Varga, D.
(2006). The JRC-Acquis: A multilingual aligned parallel corpus with 20+ languages.
In Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Language Resources and Eval-
uation (LREC’2006), Genoa, Italy.

Suchanek, F., Riedel, S., Singh, S., & Pratim Talukdar, P. (Eds.)., (2012). AKBC-WEKEX
’12: Proceedings of the Joint Workshop on Automatic Knowledge Base Construction
and Web-scale Knowledge Extraction, Stroudsburg, PA, USA. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.

Vossen, P. (Ed.). (1998). EuroWordNet: A Multilingual Database with Lexical Semantic
Networks. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Norwell, MA, USA.

Wan, X. (2009). Co-Training for Cross-Lingual Sentiment Classification. In Proceedings
of the Joint Conference of the 47th Annual Meeting of the ACL and the 4th Interna-
tional Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing of the AFNLP, pp. 235–243,
Singapore.

Wei, B., & Pal, C. (2010). Cross Lingual Adaptation: An Experiment on Sentiment Classi-
fications. In Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (ACL), pp. 258–262, Uppsala, Sweden.

Yarowsky, D., Ngai, G., & Wicentowski, R. (2001). Inducing Multilingual Text Analysis
Tools via Robust Projection across Aligned Corpora. In Proceedings of the First In-
ternational Conference on Human Language Technology Research, pp. 1–8, San Diego,
CA, USA.

Zhang, Y., Jones, G. J., & Zhang, K. (2008). Dublin City University at CLEF 2007:
Cross-Language Speech Retrieval Experiments. Lecture Notes In Computer Science,
703–711.

15


