












































Microsoft Word - PatRecLetCreat.docx


Pattern Recognition Letters 

A transformational creativity tool to support chocolate designers 

Francisco J. Ruiza 0F, Cristóbal Rayaa, Albert Samàa and Núria Agellb 
aAutomatic Control Department, BarcelonaTech, Vilanova i la Geltrú, Spain 
bESADE Business School-Ramón Llull University, Sant Cugat, Spain 

 Corresponding author: EPSEVG. Avda. Víctor Balaguer, s/n. 08800 Vilanova i la Geltrú. Spain. Tel.: +34-938-967-231; fax: +34-938-967-
700; e-mail: francisco.javier.ruiz@upc.edu 

ABSTRACT 

A new formulation of the central ideas of Boden’s well-established theory on combinational, exploratory and 
transformational creativity is presented. This new formulation, based on the idea of conceptual space, 
redefines some terms and includes several types of concept properties (appropriateness and relevance), 
whose relationship facilitates the computational implementation of the transformational creativity 
mechanism. The presented formulation is applied to a real case of chocolate designing in which a novel and 
flavorful combination of chocolate and fruit is generated. The experimentation was conducted jointly with a 
Spanish chocolate chef. Experimental results prove the relationship between appropriateness and relevance in 
different frameworks and show that the formulation presented is not only useful for understanding how the 
creative mechanisms of design works but also facilitates its implementation in real cases to support creativity 
processes. 

2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.



1. Introduction 

Computational creativity is an emerging, multidisciplinary 
branch of Artificial Intelligence, closely related to Cognitive 
Science, whose goal is to model, simulate or serve as a support 
tool for creative tasks. In this paper, we focus on systems for 
achieving the latter goal. Such systems are normally referred to 
as Creativity Support Tools or Creativity Support Systems (CSS). 
CSS can be defined as systems capable of enhancing human 
creativity without necessarily being creative themselves. They act 
as a creative collaborator with scientists, designers, artists and 
engineers by applying technology to help humans ‘think outside 
the box’ and expand their exploration boundaries by generating 
good ideas that have never been thought of before [Thornton 
2007]. They can help us to look farther and avoid dwelling on the 
obvious concepts. The great challenge for CSS is to enable more 
people to be more creative more of the time [Shneiderman 2000]. 

Creativity can be found in painting, sculpture, music, 
literature, architecture but also in engineering, software 
development, scientific discoveries and almost all human 
activities. Many scientists and engineers have extended their 
discovery and innovation capabilities by applying computational 
tools able to perform fast calculations and useful simulations and 
visualization. For instance, genome researchers use specialized 
visual analysis tools to discover biological pathways, computer-
aided design (CAD) is used in designing electronic, mechanical 
and architectural systems, and media artists are provided with 
powerful development environments that support animation, 
music and video editing tools. In fact, any tool that facilitates 
access to and revision of existing projects and performance, such 
as Web browsers, wikis and search engines, helps to enhance 
human creativity. However, like telescopes, microscopes and 
cameras, these computational applications are still only tools; the 
act of creation is actually carried out by the users [Shneiderman 
2007]. 

It is assumed that creativity is closely linked to the rational 
decision-making process. In the literature, decision-making 
processes normally comprise four steps: Framing the decision, 
generating alternatives, evaluating the alternatives and choosing 
and implementing the chosen alternative [Langton 2012]. 
Creativity is mainly linked to the second step: generation of 
alternatives, but it is also associated to the third and fourth steps. 
Generating ideas (hypotheses for scientists, prototypes for 
engineers, models for architects, or sketches for artists) is often 
considered the key step in creativity. It is sometimes referred to 
as divergent thinking. Creating lists of questions or community 
brainstorming are activities which promote divergent thinking. 
The use of computer programs makes it easier to generate, 
collect, organize and present new ideas based on word 
combination, using hypertext databases and making different 
kinds of connections. However, once a new idea emerges, the 
creator must determine its suitability. The evaluation and 
selection stage is referred to as convergent thinking. This stage 
draws on large amounts of domain knowledge to assess novelty 
and quality. 

Alternatives are normally generated by combining elements 
within and beyond the domain but one needs to choose 
potentially good alternatives if one is to avoid evaluation of a 
vast number of possible combinations. This is achieved by 
reviewing existing processes in the domain and other processes 
belonging to other domains with subtle common aspects. In this 
sense, creative people are skilled at both finding these apparently 
different domains with common characteristics and at pre-
evaluating the alternatives, taking into account the relation 
between domains.  

 

This paper presents a new formulation of the central ideas of 
Boden’s well-established theory on creativity [Boden 1990]. This 
new formulation redefines some terms and also reviews the 
formal mechanisms of exploratory and transformational 
creativity. It is based on the conceptual space proposed by Boden 
and formalized by other authors to facilitate implementation of 
these mechanisms. We consider transformational creativity to be 
a quest for concepts that fall outside the problem framework that 
involves weighing up the relationship (appropriateness and 
relevance) between concepts in different frameworks. To 
illustrate this formulation, a computational system is developed 
and tested in the support process of a creative chocolate designer. 
The study was conducted jointly with the chocolate chef Oriol 
Balaguer and his team (http://www.oriolbalaguer.com). Oriol 
Balaguer has received a host of national and international awards. 
The Catalan pastry chef is actively involved in the research and 
development of new products.  

Culinary design has long been seen as a highly creative 
domain within creativity research [Sawyer 2012]. Thus, CSS has 
a potential role in the food industry. Today, a significant portion 
of a food services or manufacturers’ business focuses on coming 
up with new ingredient combinations and finding new flavors 
that may become a commercial success. With the availability of 
large-scale online recipe repositories in recent years, some recipe 
design principles have been formulated, inspiring creativity 
strategies. [Ahn 2011]. The flavor of a dish depends as much on 
how it is prepared as on the choice of particular ingredients. 
Furthermore, there are many ingredients whose main role in a 
recipe is not only flavoring but also to ensure mechanical 
stability, improve conservation or to add vivid colors a pleasing 
texture. However, some hypotheses ignore all these factors and 
focus solely on flavoring compounds in the ingredients. One of 
the main guiding principles in putting together two ingredients in 
a recipe is the so-called food pairing hypothesis [Ahn 2011]. 

Food pairing is a relatively new method for identifying which 
ingredients go well together. It is based on the principle that 
some food combines well with one another when they share key 
flavor components. This flavor pairing hypothesis arose when 
Heston Blumenthal, the famous chef from the English restaurant 
The Fat Duck 1F1, found caviar and white chocolate go well 
together. He contacted Firmenich, a Swiss perfume and flavor 
company, who found that both chocolate and caviar shares 
trimethylamine and other flavor compounds that contribute to the 
desirable flavors [Blumenthal 2008]. In order to apply the food 
pairing hypothesis, flavor and aroma compounds of an ingredient 
should be obtained (with the aid of gas chromatography or mass 
spectrometry) and compared to the compounds of other 
ingredients. However, this hypothesis also makes it easy to come 
up with unexpected combinations since food pairing suggests that 
the binary relation go well together satisfies, to a certain degree, 
the transitive property, (that is to say, adequacy between two 
ingredients depends on the adequacy between these ingredients 
and other ingredients). The flavor pairing hypothesis has been 
scientifically studied for several modern cuisines and has been 
found to hold strongly for Western cuisine but not for Asian 
cuisine [Ahn 2011].   

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section 
Two provides a review of the literature on computational 
creativity. Section Three covers the proposed CSS methodology. 
Section Four details the application of the chosen methodology. 

                                                 
1 The Fat Duck has been awarded three Michelin stars and 
was voted Best Restaurant in the world in 2005. 



The fifth and last section gives conclusions and discusses future 
work.  

 

2. Literature review on computational creativity 

Creativity should be regarded as one of the highest-level 
cognitive functions of the human mind.  It is a phenomenon 
whereby something new and valuable is produced such as an 
idea, a problem solution, a marketing strategy, a literary work, a 
painting, a musical composition or a new cookery recipe. 
Authors have diverged in the precise definition of creativity 
beyond these two features: originality (new) and appropriateness 
(valuable) [Mumford 2003].  

One of the few attempts to address the problem of creative 
behavior and its relation with Artificial Intelligence was done by 
Margaret Boden [Boden 1990][Boden 1996]. She aimed to study 
creativity processes from a philosophical viewpoint focusing on 
understanding human creativity rather than trying to create a 
creative machine.  

Boden distinguishes between creativity that is novel merely to 
the agent that produces it and creativity that is recognized as 
novel by the society. The first is usually known as P-creativity 
(or “psychological creativity”) and the second is known as H-
creativity (or “historical creativity”). All P-creative ideas are H-
creative, but not all H-creative ideas are P-creative. What is 
valued by one person or social group may or may not be valued 
by another. 

The most important contribution of Boden’s study is the 
introduction of the idea of conceptual space composed of partial 
or complete concepts. She conceives of the process of creativity 
as the location and identification of a concept in this conceptual 
space. The creative process can be performed by combining, 
exploring or transforming this conceptual space. According to 
Boden’s theory, combinational creativity uses familiar ideas to 
generate a new idea in the form of unfamiliar juxtaposition. 
Moreover, exploratory creativity explores potentiality of a 
conceptual space to create a new and unexpected idea. Another 
type of computational creativity in Boden’s theory is 
transformational creativity. If the conceptual space is defined 
through a set of rules, when these rules change, then the process 
is called transformational creativity.  

From Boden’s study, it is not clear how the rules give rise to a 
particular conceptual space and, therefore, what is the true 
difference between exploring the space and transforming it. In 
order to clarify and to formalize the creative process, G. A. 
Wigging [Wigging 2006] presented several papers in which he 
emphasized the notion of search as the central mechanism for 
exploratory creativity and the notion of meta-level search related 
to transformational creativity. Wiggings posits a universe of 
possibilities U which is a superset of the conceptual space. The 
universe is a multidimensional space, whose dimensions are 
capable of representing all possible concepts which are relevant 
to the domain in which we wish to be creative. For 
transformational creativity to be meaningful, all conceptual 
spaces are required to be subsets of U. 

Wiggings conceives exploratory creativity as a search of 
concepts in a specific conceptual space. The process involves 
three sets of rules that can be denoted as acceptability, 
appropriateness and strategy. The first set of rules is linked with 
belonging to the conceptual space. Moreover, acceptability is 
related to style. On the other hand, appropriateness rules are 
related to the value of the concept. Valuable concepts may 
become successful regardless of being acceptable according to 

the rules associated to acceptability. This second set of rules 
(which defines the value of a concept) is much harder to define 
because it depends on cultural and aesthetic aspects, specific 
context, personal mood, etc. However, it is important to note that, 
in this context, appropriate means suitable to the task, but above 
all original and surprising. Finally, there exist a third set of rules 
linked to the search strategy. For instance, some people prefer to 
work “top-down”, others “bottom-up”, others rely on ad-hoc 
methodologies, using informed or uninformed heuristics and 
even at random. Wiggings points out that separating acceptability 
and strategy rules can be used to describe situations where 
different designers, each with a personal way of finding new 
ideas, are working within the same style (a shared notion of 
acceptability). 

 From Wiggins’ perspective, the interaction of these three sets 
of rules (acceptability, appropriateness and strategy) leads to the 
exploratory creativity process. However, although working 
within three invariant sets of rules may produce interesting 
results, a higher form of creativity can result from making 
changes of these rules (transformational creativity). In other 
words, on the one hand, exploratory creativity consists of finding 
a concept in a specific conceptual space, following a specific 
strategy and assessing it by using a specific appropriateness set of 
rules. On the other hand, transformational creativity consists of 
the same process than exploratory creativity but changing the 
conceptual space, the search strategy or the appropriateness 
assessment. 

Besides Wiggings work, there have been other formalizations 
of specific aspects of the computational creative process [Ritchie 
2007] [Ritchie 2012] [Charnley 2012]. Although these 
formalizations are very helpful in clarifying the nature of creative 
computation and have given rise to some applications in diverse 
domains including graphic design, creative language, video game 
design and visual arts [Manurung 2012], the details of most of 
them are unspecified and the concepts they include are tricky to 
implement. The current paper starts from the central ideas of 
Boden and Wiggings and redefines the formal mechanisms of 
exploratory and transformational creativity in a way which 
facilitates the implementation of these mechanisms. 

 

3. The proposed formulation 

As in Wiggins theory, let us start by considering a universal 
set of all concepts, U. The idea is that U is universal enough to 
contain concepts for every type of complete or incomplete 
artifacts that might ever be dreamed up. In addition, we define 
the following terms: 

Definitions (Framework, H-conceptual space, appro-
priateness and relevance). A framework F is the 3-tuple (C, a( ), 
r( )) where C U and a( ) and r( ) are maps from U to R. 

 The subset C is the H-conceptual space (or ‘historical 
conceptual space’) formed by all concepts related to the 
framework F. 

 a( ) is the appropriateness map. In our formulation it is 
related to the success of considering a concept in this 
framework. 

 r( ) is the relevance map. It is a measure of the 
membership relation between the concept and the 
framework: r(y)0 if yC and 0 otherwise. 

  A naïve relevance measure might be a 0/1 value (1 if xC and 0 
otherwise), but it is possible to consider more complex measures 
containing more information about the relation between the 
concept and the framework.  



In the proposed formulation, we separate originality and 
appropriateness. This separation is not clear in Wiggins 
formulation where appropriate means both suitable to the task 
and original and surprising. We consider that any agent can act as 
a spectator and can easily obtain the relevance measure for any 
concept given any framework. However, only experts on a 
framework know appropriateness for some concepts in the H-
conceptual space. 

Definitions (Expert and P-conceptual space). An expert i on 
a given framework F is an agent that also knows value a() for 
concepts from some subset C i of C. Inspired by Boden’s theory, 
we call C i the psychological or P-conceptual space, that is, the 
concept space associated to the framework F and to the expert i.  

An expert only knows appropriateness for concepts from 
his/her P-conceptual space, but the values a(y) for yC i are 
unknown by the expert. However, an expert can also have 
expertise in others frameworks. We use the notation C j  as the H-
conceptual space associated to framework Fj and C ji as the P-
conceptual space associated to framework Fj and expert i. It is 
common that different frameworks share concepts but obviously 
appropriateness of the same concept can differ depending on the 
framework. Multi-expertise can be an advantage in the creative 
process.  

Figure 1. Universe of concepts. H-Conceptual spaces (associated to 
frameworks) and P-Conceptual spaces (associated to frameworks and one 
expert). The expert i is represented as a grey circle. He has knowledge on four 
frameworks. In the figure it can be seen that one concept can belong to 
different frameworks 

We consider that given a framework, the appropriateness of a 
concept is independent of the expert. The difference between 
experts of the same framework is related to the different P-
conceptual spaces, all them subsets of the H-conceptual space. 

In addition, we consider that both a framework and an expert 
can evolve and both the H-conceptual space and the P-conceptual 
space can grow because of the creative activity. 

 

Definition (creative and strategy). A creative agent on a 
given framework F, or just a creative (sic) (used as a noun), is an 
expert in this framework that has a strategy for obtaining 
concepts. A strategy is defined as a way to select a concept from 
U given all the knowledge that the creative has about the main 
framework but also about other frameworks. The strategy 
depends on the appropriateness and relevance values of concepts 
in different frameworks. 

‘Creatives’ select concepts following their strategy. Once the 
concept is obtained, its relevance in the framework is modified 
and both the P-conceptual space and the H-conceptual space are 
extended to include this new concept. 

The relevance is the result of creatives’s activities. However, 
the appropriateness depends only on the concept and the 
framework considered. The underlying idea is that, although 
evaluating the appropriateness requires some kind of talent or 
expertise, relevance evaluation can be easily performed by any 
agent by means of an objective analysis of the framework. Thus a 
concept with high relevance in a framework is not necessarily 
highly appropriate. In fact, an original concept always has low 
relevance in the considered framework. 

It is possible to simplify the model by avoiding the distinction 
between ‘creatives’ and experts but in some fields there are 
obviously two types of agents. For instance movie, painting or 
literature critics can be considered as experts who can assess 
concepts but they normally do not develop artistic skills.  

 

3.1. CSS for transformational creativity 

Among Boden’s three kinds of creativity (combinational, 
exploratory and transformational), in this paper, we have focused 
on the third one. As combinational and exploratory creativities 
delimit the search in the P-conceptual space, the best strategy 
seems to select the concept with the best combination of 
appropriateness and relevance values. Although the selection of a 
concept from the P-conceptual space may not be trivial and can 
be performed using other kind of CSS, this topic will not be 
consider in this paper.  

The main problem regarding transformational creativity is the 
lack of knowledge, from the expert’s side, on the appropriateness 
values for concepts outside the P-conceptual space. The CSS 
cannot directly obtain this appropriateness value. However, 
computational intelligence can be used for obtaining relevance 
values for any concept with respect to any framework. 

Definition (Relevance vector). Let us consider a set of 
different frameworks F1, F2,…, Fm. Given a concept xU, we 
consider the relevance vector of x with respect to the set of 
frameworks F1, F2,…, Fm as (x)=(r1(x), r2(x),…, rm(x)). 

 The relevance vector describes the membership relation of x 
to the set of frameworks F1, F2,… , Fm. Given a framework F0,  
the expert i and its P-conceptual space C i0,  the utility of CSS in 
transformational creativity relies on proposing new concepts 
yU, yC i0 to the expert based on the relevance information of 
these concepts with respect to frameworks different to the one 
initially considered and from the relation among all these 
frameworks. 

The system we consider is able to propose new concepts yU, 
yC i0 with likely high a0(y). In order to predict how valuable a 
new concept y is, i.e a0(y), our hypothesis is that no obvious 
relations between different frameworks exist, therefore the 
appropriateness a0(y) and the relevance vector (y) are closely 
related. In this sense, it is considered that concepts with similar 
relevance vectors on the current framework should have similar 
appropriateness function. This hypothesis could not be true for a 
small set of frameworks but, from our preliminary experiments, 
seems to be true for larger ones.  

Given the relation between appropriateness and relevance, our 
CSS will use the set C i0, or a subset of it, as a training set in a 
learning system in order to extract the relation between 
appropriateness in F0 and the relevance vector in a set of 
frameworks F1, F2,…, Fm. Once trained, we only have to feed the 
CSS with other concepts and the system will propose those 
concepts with expected high appropriateness. 

An illustrative example is proposed in this paper to validate 
our formulation and hypothesis. This example highlight the 



relationship between the appropriateness and the relevance of a 
concept with respect to other apparently distinct frameworks. 

 

4. Experimental framework: combining chocolate with fruits 

To illustrate the implementation of the ideas presented in the 
previous section, let us consider the following creative situation: 
coming up with a new chocolate cake by combining dark 
chocolate with a fruit to obtain a highly accepted product. The 
‘creative’ given the task has a lot of experience in combining 
chocolate with many different ingredients –cheese, liqueurs, olive 
oil, nuts and, of course, fruits. Due to his experience, he knows 
whether several combinations of specific types of chocolates and 
fruits are suitable or not but, obviously, he does not know how 
well any kind of chocolate combines with all existing fruits. 
Thus, a CSS is going to be developed according to the 
methodology presented in the previous section in order to assist 
the expert in creating suitable new combination. 

In our case, since we constrained the problem to combine fruit 
and dark chocolate, the universe U is formed by all fruits. The H-
conceptual space, C0 U, contains all fruits that have ever been 
mixed with black chocolate. The P-conceptual space, C i0, which 
consists in all fruits for which the expert i knows whether they 
blend in well or not with dark chocolate, is just a subset of C0. 
Moreover, the expert is able to assign a value a0(x) for all xC i0, 
which, in our case, is represented in our case as a qualitative 
ordinal value (see Table 2). The objective of our CSS consists of 
suggesting other fruits yU, yC i0, with a high predicted value 
function a0(y), i.e. fruits valuable to the expert for the considered 
problem (combining with dark chocolate). 

Following the CSS methodology introduced in the previous 
section, we can learn the value a0( ) of a fruit with respect to the 
dark chocolate (framework F0) through the way it is related to 
other frameworks. In this example we are considering only 
frameworks related to recipes and ingredients, but other 
alternatives could also have been considered. To obtain the 
relevance value in regards to a framework, a large recipe 
database has been used. We counted the number of recipes 
containing both the fruit and each term associated to the 
framework. 

Although the combination of fruits and dark chocolate could 
have nothing to do with, for instance, the combination of fruits 
and rice according to our assumption, given a new fruit that has a 

high value of a0 and has similar relevance vector than another 
unknown fruit with respect to others frameworks including rice, 
this new fruit could be considered as a good option to extend the 
search. 

 

4.1. Data collection 

In order to validate our method, we used the data provided by 
the chocolate chef Oriol Balaguer who assessed, according to his 
expertise, the combinations of 28 different fruits and their 
suitability in combination with dark chocolate [Agell 2013]. In 
addition we considered 14 frameworks aside from the main 
framework (dark chocolate). All considered frameworks 
consisted in ingredients used in cooking, but not necessarily in 
pastry making. In this implementation of the CSS, we are not 
focusing on the frameworks selection problem. Instead, we think 
that the ad-hoc selection for this example is enough for 
illustrating how the formulation presented can be implemented 
and we leave framework selection as work to be undertaken in 
the near future. 

In order to obtain the relevance vector for each fruit we used 
the online database of recipes www.allrecipes.com. 
Allrecipes.com is a food-focused social media website where 
millions of home and professional cooks find and share food 
experiences. Founded in 1997, Allrecipes.com has grown to 
become the world #1 food site with over 450 million visits 
annually. In addition to the US based site, Allrecipes has 16 
international sites around the world. 

 Table 1 gives the list of the 23 fruits (rows) and some of the 
frameworks (columns). The last column of this table shows the 
qualitative assessment provided by the expert considering the 
qualitative labels detailed in Table 2. Values in Table 1 are 
obtained by searching both terms simultaneously (fruit and 
framework). This value represents the number of recipes of the 
database containing both terms. Table 3 gives the complete list of 
frameworks considered in this study. 

This list of 23 fruits constitutes a subset of the P-conceptual 
space of the expert. This subset is employed to obtain the relation 
between the appropriateness value given by the expert and the 
relevance vector given by the website. Once this relation is 
captured, the CSS can be used to predict the appropriateness of 
new fruits whose relevance vectors were obtained from the 
website. 

 
 

 

Table 1.  List of the 23 fruits assessed by the expert (last column) and a list of 12 of 50 frameworks considered in this example. The last column contains 
expert assessment of the fruit. 

 Almond Bacon Beef Beans Beer Bread Butter Cabbage Caramel Cheese Chicken Chilli … app
Apple 188 119 155 133 23 565 1309 99 154 601 522 168 … 1
Pear 28 5 10 11 0 44 116 3 15 82 30 12 … 1
Quince 0 0 0 0 0 0 3 0 0 0 0 0 … 2
Apricot 63 4 13 8 2 52 156 2 5 54 73 8 … 4
Peach 49 6 10 18 4 57 210 7 3 64 43 13 … 3
Plum 16 33 48 16 5 90 114 13 2 187 118 58 … 5
Blackberry 6 2 2 3 2 11 89 0 5 24 6 0 … 4
Strawberry 89 7 6 30 3 121 323 5 9 257 40  … 4
Raspberry 72 3 3 14 5 54 213 2 2 127 32 4 … 5
Grape 44 31 20 17 2 48 61 9 6 171 115 18 … 1
Pineapple 66 29 57 65 5 138 321 21 12 280 215  … 5
Orange 201 29 78 92 24 274 684 23 16 272 342 89 … 5
Banana 103 13 15 44 7 361 425 4 29 125 32 23 … 5
Pomegranate 7 0 0 0 0 11 13 2 0 10 0 4 … 4
Grapefruit 3 0 2 2 0 5 7 0 0 8 7 0 … 5
Kiwi 5 0 4 0 0 3 18 0 0 20 9 2 … 3



Lime 36 27 132 51 63 110 264 63 9 289 514 322 … 4
Mandarine 34 6 0 9 0 7 22 8 0 36 32 2 … 5
Mango 21 4 7 7 0 43 66 6 0 50 119 31 … 5
Olive 204 386 995 202 90 1560 1321 160 112 3403 2327 1081 … 2
Papaya 5 0 0 0 0 3 8 0 0 7 11 2 … 1
Watermelon 2 3 0 0 0 3 5 0 0 25 4 5 … 1
Citron 15 0 0 2 0 6 24 0 0 3 0 0 … 3

 

 

Table 2. Labels and linguistic meaning in the fruit assessment by the expert. 

Labels Linguistic labels 
1 It does not combine at all 
2 It does not combine well 
3 Combines well 
4 Combines very well 
5 It makes an excellent combination 

  
 

Table 3. Complete list of frameworks considered in the study. 

# Framework # Framework # Framework # Framework 
1 Almond 16 Fish 31 Nuts 46 Spinach 
2 Bacon 17 Flour 32 Onion 47 Sugar 
3 Beef 18 Garlic 33 Pasta 48 Tabasco 
4 Beans 19 Honey 34 Peanut 49 Tea 
5 Beer 20 Hummus 35 Pepper 50 Tofu 
6 Bread 21 Jam 36 Pie 51 Tomato 
7 Butter 22 Ketchup 37 Pizza 52 Tuna 
8 Cabbage 23 Kidney 38 Potato 53 Turkey 
9 Caramel 24 Lettuce 39 Prawn 54 Vanilla 

10 Cheese 25 Liqueur 40 Rice 55 Veal 
11 Chicken 26 Lobster 41 Salad 56 Vinegar 
12 Chilli 27 Mayonnaise 42 Salmon 57 Wine 
13 Coffee 28 Milk 43 Salt 58 yoghurt 
14 Curry 29 Mint 44 Soda   
15 Eggs 30 Mustard 45 Soup   

  
 

4.2. CSS training and results 

As said in Section 3, our proposal is based on the existing 
relation between the appropriateness of a concept with respect to 
a framework and the relevance vector of this concept with regard 
to a set of other frameworks. To validate this hypothesis, we used 
data from Table 1 to obtain this relation and assess its 
significance. This validation is performed twice by using, on the 
one hand, the complete range of expert’s valuation shown in 
Table 2 and, on the other hand, using just a binary valuation 
(suitable or not suitable) that simplifies the expert’s assessment. 
We used a multiclass and a two-class support vector machines 
(SVM) and we validated through ‘leave one out’ cross-validation 
process. If the SVM can correctly estimate the appropriateness of 
a fruit from the relevance vector, it can be used to propose new 
fruits with high predicted appropriateness.  

 

Table 4. Best parameter values and results of binary and multi-class 
SVM. 

 5 classes 2 classes 

C 10 100,000 

 100 0.1 

accuracy 34.78% 85.00% 

 

Parameters of the SVM were tuned by optimizing the 
geometric mean of sensitivity and specificity because data are 
imbalanced [González-Abril 2014]. In the first case, we 
employed a multiclass SVM (5 classes) with a Gaussian kernel. 
The best parameters obtained were C=10 (regularization cost) 
and =100 (Gaussian kernel parameter). Software R and LibSVM 
library were used to train the datasets and predict accuracy of 
classifying [R Dev team 2008] [Chang 2013]. The total accuracy 
obtained was 34.78%. This value means that 34.78% of the time, 
the predicted value matches with the expert assessment. Taking 
into account that there are 5 classes and the expected accuracy in 
the case of random values is 5i=1 (Ni/N)2=24%  (Ni is the 
number of examples of class i and N the total of examples), the 
accuracy value obtained reaffirms our hypothesis. In the second 
case, pattern labels are changed in order to maximize CSS utility. 
Instead of using the labels shown in Table 2, a binary 
classification when employed in which the first class contains 
those combinations that were suitable to the expert and the 
second class those were those that were not. Patterns 
corresponding to values 3 and less are considered to the first 
class and the rest of patterns are considered to belong to the 
second class. In this case, the best parameters obtained by the 
tuning process were C=100,000 and = 0.1. The total accuracy 
obtained was 85%.  



In order to show that the relationship between the 
appropriateness and the relevance vector increases with the 
dimension of the relevance vector, subsets of the set of 
frameworks have been considered instead of the whole set. 
Figure 2 shows the mean accuracy according to the number of 
frameworks considered in each trial. For each k from 1 to 58, 
thirty different subsets of k elements have been considered. The 
mean accuracy among these thirty subsets of k elements is 
calculated when the SVM is applied considering leave one out 
cross validation. Figure 2 supports our hypothesis and, in 
addition, it can be noted that this accuracy stabilizes from the 
value 30. 

 

 Figure 2. Mean accuracy of the SVM with respect to the number of 
frameworks considered.  

 

5. Conclusion and Future work 

In this paper we proposed a new formalization of the 
mechanism of creativity based on Boden’s notions of conceptual 
space and transformational creativity through a search beyond 
the boundaries of this conceptual space. This study redefines the 
formal mechanisms of exploratory and transformational 
creativity introducing the concepts of framework and relevance 
of a concept with respect to a framework. The formalization 
presented has been implemented in a real example conducted 
with a Spanish chocolate chef. The CSS obtained proved capable 
of proposing new, unknown fruits that were predicted to combine 
well with dark chocolate. The validation of the method was 
performed using both a bi-class and a multi-classs SVM. The 
results allowed us to conclude that the assumptions on which the 
method is based were satisfied in this example. 

Finally, it is important to note that in this implementation, we 
are not aiming at the frameworks’ selection problem. However, 
this is an important issue to be analyzed in future work. In 
addition, two different topics will be considered in future 
research. First, the inclusion of both complete and incomplete 
concepts in the formalization. Second, consideration of a new 
real case, where it could be demonstrated that creativity enhanced 
by introducing the methodology described in this paper. 

 

Acknowledgments 

This work is supported by the Spanish project SENSORIAL 
(TIN2010-20966-C02-02) Spanish Ministry of Education and 
Science. Author want to thank the chocolate chef, Oriol Balaguer 

for his support and interest during the experimental process 
carried out in this study. 

References  

[1] Ahn, Y.-Y.; Ahnert, S. E.; Bagrow, J. P.; and Barabasi, A.-L.. Flavor 
network and the principles of food pairing. Sci.Reports 1:196.(2011) 

[2] C.J. Thornton, How thinking inside the box can become thinking 
outside the box. In Proceedings of the 4th international Joint Workshop 
on Computational Creativity, (2007). 

[3] B. Shneiderman, Creating Creativity: User Interfaces for Supporting 
Innovation, ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction 7,1 
(2000), 114-138. 

[4] B. Shneiderman. Creativity Support Tools. Accelerating Discovery and 
Innovation. Communications of the ACM, vol 50, nº 12 (2007). 

[5] M.A. Boden, The Creative Mind: Myths and Mechanism. Weidenfiel 
and Nicholson, London, (1990). 

[6] M.A. Boden, What is creativity? In M.A.Boden, editor, Dimensions of 
Creativity. MIT Press (1996), 75-118. 

[7] G. Wiggins, A preliminary framework for description, analysis and 
comparison of creative systems. Knowledge-Based Systems 19 (2006), 
449-458. 

[8] G. Ritchie, Some empirical criteria for attributing creativity to a 
computer program. Minds and Machines 17 (1) (2007), 67-69 (2007). 

[9] G. Ritchie, A closer look at creativity as search, In Proceedings of the 
3rd International Conference on Computational Creativity (2012). 

[10] J. Charnley, A. Pease and S. Colton. On the Notion of Framing in 
Computational Creativity, In Proccedings of the 3rd International 
Conference on Computational Creativity (2012). 

[11] R. Manurung, G. Ritchie and H. Thompson. Using a genetic algorithms 
to create meaningful poetic text. Journal of Experimental & Theoretical 
Artificial Intelligence 24(1), pp43-64. (2012),  

[12] N. Agell, G. Sánchez, M. Sánchez, F. Ruiz, Group decision-making 
system based on a qualitative location function. An application to 
chocolates design, In Proceedings of the 27th International Workshop on 
Qualitative Reasoning (2013). 

[13] Heston Blumenthal. The Big Fat Duck Cookbook. Bloomsbury, 
London, United Kingdom, 2008. 

[14] Langton, N., Robbins, S.P., Judge, T. A.. Organizational Behaviour: 
Concepts, Controversies, Applications. Pearson (2012) 

[15] Mumford, M. D. Where have we been, where are we going? Taking 
stock in creativity research. Creativity Research Journal, 15, pp 107-120 
(2003) 

[16] R Development Core Team. R: A language and environment for 
statistical computing. R Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, 
Austria, URL http://www.R-project.org. (2008) 

[17] L. González-Abril, H. Núñez, C. Angulo and F. Velasco. GSVM: An 
SVM for handling imbalanced accuracy between classes in bi-
classification problems. Applied Soft Computing, 7 pp 23-31 (2014),  

[18] Sawyer, R. K. 2012. Explaining Creativity: The Science of Human 
Innovation. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

[19] Varshney, L. R.; Pinel, F.; Varshney, K. R.; Bhattacharjya, D.; 
Schöergendorfer, A.; and Chee, Y. M.. A big data approach to 
computational creativity. (2013). 

[20] Jordanous, A. 2011. Evaluating evaluation: Assessing progress in 
computational creativity research. Proc. Int. Conf. Comput. Creativity 
102 – 107. 

[21] Chang, Chih-Chung and Lin, Chih-Jen: 
LIBSVM: a library for Support Vector Machines 
http://www.csie.ntu.edu.tw/~cjlin/libsvm (last updated 2013) 




