


















































Automatic evaluation for e-learning using latent semantic analysis: A use case | Farrús | The International Review of Research in Open and Distributed Learning


ISSN: 1492-3831

IRRODL Co-Editors:
Dianne Conrad
Rory McGreal

Search

Search Scope
All

Search

BROWSE

By Issue
By Author
By Title

USER

Username

Password

Remember me

Login

ARTICLE TOOLS

Abstract

Print this article

Indexing metadata

How to cite item

 Email this article (Login required)

 Email the author (Login required)

FONT SIZE

HOME ABOUT REGISTER CURRENT ARCHIVES WHAT'S NEW RESOURCES CONFERENCES

Home > Vol 14, No 1 (2013) > Farrús

March – 2013

Automatic Evaluation for E-Learning Using Latent
Semantic Analysis: A Use Case

Mireia Farrús
Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Spain

Marta R. Costa-jussà
Institute for Infocomm Research, Singapore

Abstract

Assessment in education allows for obtaining, organizing, and presenting information about how much
and how well the student is learning. The current paper aims at analysing and discussing some of the
most state-of-the-art assessment systems in education. Later, this work presents a specific use case
developed  for  the  Universitat  Oberta  de  Catalunya,  which  is  an  online  university.  An  automatic
evaluation tool is proposed that allows the student to evaluate himself anytime and receive instant
feedback. This tool is a web-based platform, and it has been designed for engineering subjects (i.e.,
with  math  symbols  and  formulas)  in  Catalan  and  Spanish.  Particularly,  the  technique  used  for
automatic assessment is latent semantic analysis. Although the experimental framework from the use
case is quite challenging, results are promising.

Keywords: E-learning; automatic test assessment; web platform; latent semantic analysis

Introduction

Assessment in education is the process of obtaining, organizing, and presenting information about
what  and  how the  student  is  learning.  Assessment  uses  several  techniques  during  the  teaching-
learning process, and it is especially useful when evaluating open-answer questions since they allow
teachers  to  better  understand  the  assimilation  of  the  student  in  the  subject.  In  some cases,  for
instance, students with high punctuation in closed-answer tests report subjacent conceptual errors
when being interviewed by a teacher (Tyner, 1999).

During the last years, the use of a computer for assessment purposes has substantially increased. The
aims of using computer assessment include achieving and consolidating the advantages of a system
with the following characteristics (Brown et al., 1999): first, to reduce the professors’ workload by
automating  part  of  the  student  evaluation  task;  second,  to  provide  the  students  with  detailed
information on their learning period in a more efficient way than traditional evaluation; and, finally, to
integrate the assessment culture into the students’ daily work in an e-learning environment. In fact,
nowadays one of the most crucial  things in assessment is feedback, so assessment of learning is
generally intended to measure learning outcomes and report those outcomes to students (and not only
to the system or teacher).

Automatic evaluation for e-learning using latent semantic anal... http://www.irrodl.org/index.php/irrodl/artic\ le/view/1389/2454

1 of 8 18/09/16 11:30



SUBSCRIBE TO MAILING LIST

Subscribe

Select Language ▼

INFORMATION
For Readers
For Authors
For Reviewers
For Librarians

ABOUT THE AUTHORS

Mireia Farrús
http://www.upf.edu/
Universitat Pompeu Fabra
Spain

Department of Information and
Communication Technologies

Marta R. Costa-jussà
Barcelona Media Innovation Center
Spain

Department of Voice and Language

Post-doc researcher

JOURNAL HELP
OPEN JOURNAL SYSTEMS

The  current  paper  aims  at  analysing  some  of  the  most  state-of-the-art  assessment  systems  in
education and presents a specific use case developed for the Universitat Oberta de Catalunya. Some
examples of existing e-learning platforms are given. Next the use of latent semantic analysis as a
semantic analyser algorithm of related documents is briefly described and explained in the context of
assessment tasks. Then the authors present the above-mentioned use case, which takes advantage of
latent semantic analysis in order to obtain the evaluation results. Finally, conclusions are shown.

E-learning Assessment Platforms

Some papers in the literature are oriented to automated essay-scoring research. The most relevant
ones can be found in Miller (2003), Shermis and Burstein (2003), Hidekatsu et al. (2007), and Hussein
(2008). However, studies covering automatic essay scoring in engineering subjects are limited (to the
best of our knowledge), though not inexistent. In Quah et al. (2009), for instance, the authors use a
Support Vector Machine to build a prototype system, which is able to evaluate equations and short
answers. The system extracts textual and mathematical data from input files in the form of distinct
words for text and for mathematical equations using equation trees based on MathTree format. Then
the  system learns  how to  evaluate  them,  based  on  grades  given  at  the  beginning,  learning  the
evaluation scheme and evaluating the subsequent scripts automatically.

Many portals can be currently found online. To overview some examples, for instance, the Online
Learning  and  Collaboration  Services  (OLCS,  http://www.olcs.lt.vt.edu)  from  VirginiaTech  provides
system  administration,  support,  and  training  for  scholars,  online  course  evaluations,  and  other
instructional  software.  The  ViLLE  Collaborative  Educational  Tool  (http://ville.cs.utu.fi/)  is  a  full
environment capable of doing many kinds of assessment, where people can benefit of developing their
own material instead of developing a new Web site. In addition, it becomes easier to get feedback on
the material if done in collaboration with other teachers.

Another example of a learning platform is the Khan Academy (http://www.khanacademy.org), which
has created a generic framework for building exercises. This framework, together with the exercises
themselves, can be used completely independently of the Khan Academy application. The framework
exists in two components: an HTML markup for specifying exercises and a plug-in for generating a
usable and interactive exercise from the HTML markup.

Furthermore,  some  systems  can  be  found  specifically  for  math  exercises.  STACK
(http://www.stack.bham.ac.uk),  for  instance,  is  an  open-source  system  for  computer-aided
assessment in mathematics and related disciplines, with emphasis on formative assessment. And some
systems such as restructured text (http://docutils.sourceforge.net/rst.html) provide techniques that
can be used to develop new materials.

Latent Semantic Analysis in E-Learning

The task of evaluating a document in our education context implies judging the semantic content of
such a document. To this end, latent semantic analysis (LSA), also known as latent semantic indexing,
a technique that analyses a semantic relationship between a set of documents and the terms they
contain (Hofmann, 1999), has been successfully applied in multiple natural language processing areas
such as cross-language information retrieval (Dumais et al. 1996), cross-language sentence matching
(Banchs & Costa-jussà, 2010), and statistical machine translation (Banchs & Costa-jussà, 2011).

The aim of LSA is to analyse documents in order to find their underlying meaning or concepts. The
technique arises from the problem of how to compare words to find relevant documents since what we
actually want to do is compare concepts and meanings that are behind the words, instead of the words
themselves. In LSA, both words and documents are mapped into a concept space. It is in this space
where the comparison is performed. This space is created by means of the well-known singular value
decomposition (SVD) technique, which is a factorization of a real or a complex matrix (Greenacre,
2011).

In the specific  area of essay assessment,  LSA has shown promising results in content analysis of
essays (Landauer et al., 1997), where LSA-based measures were closely related to human judgments
in predicting how much the student will learn from the text (Wolfe et al., 2000; Rehder, et al., 2000)
and in grading essay answers (Kakkakonen et al., 2005). Other educational applications are intelligent
tutoring systems which provide help for students (Wiemer- Hastings et al., 1999, Foltz et al., 1999b)
and assessment of summaries (Steinhart, 2000). In this context, LSA has been applied to a variety of
languages such as essays written in English (Wiemer-Hastings & Graesser, 2000), in French (Lemaire
and Dessus, 2001), and in Finnish (Kakkakonen et al, 2005) since LSA is language independent. All
these studies show that,  although it  does not take into account word ordering, LSA is capable of
capturing significant portions of the meaning not only of individual words but also of whole passages
such as sentences, paragraphs, and short essays. That is why we have chosen LSA in order to compare
the semantic similarity of documents in the concept space (Pérez et al., 2006).

Particularly, in this work and differently from the previous literature, we investigate if  LSA can be
applied for e-assessment of mathematical  essays. Additionally,  experiments are performed both in
Catalan and Spanish. LSA is integrated as follows. The documents containing the responses of the
students are compared with one or more reference documents containing the correct answers created
by the teachers. Then such semantic comparison of the students’ and reference documents will allow
teachers to generate an approximate evaluation of the students. For the document comparison and/or
document  retrieval,  documents  are  typically  transformed  into  a  suitable  representation,  usually  a
vector-space model (Salton, 1989). A document is represented as a vector, in which each dimension
corresponds to a separate term. If a term occurs in the document, its value in the vector is non-zero.
Several ways of computing these values, also known as (term) weights, have been developed. One of
the best known schemes is tf-idf (term frequency inverse document frequency) weighting. The tf-idf
weight  defines  statistically  how  important  a  word  is  to  a  document  in  a  collection.  Such  a
representation  is  known  to  be  noisy  and  sparse.  That  is  why  in  order  to  obtain  more  efficient
vector-space  representations,  space  reduction  techniques  are  applied  (Deerwester  et  al.,  1990;

Automatic evaluation for e-learning using latent semantic anal... http://www.irrodl.org/index.php/irrodl/artic\ le/view/1389/2454

2 of 8 18/09/16 11:30



Hofmann, 1999: Sebastiani, 2002), so that the new reduced space is supposed to capture semantic
relations among the documents in the collection. Figure 1 shows a schematic representation of the use
of latent semantic analysis for automatic essay scoring.

As a final step, a cosine distance similarity measure among each exam and its solution in the reduced
space is calculated, obtaining a score that shows how a particular set of exams is similar in semantics
with their corresponding solution.

The UOC’s Use Case

This section addresses the creation of a free-text assessment tool through the Internet, allowing the
automatic student assessment of the Universitat Oberta de Catalunya (Open University of Catalonia,
UOC).  The  main  characteristics  of  the  university  assessment  system and  the  developed  tool  are
described in the following subsections.

The Universitat Oberta de Catalunya

The UOC is an online university based in Barcelona with more than 54,000 students. Over 2,000 tutors
and  faculty  work  together,  and  administrative  staff  of  around  500  provide  services  to  all  these
students. The students follow a continuous assessment system, which is carried out online throughout
the semester. Although this system is successfully used to complete their studies, one of the main
problems  is  the  growing  number  of  students  each  year,  which  makes  the  task  of  marking  their
continuous assessment tedious and time-consuming. Likewise, more external  tutors are needed to
carry out this task, which makes it difficult to come to agreement on criteria.

The Assessment Tool

The  tool  developed  at  the  UOC aims  to  provide  an  automatic  assessment  of  assignments  in  the
engineering subjects by using the latent semantic analysis technique, following the work carried out by
Miller (2003), where the application of LSA to automated essay scoring is examined and compared to
earlier statistical methods for assessing essay quality. The implementation of LSA is done using JAVA.

The web-based free-text assessment tool allows the professors to design as many evaluation tests as
they want, with as many questions as they consider necessary for the evaluation. On the one hand, for
each question, the professor associates several correct-answer models in order to generate enough
reference answers to guarantee that the automatic evaluation system works correctly. On the other
hand,  the  web-based platform allows students  to  realise  as  many evaluation tests  as  they want,
generating, after each test realization, a report including the evaluation results of every individual
question as well as the overall results. Moreover, the tool provides the students with the possibility of
comparing the reference answers generated by the professor with their own answers in order to give
detailed feedback and improve their learning process. The platform also includes a text editor that
allows  inserting  formulas  both  in  the  statements  and  in  the  answers  with  the  JavaScript  plug-in
MathML (Su et al., 2006).

Evaluation Experiments

In this section we describe the experimental framework in our case study. We include subsections that
particularly describe the working framework, the web interface, the assessment experiments, and the
results obtained.

Working framework.

The main objective of the tool  is to help teachers in their evaluation tasks on a large number of

Automatic evaluation for e-learning using latent semantic anal... http://www.irrodl.org/index.php/irrodl/artic\ le/view/1389/2454

3 of 8 18/09/16 11:30



students. These first experiments involve a controlled and relatively small number of students in order
to establish the groundwork for further and more extensive experiments. The application framework
covers the students in two consecutive semesters (with 54 and 70 registered students, respectively) of
a  single  UOC’s  subject  called  Circuit  Theory,  a  core  subject  belonging  to  the  first  year  of  UOC’s
Telecommunications Engineering Grade.

Apart  from the single  final  evaluation that  takes place at  the end of  the semester,  the subject’s
assessment  model  contains  four  different  single  continuous  assessment  assignments  (CAAs)
distributed  over  the  course  of  the  semester  and  a  single  practical  work  that  includes  computer
simulation exercises, structured as follows. The first three CAAs are made up of two different sections:
a short question section and an exercises section. The fourth and last CAA contains only an exercises
section. More specifically, the short question sections consist of a set of 5-6 questions about very
concrete issues. Each of these questions is provided with four possible answers, where only one of
them is correct, in such a way that the students have to specify the correct answer and give reasons
for their choices. Due to the technical nature of the subject matter, mathematical equations usually
appear  in  the  wording  of  both  questions  and  answers  as  well  as  in  the  students’  corresponding
justifications.

Within this context, the short questions section of the first three CAAs have been chosen as a specific
application framework to perform the automatic evaluation experiments, due to the suitability of the
structure and length of both the question and answers as well as to the nature (short text plus a few
mathematical equations) of the justifications the students have to provide.

Web interface.

The automatic test assessment system is presented as a web platform, where access can be realized
from two different profiles: the teacher and the student. The main task of the teacher is to provide
questions and correct reference answers. Thus, a teacher can realise two different actions for each
subject: to create a new test and to modify an existing one. In order to create a new test, the teacher
must first define the following attributes: the name of the test, the subject in which it belongs, the
position within the test set of the subject, and a brief description (Figure 2a). Once these attributes
have been inserted, the teacher can register the empty test in the database. Then teachers can insert
as many questions as they wish in the test. For each new question, the following attributes need to be
completed: (a) statement, (b) maximum possible mark (c) minimum mark to pass the question, (d)
question  difficulty,  and  (e)  language  of  the  statement  (Figure  2b).  Moreover,  a  set  of  reference
answers is associated with each question. Additionally, the teacher can consult the obtained results as
well as the answers given by the students.

Once authenticated, the students can perform the following actions: (1) evaluating themselves by
realising a test, (2) checking the history of the realised tests, and (3) consulting the obtained marks as
well as the maximum and minimum marks defined by the teacher.

In order to evaluate themselves, students are shown a list of alphabetically ordered subjects in which
they can realise the evaluation by choosing a subject and selecting the test they wish to start with and
the difficulty level. The statement of each question is presented to the students together with their
corresponding mark. The students must answer within a text editor, where they can insert formulas
thanks to a JavaScript plug-in called MathEdit (Su et al., 2006), as seen in Figure 3a. Once the answer
has been written and the test is finished, the system provides a score to the student together with the
obtained marks in each of the questions (see Figure 3b). Likewise, the students can check, for each
question, the answers they wrote as well as the reference questions written by the teacher.

Automatic evaluation for e-learning using latent semantic anal... http://www.irrodl.org/index.php/irrodl/artic\ le/view/1389/2454

4 of 8 18/09/16 11:30



Apart from the realisation of the tests, the students have the possibility of logging into the platform in
order to evaluate their progress. Thus, every student has access to a history in which they can see a
list of completed tests. Once a completed test is chosen, the questions can be seen in detail, including
the answer given by the student, the obtained mark, the maximum and minimum marks defined by
the teacher, and the reference answers used by the automatic evaluation system in order to make the
corrections.

Assessment experiments.

This  section  describes  the  automatic  evaluation  performed  over  the  continuous  assessment
assignments  of  the  students.  The  experiments  carried  out  used  the  CAAs  from  two  consecutive
semesters, S1 and S2, in which 54 and 70 students were registered, respectively. Each semester
included a set of three different CAAs (CAA1, CAA2, and CAA3). The data were tokenized, lowercased.
The 20 most frequent words were discarded. As follows, we describe the procedure for treating the set
of solutions with LSA.

Compute N solutions in terms of tf-idf:1. 

a) Extract vocabulary

b) Each solution is a vector of M dimensions

Matrix solution N*M2. 
Compute SVD3. 
Select L singular values4. 

Then, for each student answer the procedure is as follows:

Vectorise the answer in terms of tf-idf, use the vocabulary of the set of solutions. We’ve got a
vector of dimension M.

1. 

Project the vector into the reduced space.2. 
Compute the similarity of this reduced space vector with each solution. We keep the maximum
distance.

3. 

The material used in the analysis presented three main problems.

Format files. The students’ CAAs are delivered in many different formats, although they are
mainly in PDF, Word, and Open Office Writer. Some of them are even scanned documents pasted
as image files in Word or Writer documents. Therefore, not all the CAAs can be easily
transformed into TXT format to be treated properly. Consequently PDF documents and all those
documents containing image files were removed from the original set of files. Table 1 shows, for
each semester, the number of registered students, the number of original documents, and the
number of used documents after removing PDF documents and documents with pasted images.
The table also shows the vocabulary for each CAA. As can be seen, the vocabulary size is not
correlated with the number of CAAs, so the vocabulary content of the CAAs varies largely among
each set.

1. 

Mathematical formulation. Given that we are using a bag-of-words approach, the formulation
extracted from Open Office documents was coded in MathML (Mathematical Markup Language),
while the formulation extracted from Word documents was not, which made a big difference
between CAAs regarding the final vocabulary.

2. 

Language. The students submitted the CAAs in both the Catalan and Spanish languages. In this
case, we assumed that the method presented in the current paper is able to take advantage of
the vocabulary that is language independent, such as the mathematical variables.

3. 

Results.

In order to carry out the preliminary assessment experiments, CAA1 and CAA2 from semester S1 were
used  as  development  material,  which  allowed  concluding  that  the  best  rank  reduction  in  latent
semantic analysis was five.

Automatic evaluation for e-learning using latent semantic anal... http://www.irrodl.org/index.php/irrodl/artic\ le/view/1389/2454

5 of 8 18/09/16 11:30



The results are shown in terms of the correlation obtained between automatic and human evaluations.
We define  human evaluation  as  the  assessment  made by the  teacher  in  a  traditional  way,  while
automatic evaluation is defined as a computer-based assessment given by the methodology proposed
in the current work (i.e., the quantifications obtained automatically using latent semantic analysis and
the cosine distance).

Thus, by using the latent semantic analysis, automatic evaluations were obtained for each student,
CAA, and semester. Then the correlations between automatic and human evaluations were computed
for  each  semester  and  CAA  collection.  The  correlation  results  obtained  are  reported  in  Table  2
(correlation column), together with the statistical significance of the correlation results (p column).

As can be seen from the table, in statistically significant results (i.e., where p < 0.05), the correlation
varies from 52% to 69% (see CAA1 and CAA2 from semester S2). Although these results are lower
than those presented in Miller (2003), they are promising given that we are dealing with a complete
textual subject, but with a subject containing a considerable number of mathematical formulas. The
rest of the results (S1 and CAA3 from S2) are not statistically significant.

On the one hand, we must take into account that the reference answers were written in Catalan by the
teachers, while the students could choose whether to answer the tests in Catalan or Spanish, so the
language of the tests was not the same in all  the students’  CAAs. On the other hand, unlike the
students’ CAAs, all the reference solutions were available in Writer format. Since only the mathematical
formulas of  the Writer  documents were transformed into MathML,  there was also disparity  in  the
formulas in each CAA collection.

In order to see how these disparities could have affected the results, we computed the percentage of
CAAs in each set that satisfied the following two requirements at the same time (i.e., the same two
characteristics satisfied by the reference solutions).

The formulas were coded in MathML.1. 
The students answered in the Catalan language.2. 

The percentage of CAAs satisfying both characteristics are shown in Table 2 in the third column of
every CAA result. It can be seen that the two statistically significant results with a correlation over
50% (i.e., CAA1 and CAA2 from semester S2) correspond to those results in which the codification and
the language used is the same as the reference solutions in more than 25% of the cases. Therefore, it
could  be  stated  from the  results  that  the  correlation  between  human  and  automatic  evaluations
depends on the coherence of both the mathematical codification and the language used in the tests.

For example, from CAA1 and S1, one answer to a short question to be evaluated was, “Si introduïm un
senyal sinusoidal en un circuit, la resposta forçada serà una sinusoide que l’entrada amplificada per
H(s)” (in English, “If we introduce a sinusoidal signal in a circuit, the forced response is a sinusoid
amplified by the input H(s)”). The answer was, “La resposta del sistema és una senyal sinusoidal de la
mateixa freqüència amplificada per H(s)” (in English, “The system response is a sinusoidal signal of the
same frequency amplified by H(s)”). There is only a detail de la mateixa freqüència (in English, the
same frequency) which is not present in the student answer. This answer is ranked by the teacher as
an 8 and by the system as a 9.

To conclude the presented results, it may be interesting to discuss briefly the role played by MathML,
as opposed to the words in the written reports.  At the time of realising the current experiments,
mathematical formulas were merely treated as words. In fact, one of the drawbacks of the current
study is  that  we are dealing with the bag of  words method; therefore,  the word order,  which is
definitely important in the meaning of mathematical formulas, is not taken into account. For instance,
the method does not distinguish between I = V/R and I = R/V. However, since the former is totally
correct, the latter is completely wrong. This is one of the challenges to be solved in future research.

Conclusions

This  paper  has presented an analysis  and a  discussion of  state-of-the-art  assessment  systems in
education.  Additionally,  this  work  shows  a  detailed  case  study  of  an  automatic  correction  tool
embedded as part of virtual classrooms in UOC’s web-based teaching-learning environment in order to
help students’ self-assessment by providing them with instant feedback. Thereby, adult e-learners,
who usually have a lack of time, do not have to await teachers’ assessments to be graded. This tool,
based on a web interface is designed to be used in an online environment, both by the teacher (the
correct  design  and  assessment  tests)  and  student  (the  self-assessed).  The  automatic  evaluation
process  is  based  on  testing  techniques  using  natural  language  processing  and  latent  semantic
processing.

The case study carried out in this paper has had to overcome some problems regarding the available

Automatic evaluation for e-learning using latent semantic anal... http://www.irrodl.org/index.php/irrodl/artic\ le/view/1389/2454

6 of 8 18/09/16 11:30



material, first of which is the existence of a lot of mathematical formulas in the engineering subjects
treated. Although many research works have dealt with automated essay scoring, as far as we are
concerned,  they  have  not  dealt  with  mathematical  language.  Moreover,  the  students’  tests  are
available  in  different  languages  and file  formats,  which  makes  it  even more  difficult  to  treat  the
mathematical formulas by converting them into a homogeneous code.

In  order  to  be  able  to  treat  the  available  material,  PDF  documents  and  those  Word  or  Writer
documents containing pasted images as responses were removed at the beginning. However, we are
aware that this is not the best method to collect the data, and both of them (PDF and image files) will
be dealt with in future research.

Nevertheless, despite the difficulties in the material used, the preliminary experiments have shown
some interesting  results.  After  computing  the  correlation  between  the  automatic  and  the  human
assessment tests it was shown that only two from the six evaluation tests provided correlation greater
than 50% with statistically significant results. These two sets correspond to those set of PACs that
have  more  similarity  with  the  reference  solution  PACs:  The  mathematical  formulas  are  coded  in
MathML, and the students answers were mostly written in the same language.

In automatic essay assessment we would expect a higher correlation. However, we are dealing with a
challenging issue since it does include mathematical symbols and formulas, which makes the current
analysis  more  difficult.  Therefore,  although  for  the  time  being  the  correlation  results  are  not
satisfactory,  they  have  set  a  starting  point  that  allows  us  to  work  with  this  kind  of  material  in
engineering subjects. Thus, future work will focus on improving the format of the materials to give
coherence  to  them  (i.e.,  by  using  the  same  formulation  and  dealing  with  the  language  issue).
Additionally,  we  plan  to  experiment  with  non-linear  space  reduction  such  as  multidimensional
scalability in order to find further semantic similarities.

Acknowledgements

The authors would like to thanks the Universitat Oberta de Catalunya for providing us the materials
and the context needed to develop the current research, and for partially funding this work under the
Teaching Innovation Project number IN-PID 1043. We would like to specially thank Germán Cobo,
David García, Jordi Duran, Francisco Cortés, Lluis Villarejo and Rafael E. Banchs for their support to
this  work.  This  work  has  also  been  partially  funded  by  the  Seventh  Framework  Program of  the
European  Commission  through  the  International  Outgoing  Fellowship  Marie  Curie  Action  (IMTraP-
2011-29951).

References

Banchs,  R.  E.,  &  Costa-jussà,  M.  R.  (2010).  A  non-linear  semantic  mapping technique for  cross-
language  sentence  matching.  Lecture  Notes  in  Computer  Science,  Springer,  7th  International
Conference on Natural Language Processing (IceTAL) (pp. 57-66). Iceland.

Banchs, R. E., & Costa-jussà, M. R. (2011, June). A semantic feature for statistical machine translation.
ACL  HLT:  5th  Workshop  on  Syntax,  Semantics  and  Structure  in  Statistical  Translation  (SSST-5),
Portland.

Brown, S., Race, R., & Bull, J. (1999). Computer-assisted assessment in higher education. Kogan Page.

Deerwester, S., Dumanis, S., Furnas, G.W., Landauer, T.K., & Harshman, R. (1990). Indexing by latent
semantic analysis. Journal of the American Society for Information Science, 41(6), 391-407.

Dumais, S., Landauer, T., & Littman, M. (1996). Automatic cross-linguistic information retrieval using
latent semantic indexing. In SIGIR 1996 Workshop on Cross-Lingual Information Retrieval.

Foltz, P. W., Laham, D., & Landauer, T. K. (1999b). The intelligent essay assessor: Applications to
educational technology. Interactive Multimedia Electronic J. of Computer-Enhanced Learning. Retrieved
from http://imej.wfu.edu/articles/1999/2/04/index.asp

Greenacre,  M.  (2011).  It  had  to  be  U  –  The  SVD song.  Available  from http://www.youtube.com
/watch?v=JEYLfIVvR9I&feature=player_detailpage.

Hidekatsu,  K.,  Kiyoshi,  A.,  Chiharu,  I.,  Nagatomo,  N.,  &  Shinya,  W.  (2007).  Toward  a  software
development model for automatic marking software. Proceedings of the 35th Annual ACM SIGUCCS
Conference on User Services. Orlando, Florida, USA.

Hofmann  (1999).  Probabilistic  latent  semantic  analysis.  Proceedings  of  Uncertainty  in  Artificial
Intelligence, UAI99I (pp. 289-296).

Hussein,  S.  (2008).  Automatic  marking  with  Sakai.  Proceedings  of  the  2008  Annual  Research
Conference of the South African Institute of Computer Scientists and Information Technologists on IT
Research in Developing Countries: Riding the Wave of Technology. Wilderness, South Africa.

Landauer, T. K., Laham, D., Rehder, B., & Schreiner, M. E. (1997). How well can passage meaning be
derived  without  using  word  order?  A  comparison  of  latent  semantic  analysis  and  humans.  In
Proceedings of the 19th Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society. Mawhwah, NJ. Erlbaum.

Lemaire, B., & Dessus, P. (2001). A system to assess the semantic content of student essays. Journal
of Educational Computing Research, 24, 305–320.

Miller, T. (2003). Essay assessment with latent semantic analysis. Journal of Educational Computing
Research, 29(4), 495-512.

Pérez,  D.,  Alfonseca,  E.,  Rodríguez,  P.,  &  Pascual,  I.  (2006).  Willow:  Automatic  and  adaptive
assessment of students free-text answers. In Proceedings of the 22nd International Conference of the

Automatic evaluation for e-learning using latent semantic anal... http://www.irrodl.org/index.php/irrodl/artic\ le/view/1389/2454

7 of 8 18/09/16 11:30



Spanish Society for the Natural Language Processing (SEPLN).

Quah, J.T-S., Lim, L-R., Budi, H., & Lua, K-T. (2009). Towards automated assessment of engineering
assignments.  Proceedings  of  the  2009  International  Joint  Conference  on  Neural  Networks  (pp.
1411-1418). Atlanta, Georgia, USA.

Rehder, B., Schreiner, M. E., Wolfe, M. B., Laham, D. Landauer, T. K., & Kintsch, W. (1998). Using
latent semantic analysis to assess knowledge: Some technical considerations. Discourse Processes, 25,
337-354.

Salton, G. (1989). Automatic text processing: The transformation, analysis and retrieval of information
by computer. Addison-Wesley.

Sebastiani, F. (2002). Machine learning in automated text categorization. ACM Computing Surveys,
34(1), 1–47.

Shermis, M. D., & Burstein, J. C. (2003). Automated essay scoring: A cross-disciplinary perspective.
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Steinhart,  D.  (2000).  Summary  street:  An  LSA  based  intelligent  tutoring  system for  writing  and
revising summaries (Ph.D. thesis). University of Colorado, Boulder, Colorado.

Su,  W.,  Wang,  P.,  Li,  L,.  Li,  G.,  Zhao,  Y.  (2006).  MathEdit,  a  browser-based visual  mathematics
expression  editor.  Proceedings  of  The  11th  Asian  Technology  Conference  in  Mathematics  (pp.
271-279.). Hong Kong.

Tyner, K. (1999). Development of mental representation: Theories and applications. Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.

Wiemer-Hastings,  P.,  Wiemer-Hastings,  K.,  &  Graesser,  A.  (1999).  Approximate  natural  language
understanding  for  an  intelligent  tutor.  In  Proc.  of  the  12th  Int’l  Artificial  Intelligence  Research
Symposium (pp. 172–176). Menlo Park, CA, USA.

Wiemer-Hastings, P., & Graesser, A. (2000). Select-a-kibitzer: A computer tool that gives meaningful
feed-back on student compositions. Interactive Learning Environments, 8, 49–169.

Wolfe, M. B., Schreiner, M. E., Rehder, B., Laham, D., Foltz, P. W., Kintsch, W., & Landauer, T. K.
(1998).  Learning  from  text:  Matching  readers  and  texts  by  latent  semantic  analysis.  Discourse
Processes, 25(2-3), 309-336.

Automatic evaluation for e-learning using latent semantic anal... http://www.irrodl.org/index.php/irrodl/artic\ le/view/1389/2454

8 of 8 18/09/16 11:30


