











































Description of the Chinese-to-Spanish Rule-Based Machine
Translation System Developed using a Hybrid Combination of Human
Annotation and Statistical Techniques

Marta R. Costa-jussà1 and Jordi Centelles
Institute for Infocomm Research, 1 Fusionopolis Way, 138632 Singapore
Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya, C/ Jordi Girona 1-3, 08034 Barcelona
marta.ruiz@upc.edu, jordi.centelles.sabater@alu-etsetb.upc.edu

Two of the most popular Machine Translation (MT) paradigms are rule-based (RBMT) and corpus-based,
which include the statistical systems (SMT). When scarce parallel corpus is available, RBMT becomes
particularly attractive. This is the case of the Chinese-Spanish language pair.

This paper presents the first RBMT system for Chinese to Spanish. We describe a hybrid method for
constructing this system taking advantage of available resources such as parallel corpora that are used to
extract dictionaries and lexical and structural transfer rules.

The final system is freely available on-line and open-source. Although performance lags behind standard
SMT systems for an in-domain test set, the results show that the RBMT’s coverage is competitive and it
outperforms the SMT system in an out-of-domain test set. This RBMT system is available to the general
public, it can be further enhanced and opens up the possibility of creating future hybrid MT systems.

General Terms: Experimentation and Languages

Additional Key Words and Phrases: Rule-based Machine Translation and Statistical Techniques and
Chinese-to-Spanish

ACM Reference Format:
Marta R. Costa-jussà and Jordi Centelles. Description of the Chinese-to-Spanish Rule-Based Machine
Translation System Developed using a Hybrid Combination of Human Annotation and Statistical Tech-
niques ACM TALIP V, N, Article A (January YYYY), 13 pages.
DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/0000000.0000000

1. INTRODUCTION
Chinese and Spanish are two of the most widely-spoken languages in the world and
they are gaining importance in today’s information society. For example, in the ranking
of usage of content languages for websites, Spanish is in the 4th position and Chinese
ranks 5th [Q-SuccessConsulting 2013].

Although communication between the two communities is challenging on both cul-
tural and linguistic levels, there are many shared economic interests. China’s trade
with Latin America grew in 2011, with the top five nations involved being Brazil,
Mexico, Chile, Venezuela and Argentina [IndoAsianNews 2013]. In this sense, Ma-
chine Translation (MT) between the two languages is of clear interest for companies,
tourists, students and politicians. Even though the necessity is obvious, there are not
many Chinese-to-Spanish MT systems available on the Internet. Systems available in

1Currently, visiting Instituto Politècnico Nacional, Mexico

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted
without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that
copies show this notice on the first page or initial screen of a display along with the full citation. Copyrights
for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is per-
mitted. To copy otherwise, to republish, to post on servers, to redistribute to lists, or to use any component
of this work in other works requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Permissions may be requested
from Publications Dept., ACM, Inc., 2 Penn Plaza, Suite 701, New York, NY 10121-0701 USA, fax +1 (212)
869-0481, or permissions@acm.org.
c© YYYY ACM 1539-9087/YYYY/01-ARTA $15.00
DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/0000000.0000000

ACM Transactions on Asian Language Information Processing, Vol. V, No. N, Article A, Publication date: January YYYY.



A:2

Google Translate and Bing are corpus-based and these seem to produce translations
through English pivoting to compensate for the lack of Chinese-Spanish parallel cor-
pora.

When it comes to academic research, there have not been many studies on this lan-
guage pair and they are mainly reviewed in [Costa-jussà et al. 2012; Bertoldi et al.
2008] and these studies also rely on the pivoting procedure. Results of such approaches
do not improve the direct system (for the same quantity of data) unless there is a com-
bination of pivot systems. The main drawback of the combination is that the final
system is not efficient. Therefore, corpus-based approaches have been applied to this
language pair but results are not comparable to other language pairs (such as English-
Spanish) because of the limited data available. Furthermore, the linguistic differences
(mainly at the morphological level) between these two languages makes the training
of data-driven systems rather difficult.

1.1. Linguistic Differences between Chinese and Spanish
In fact, Chinese and Spanish are languages with multiple linguistic differences.

At the morphological level, Chinese is an analytical (or “isolating”) language, which
means that it shows a low ratio of morphemes to words; in fact, the correspondence
is nearly one-to-one. Spanish, on the other hand, is a fusional language, meaning
that morphemes (at least one independent morpheme per word) are mixed together
in words with no clear limits.

At the level of syntax, Chinese and Spanish tend to follow the Subject-Verb-Object
pattern and, theoretically, there are not as many long reorderings as would be ex-
pected for language pairs such as Japanese-Spanish. As stated in Cuza et al. [Cuza
et al. 2013] the Chinese-Spanish contrast is particularly evident in anaphorical ele-
ments and the nominal domain. For example, the Spanish clitic/null object alternation
is regulated by features of definiteness and specificity. In contrast, Chinese is a radical
pro-drop, topic-oriented language that does not productively use pronouns, does not
mark for definiteness and specificity in the nominal system, and null objects are iden-
tified by linking to discourse antecedents. Therefore, moving from Chinese to Spanish
may depend more on the abstract meaning of the text than on the words and structure
within it. Additionally, Chinese is a language with a massive number of homonyms
at the lexical and morphemic level [Zhang et al. 2006], making the lexical semantic
disambiguation towards Spanish even harder.

1.2. Motivation
We have shown that there is a need for translation between Chinese and Spanish
(motivated by the global market). We have also mentioned that there are no reliable
MT systems that can help communication between different parties and that trans-
lating from Chinese to Spanish is challenging due to the linguistic differences. Given
this situation, we decided to build a Chinese-to-Spanish Rule-Based Machine Trans-
lation (RBMT) system. This type of system provides a translation based on linguistic
knowledge in contrast to the existing and popular corpus-based approaches. The trans-
lation process is divided in: analysis, transfer and generation. Analysis and generation
mainly cover the morphological variation of the languages, while the transfer phase is
in charge of the syntactic aspects [Hutchins and Sommers 1992]. The main advantages
of RBMT systems are that errors are traceable to the corresponding linguistic rules.

Our linguistic motivations for constructing a Chinese-to-Spanish RBMT are the fol-
lowing ones:

(1) The proposed system can directly tackle the differences in morphology between
Chinese and Spanish by following the analysis and generation steps.

ACM Transactions on Asian Language Information Processing, Vol. V, No. N, Article A, Publication date: January YYYY.



A:3

(2) Reordering from Chinese and Spanish can benefit from the use of manually post-
edited transfer rules.

(3) The RBMT approach is able to exploit the use of linguistic tools that are separately
available for Chinese and Spanish.

The main drawbacks of a RBMT system are that it requires a lot of human dedica-
tion and years of development [Costa-Jussà et al. 2012] and that this type of system
exhibits weaknesses in lexical selection, something which is quite relevant for this
language pair. To overcome these drawbacks, we used the Apertium platform [Forcada
et al. 2011], which makes the process of constructing an RBMT system easier. More-
over, when applying the proposed RBMT approach, we used automatic techniques at
different stages of analysis, generation, and lexical and structural transfer to feed the
system from parallel corpora.

1.3. Paper Contribution and Organization
This paper describes how the Chinese-to-Spanish RBMT system has been developed
under the Apertium open-source platform. The integration was undertaken using the
General Public License (GPU) tools available for the analysis and generation steps
of the languages at hand. Monolingual and bilingual dictionaries have been created
combining human effort together with statistical lexical extraction from parallel cor-
pora. For the transfer phase, rules have been automatically generated from a parallel
corpus using recently developed algorithms [Sánchez-Martı́nez and Forcada 2009a].
These rules have been experimentally validated. This new freely available on-line lan-
guage pair is the first RBMT approach developed for Chinese to Spanish.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents a detailed descrip-
tion of the Chinese-to-Spanish RBMT architecture including the procedure of compil-
ing monolingual and bilingual dictionary procedures as well as the inference of lexical
and structural transfer rules. Section 3 provides a complete evaluation of the system
including a comparison with a standard Statistical Machine Translation (SMT) sys-
tem. Finally, Section 4 discusses the results and draws the final conclusions.

2. RULE-BASED MACHINE TRANSLATION ARCHITECTURE
The general architecture of a RBMT system has been defined previously [Hutchins
and Sommers 1992; Forcada et al. 2011]. However, in most cases, RBMTs have been
developed by private companies. Therefore, the inner workings, strategies and func-
tioning of RBMTs have not been revealed because the private companies commercial-
ize licenses to closed-source systems.

In this section, we describe in detail how we have developed our RBMT system
using the Apertium platform [Forcada et al. 2011] and following similar procedures to
those used in previous studies [Cortés et al. 2012]. Novel aspects of our work include:
(1) a particularly challenging language pair with few bilingual speakers capable of
developing the resources required to compile the target system; and (2) combining
statistical techniques with human annotation.

Figure 1 shows the representative block diagram modules of the RBMT system.
Human annotation was supported by two bilingual English-Spanish annotators and

one trilingual Chinese-English-Spanish annotator, who was in charge of checking each
step.

2.1. System Architecture
The system is based on the Apertium platform [Forcada et al. 2011] which is a
free/open-source platform for shallow transfer MT. As well as the platform, the lin-
guistic data for the MT systems are also available under the terms of the GNU-GPL.

ACM Transactions on Asian Language Information Processing, Vol. V, No. N, Article A, Publication date: January YYYY.



A:4

Fig. 1. Block diagram of the RBMT modules. Inside the cercle, the ones that have been built.

The platform was originally designed for the Romance languages of Spain, so the
targeted language pair deviates from the original objectives. However, in practice, sta-
tistical techniques were used to build our system, and we have not changed its archi-
tecture.

Development to date has consisted of:

— feeding monolingual and bilingual dictionaries, to extend coverage, with statistical
methods,

— feeding monolingual and bilingual dictionaries, to extend coverage, with human an-
notation,

— filtering and cleaning monolingual and bilingual dictionaries to make them consis-
tent,

— computing lexical selection rules by automatically extracting them from parallel
corpora,

— computing structural transfer rules by combining manual and automatic proce-
dures.

Coverage (i.e. the percentage of translated words versus the total number of words
used) is defined as the primary measure to evaluate the system.

This first development track took place in over the course of just six months, in con-
trast to the length of time required to develop classical RBMT systems. Most of the
effort (around 80%) revolved around feeding the monolingual and bilingual dictionar-
ies with human annotation. The key point here is that our system has been developed
using a hybrid approach. Although the system achieves competitive results in terms of

ACM Transactions on Asian Language Information Processing, Vol. V, No. N, Article A, Publication date: January YYYY.



A:5

coverage, it is still under construction. The latest version of the system is available for
downloading at the Apertium development site2.

2.2. Bilingual Dictionary
The bilingual dictionary was computed and principally constructed following two dif-
ferent methods.

The first involves the Yellow Bridge resource3. This website, as mentioned by the
authors, is the premier guide to Chinese language and culture for English speakers
and it provides comprehensive tools for learning the Chinese language. In particular, it
gives a list of Chinese words classified following grammatical categories (i.e. adjectives,
adverbs, conjunctions, interjections, measure words, nouns, numerals, onomatopoeia,
particles, prefixes, prepositions, pronouns, question words, suffixes, time words and
different types of verbs). For each category, the words have corresponding translations
into English. Our work consisted of translating English into Spanish and this was done
by an English-Spanish expert. To double-check the translations provided, each word
was translated using another on-line dictionary4 and Google Translate. After this, the
bilingual Chinese-Spanish entries were added to the bilingual dictionary. This proce-
dure allowed several hundreds of numerals, conjunctions, adverbs, pronouns, determi-
nants, adjectives, 3,000 nouns and 2,000 verbs to be added.

The second procedure is statistical. The parallel corpus of the United Nations Gen-
eral Assembly Resolutions (UN) [Rafalovitch and Dale 2009] was aligned at the word
level by using the standard GIZA++ [Och and Ney 2003] software. Alignment was
performed from source to target and target to source. Symmetrization was done us-
ing intersection because this is expected to provide the most reliable links. Then we
extracted phrases of length one meaning that we extracted translation from word-to-
word. The dictionary was manually filtered to eliminate incorrect entries. This proce-
dure allowed around 3,500 words to be added to the dictionaries. As a result of the two
procedures, the bilingual dictionary now contains approximately 9,000 words.

2.3. Chinese Monolingual Dictionary
The Chinese monolingual dictionary was extracted from the source part of the bilin-
gual dictionary. Additionally, it was filtered with regular expressions to avoid repeated
entries.

From a morphological point of view, as mentioned earlier, Chinese is an isolating
language. In practice, this means that words (or symbols) cannot be segmented in sub-
morphemes. In this sense, no morphological analysis is required. However, the main
challenge of Chinese at this level is that most of the time symbols appear concatenated
and sentences are not segmented into words as is typical in other languages. Therefore,
Chinese must be segmented. We considered using popular tools, such as the Stanford
Segmenter [Chang et al. 2008], but this is written in Java, so it was difficult to in-
tegrate into Apertium. For this reason, we used the ZhSeg [Dyer 2013] programmed
in C++. We evaluated the performance of this segmenter in comparison to the left-to-
right longest-match (LRLM) strategy, which is the parsing strategy used by Apertium
in analysis mode. This procedure reads tokens from left to right, matching the longest
sequence that is in the dictionary (like “greedy” matching of regular expressions). Both
ZhSeg and LRLM were compared using a manually constructed segmented test set of
456 words as a reference. The Word Error Rate (WER) measured [McCowan et al.
2004] for the ZhSeg was 16.56% and 16.89% for LRLM. Given that results were com-

2http://sourceforge.net/projects/
3http://www.yellowbridge.com/chinese/chinese-parts-of-speech.php
4http://www.chinese-tools.com/

ACM Transactions on Asian Language Information Processing, Vol. V, No. N, Article A, Publication date: January YYYY.



A:6

parable, we decided to use the Apertium morphological analyzer, which applies the
LRLM strategy. All finite-state tools in Apertium use the LRLM strategy.

It is mandatory that the monolingual and bilingual dictionaries are coherent, mean-
ing that they should have the same entries. Both dictionaries were cleaned up with
different regular expressions. It is therefore necessary to ensure that there are no
situations where a word appears in the monolingual dictionary which is not in the
bilingual dictionary, and vice versa. In order to check this out, we used a testvoc. As
mentioned in the Apertium documentation5, a testvoc is literally a test of vocabulary.
At the most basic level, this just expands the monolingual dictionary, and runs each
possibly analyzed lexical form through all the translation stages to see that for each
possible input, a sensible translation is generated in the target language.

2.4. Spanish Generation
The generation of Spanish was taken directly from the Apertium repository. Given that
this has been developed over several years, examples of earlier publications explaining
Spanish generation can be found in [Armentano-Oller et al. 2006; Corbı́-Bellot et al.
2005]. Basically, it consists of two Apertium modules: the morphological generator and
the post-generator. The morphological generator delivers a surface (inflected) form for
each transferred word and for each lemma and part-of-speech tag it is able to generate
the final form. The post-generator performs orthographic operations such as contrac-
tions.

2.5. Lexical Selection
Lexical selection is very important in any type of MT system. If the lexical module is
not implemented, Apertium deals with translation ambiguity by using multi-word ex-
pressions encoded in the system’s dictionaries as described in previous studies [Brandt
et al. 2011]. In most systems, for any given source word, the most frequent, or most
general translation is presented. Obviously, this is not a desirable situation as it poses
a translation problem: in most cases the correct translation depends on the context.

In this work, we used the procedure proposed in [Tyers 2013] which tries to learn
lexical selection rules directly from a parallel corpus. The procedure is as follows: the
source and target corpus are morphologically analyzed. Then, the parallel corpus is
aligned at the word level. The source corpus is run through the lexical-transfer stage,
which generates three outputs: the source and target tagged corpus and the possible
translations of the source words. At the same time, sentence pairs for which at least
one lexically ambiguous source word is aligned to a word in the target (also found in the
bilingual dictionary) are extracted from the parallel corpus. For each of these extracted
sentence pairs, n-grams of context around the ambiguous source word(s), belonging
to the categories of adjective, noun and verb, are extracted. From these n-grams we
extract relative frequencies by counting. If a possible given translation appears aligned
to a word in a given context more frequently than other possible translations, then a
rule is extracted. The rule basically selects the most frequently aligned translation in
that same context over other translations. This method enabled 3,400 lexical rules to
be extracted.

2.6. Transfer Rules
Structural transfer rules were extracted by combining two procedures: manual and
statistical.

The manual procedure consisted of translating a source text and contrasting the
output translation, the source and the reference. From this observation, manual pat-

5http://wiki.apertium.org/wiki/Testvoc

ACM Transactions on Asian Language Information Processing, Vol. V, No. N, Article A, Publication date: January YYYY.



A:7

terns were extracted in order to design a rule that could cover any necessary modifi-
cations. Following this procedure, 28 intrasyntagms and 34 intersyntagms rules were
extracted. The main difference is that the former rules modify within a syntagm and
the latter rules modify between different syntagms. An example of a handwritten rule
for the first level is as follows:

< rule comment = ”RULE : adj nom” >
< pattern >

< pattern− itemn = ”adj”/ >
< pattern− itemn = ”nom”/ >

< /pattern >
< action >
< call −macron = ”f − concord2” >

< with− parampos = ”2”/ >
< with− parampos = ”1”/ >

< /call −macro >
< out >

< chunkname = ”j n”case = ”caseF irstWord” >
< tags >

< tag >< lit− tagv = ”SN”/ >< /tag >
< tag >< clip pos = ”2”side = ”tl”part = ”gen”/ >< /tag >
< tag >< clip pos = ”2”side = ”tl”part = ”nbr”/ >< /tag >
< tag >< lit− tagv = ”p3”/ >< /tag >

< /tags >
< lu >

< clip pos = ”2”side = ”tl”part = ”whole”/ >
< /lu >
< b pos = ”1”/ >

< lu >
< clip pos = ”1”side = ”tl”part = ”lem”/ >
< clip pos = ”1”side = ”tl”part = ”a adj”/ >
< clip pos = ”1”side = ”tl”part = ”gen”/ >
< clip pos = ”1”side = ”tl”part = ”nbr”/ >

< /lu >
< /chunk >

< /out >
< /action >

< /rule >

This rule reorders adjective + noun into noun + adjective. Moreover, it ensures that
the number and gender of the noun and the adjective agree. In order to do the latter,
we call the f concord2 macro function. This allows forced agreement in terms of gender
and number. Notice that these are first level rules (t1x), meaning that they work within
syntagms.

For a statistical procedure, we can use the example of [Sánchez-Martı́nez and For-
cada 2009b]. This consists of aligning at word level, parallel corpora aligned at sen-
tence level; extracting alignment templates and applying a set of restrictions derived
from the bilingual dictionary of the RBMT system. Word alignment is done using stan-
dard statistical methods, in particular GIZA++ in the source to target and target to
source direction and symmetrizing using the refined intersection method [Och and
Ney 2003]. Alignment templates are extracted as detailed in [Och and Ney 2004]. Fi-
nally, restrictions are obtained from the RBMT system’s bilingual dictionary where the

ACM Transactions on Asian Language Information Processing, Vol. V, No. N, Article A, Publication date: January YYYY.



A:8

inferred transfer rules are integrated. These restrictions explicitly ensure that the in-
flection information of the translation that is changed from one language to the other
is coded.

A more recent statistical procedure is the extension of the first procedure mentioned
above [Sánchez-Cartagena 2014]. In this case, the study allows more general rules
and exploits the information contained in the bilingual phrases to decide, in a context-
dependent manner, the level of generalization, i.e. the morphological attributes to be
removed from the word classes and the lexical words. This approach is the one we have
used in this study and which allowed us to extract 100 rules.

Finally, manual and automatic rules are combined together by giving preference
to the manual rules. In case no manual rule is applicable, then the system uses an
automatic rule (when available).

3. EVALUATION FRAMEWORK
This section explains the evaluation framework for analyzing the quality of the de-
scribed Chinese-to-Spanish RBMT system. We present the data used both for training
statistical techniques and testing. Then, we detail how the baseline SMT system was
built. Finally, we report figures for coverage and other relevant MT quality measures.
Note that coverage was computed using the available Apertium script6.

3.1. Data
As far as we know, and as discussed in [Costa-jussà et al. 2012], four parallel corpora
are available for the Chinese–Spanish language pair: BTEC (Basic Travel Expression
Corpus), the Holy Bible, the KDE (K Desktop Environment, which is available from
the OPUS project7) and the UN. The first was used in the 2008 IWSLT and complete
experiments of pivot strategies are reported in works such as [Bertoldi et al. 2008].
The Holy Bible was used for similar purposes in [Henrı́quez Q. et al. 2010]. In this
study, we decided to use the UN corpus because it is freely accessible, it uses a more
general vocabulary and it is the largest one.

Table I shows the main statistics for all the corpora used once divided for experi-
mentation. Additionally, we had another development corpus called NEWS (extracted
from the web8,9) for checking the evolution of the RBMT system. This corpus was
monolingual, which is enough when checking the coverage. Finally, we utilised a small
corpus developed in-house for the transportation and hospitality domains.

Table I. Corpus Statistics used for this research (all figures are given in thousands)

Dataset Domain Language Sentences Words Vocabulary
Train UN Chinese 58 1,700 17

Spanish 58 2,300 20
Dev UN Chinese 1 33.0 3

Spanish 1 43.4 5
NEWS Chinese - 1.6 0.7

Spanish - - -
Test UN Chinese 0.5 14.6 2.5

Spanish 0.5 17.9 3.1
IN-HOUSE Chinese 0.5 3.2 1.9

Spanish 0.5 3.2 1.1

6http://wiki.apertium.org/wiki/Calculating coverage
7http://opus.lingfil.uu.se/
8http://politics.people.com.cn/n/2013/0709/c1001-22134594.html
9http://finance.people.com.cn/n/2013/0722/c1004-22275982.html

ACM Transactions on Asian Language Information Processing, Vol. V, No. N, Article A, Publication date: January YYYY.



A:9

3.2. Statistical Machine Translation System
In order to compare our system, we built a standard phrase-based SMT system. The
basic idea was to segment the given source sentences s into segments of one or more
words, then translate each source segment using a bilingual phrase obtained from the
training corpus and, finally, compose the target sentence from these phrase transla-
tions. Further description of the theory behind the baseline system can be found in
previous works [Koehn et al. 2003].

Our system was built using revision 4075 of the MOSES system [Koehn et al. 2007].
We used the default MOSES parameters, which include the grow-diagonal-final-and
word alignment symmetrization, the lexicalized reordering, relative frequencies, lexi-
cal weights and the phrase bonus for the translation model (with phrases up to length
10), a 5-gram language model using Kneser-Ney smoothing and a word penalty model.
Therefore, 14 different features are combined. The language model was built using
SRILM [Stolcke 2002]. Optimization was carried out using MERT [Och 2003]. For
word alignment we used GIZA++, as mentioned earlier in this article.

3.3. Automatic Results
MT systems (and particularly RBMT ones) may be evaluated in terms of coverage.
We used texts from different domains to perform the coverage evaluation. Table II
shows the coverage results of the RBMT system for the development and test data sets
described in Section 3.1. The coverage of the SMT system is also shown. The coverage
of the SMT system is higher in the UN corpus because this test corpus is from the
same domain (in-domain) as the training corpus. For the other corpora (NEWS and
IN-HOUSE), which are out-of-domain, the RBMT system doubles the coverage of the
SMT system.

Table II. Coverage results.

Dataset Domain Words Translations Coverage (%) SMT
DEV NEWS 1,651 1,465 88.7 42.1
TEST UN 14,608 12,080 82.7 92.1

IN-HOUSE 3,637 2,982 82.0 47.3

In addition to evaluating the coverage, we also wanted to show the quality of the
translation in terms of BLEU [Papineni et al. 2002], WER and PER [McCowan et al.
2004], ROUGE [Lin and Och 2004] and METEOR [Lavie and Agarwal 2007], which
are standard measures used to evaluate SMT. Evaluation was undertaken using the
ASIYA toolkit [Gonzàlez et al. 2012].

Table III shows the results for the different systems. RBMT is the baseline system,
it does not include lexical rules, and only uses manually written structural rules. The
next system (+LexicalTransfer) adds statistically extracted lexical rules, as explained
in Section 2.5. The system in the third row adds the automatic structural rules ex-
tracted to the manual structural rules, as explained in Section 2.6. Finally, the results
for the SMT system are also shown.

We see that both adding lexical and structural rules extracted statistically from
parallel corpora increases the performance of the RBMT system in all measures in
the UN test set, which makes sense since automatic rules where extracted with the
UN training corpus from Table I.

When testing the improvements in the out-of-domain test sets, we see that the auto-
matically extracted lexical and structural rules improve the performance of the trans-
lation system in terms of PER, METEOR and ROUGE. Although the translation
quality is quite low, in this case, the rule-based method is capable of outperforming
the statistical system.

ACM Transactions on Asian Language Information Processing, Vol. V, No. N, Article A, Publication date: January YYYY.



A:10

Table III. MT results. In bold the best results.

Dataset System BLEU WER PER METEOR ROUGE
UN RBMT 0.0627 0.8427 0.7151 0.1233 0.3079

+LexicalTransfer 0.0705 0.8401 0.6676 0.1351 0.3079
+StructuralTransfer 0.0796 0.8472 0.6266 0.1539 0.3359
SMT 0.3521 0.6685 0.3227 0.3228 0.5466

IN-HOUSE RBMT 0.0175 0.8322 0.6920 0.0920 0.1863
+LexicalTransfer 0.0164 0.8525 0.6811 0.0962 0.1996
+StructuralTransfer 0.0166 0.8516 0.6750 0.0989 0.2012
SMT 0.0149 0.9156 0.7864 0.0607 0.1103

Table IV shows some examples of the translation outputs when using statistically
extracted lexical transfer rules, and without these rules.

Table IV. Translation examples with statistically
extracted lexical transfer rules or without for the
UN test set.

RBMT régimen
+LexicalTransfer examen mecanismo
Reference mecanismo
RBMT por sexo y raza
+LexicalTransfer género y raza
Reference por género y etnia
RBMT rectora ejecutiva
+LexicalTransfer dirección ejecutiva
Reference dirección ejecutiva

Table V presents some examples of the translation outputs when using statistically
extracted structural transfer rules and without them.

Table V. Translation examples with o rwithout statistically ex-
tracted structural transfer rules for the UN test set.

RBMT convención de viabilidad
+StructuralTransfer viabilidad de los convenios
Reference viabilidad de los convenios
RBMT régimen de expertos
+StructuralTransfer los expertos del régimen
Reference los expertos del régimen
RBMT fruta persona diálogo
+StructuralTransfer diálogo de la fruta
Reference diálogo sobre la fruta

3.4. Human Linguistic Analysis
Finally, a linguistic annotator evaluated 100 random sentences from the in-house test
set using a human linguistic analysis that classified all the translation errors into one
of the five following linguistic levels: orthographic, morphological, lexical, semantic,
and syntactic. Linguistic guidelines for the target language are those presented in
[Farrús et al. 2012] and for each linguistic level involved in the classification, a list of
error subtypes was provided. For the RBMT system we used the best automatic output
from Table III.

Table VI. Linguistic evaluation results.

System ort. mor. lex. sem. syn.
RBMT 0 43 80 52 32
SMT 1 45 181 60 25

ACM Transactions on Asian Language Information Processing, Vol. V, No. N, Article A, Publication date: January YYYY.



A:11

Table VI shows the results of the linguistic analysis and the RBMT system outper-
forms the SMT system at all linguistic levels with the exception of syntax. However,
the differences are not very large apart from at the lexical level. The coverage of both
systems is very different in the out-of-domain test set. Table VII shows some examples
of the outputs.

Table VII. Translation examples comparing the RBMT and SMT
outputs of the IN-HOUSE test set.

RBMT yo sólo cincuenta dólar
SMT cincuenta dólares de los estados unidos . sólo
Reference tengo sólo cincuenta dólares encima .
RBMT tiene qué cerveza ?
SMT la que pueden
Reference qué cerveza toma usted ?
RBMT yo fundamentalmente hace no trabajo .
SMT que no fundamental en toda labor .
Reference no estoy haciendo ningún trabajo .

4. CONCLUSIONS AND FURTHER WORK
The novel aspects covered in this article include: (1) a detailed description of the first
Chinese-to-Spanish open-source RBMT system; and (2) a RBMT system built using
hybrid techniques, combining human knowledge and statistical techniques.

In particular, human expertise has been used to create exhaustive monolingual and
bilingual dictionaries as well as define structural transfer rules. Additional statistical
knowledge complements all the steps mentioned. Moreover, statistical information has
been the only source for the lexical transfer rules. The improvement in the RBMT
system provided by the use of statistical knowledge in the RBMT system has been
evaluated and it has been shown to enhance translation output. In this sense, we
present effective techniques for constructing a RBMT system using hybrid techniques.
Moreover, the RBMT system outperforms the statistical system in the out-of-domain
test.

The new RBMT system and the methods for constructing it have been evaluated
both automatically and through a linguistic human analysis. Moreover, the output of
the lastest version of the RBMT system has been contrasted with a statistical state-
of-the-art system for the out-of-domain test set. The RBMT system outperforms the
SMT system at all linguistic levels except at the syntax level. Clear outperformance is
shown in terms of lexical coverage.

Future work includes improving the RBMT system with new dictionary entries and
more complex transfer rules. Both enhancements can be made combining human and
statistical knowledge. Also, the fact of having two systems based on different principles
in such a challenging language pair may be useful for research in the active field of
hybrid MT. Finally, another RBMT toolkit, such as Matxin [Mayor et al. 2011], could
be applied to solve reordering problems.

Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank the Apertium developers that helped improve the
system and Kheng Hui for his dedication.

This work has been partially supported by the Google Summer of Code, the Sev-
enth Framework Program of the European Commission through the International
Outgoing Fellowship Marie Curie Action (IMTraP-2011-29951), the Spanish Minis-
terio de Economı́a y Competitividad, contract TEC2012-38939-C03-02 as well as from

ACM Transactions on Asian Language Information Processing, Vol. V, No. N, Article A, Publication date: January YYYY.



A:12

the European Regional Development Fund (ERDF/FEDER), and the AGAUR under
the MOOCs 2013 contract.

REFERENCES
C. Armentano-Oller, R. C. Carrasco, A. M. Corb-Bellot, M. L. Forcada, M. Ginestı́-Rosell, S. Ortiz-Rojas,

J. A. Pérez-Ortiz, G. Ramı́rez-Sánchez, F. Sánchez-Martı́nez, and M. A. Scalco. 2006. Open-source
Portuguese-Spanish machine translation. In Computational Processing of the Portuguese Language,
Proceedings of the 7th International Workshop on Computational Processing of Written and Spoken Por-
tuguese, PROPOR 2006, R. Vieira, P. Quaresma, M.d.G.V. Nunes, N.J. Mamede, C. Oliveira, and M.C.
Dias (Eds.). Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 3960. Springer-Verlag, 50–59.

N. Bertoldi, R. Cattoni, M. Federico, and M. Barbaiani. 2008. FBK @ IWSLT-2008. In Proc. of the Interna-
tional Workshop on Spoken Language Translation. Hawaii, USA, 34–38.

M. D Brandt, H. Loftsson, H. Sigurrsson, and F. M. Tyers. 2011. Apertium-IceNLP: A rule-based Icelandic
to English machine translation system . In Proceedings of the 16th Annual Conference of the European
Association of Machine Translation.

P.C. Chang, M. Galley, and C. D. Manning. 2008. Optimizing Chinese word segmentation for machine
translation performance. In Proceedings of the Third Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation
(StatMT ’08). Association for Computational Linguistics, Stroudsburg, PA, USA, 224–232. http://dl.acm.
org/citation.cfm?id=1626394.1626430

A. M. Corbı́-Bellot, M. L. Forcada, S. Ortiz-Rojas, J. A. Pérez-Ortiz, G. Ramı́rez-Sánchez, F. Sánchez-
Martı́nez, I. Alegria, A. Mayor, and K. Sarasola. 2005. An open-source shallow-transfer machine trans-
lation engine for the romance languages of Spain. In Proceedings of the Tenth Conference of the European
Association for Machine Translation. 79–86.

J. P. Martı́nez Cortés, J. O’Regan, and F. M. Tyers. 2012. Free/Open Source Shallow-Transfer Based Machine
Translation for Spanish and Aragonese. In LREC. 2153–2157.

M. R. Costa-Jussà, M. Farrús, J. B. Mariño, and J. A. R. Fonollosa. 2012. Study and Comparison of Rule-
Based and Statistical Catalan-Spanish Machine Translation Systems. Computing and Informatics 31,
2 (2012), 245–270.

M. R. Costa-jussà, C. A. Henrı́quez Q, and R. E. Banchs. 2012. Evaluating indirect strategies for Chinese-
Spanish statistical machine translation. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research 45, 1 (Sept. 2012),
761–780. http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2444851.2444870

A. Cuza, M. Perez-Leroux, and L. Sánchez. 2013. The role of semantic transfer in clitic-drop among Chinese
L1-Spanish L2 bilinguals. Studies in Second Language Acquisition 35, 1 (2013), 93–125.

C. Dyer. 2013. http://code.google.com/p/zhseg/. (2013).
M. Farrús, M. R. Costa-jussà, and M. Popović. 2012. Study and correlation analysis of linguistic, perceptual,

and automatic machine translation evaluations. Journal of the Association for Information Sciences and
Technolgy (JASIST) 63, 1 (Jan. 2012), 174–184. DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/asi.21674

M. L. Forcada, M. Ginestı́-Rosell, J. Nordfalk, J. O’Regan, S. Ortiz-Rojas, J. A. Pérez-Ortiz, F. Sánchez-
Martı́nez, G. Ramı́rez-Sánchez, and F. M. Tyers. 2011. Apertium: a free/open-source platform for rule-
based machine translation. Machine Translation 25, 2 (2011), 127–144.

M. Gonzàlez, J. Giménez, and Ll. Màrquez. 2012. A Graphical Interface for MT Evaluation and Error Anal-
ysis. In The 50th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics.

C. A. Henrı́quez Q., R. E. Banchs, and J. B. Mariño. 2010. Learning Reordering Models for Statistical Ma-
chine Translation with a Pivot Language. (2010). Internal Report TALP-UPC.

W. J. Hutchins and L. Sommers. 1992. An introduction to machine translation. Academic Press 362 (1992).
IndoAsianNews. 2013. China’s trade with Latin America grew in 2011. (Accessed on-line September 2013).

http://in.news.yahoo.com/chinas-trade-latin-america-grew-2011-050334275.html
P. Koehn, H. Hoang, A. Birch, C. Callison-Burch, M. Federico, N. Bertoldi, B. Cowan, W. Shen, C. Moran, R.

Zens, C. Dyer, O. Bojar, A. Constantin, and E. Herbst. 2007. Moses: Open Source Toolkit for Statistical
Machine Translation. In Proceedings of the 45th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (ACL’07). Prague, Czech Republic, 177–180.

P. Koehn, F.J. Och, and D. Marcu. 2003. Statistical Phrase-Based Translation. In Proc. of the 41th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics.

A. Lavie and A. Agarwal. 2007. Meteor: an automatic metric for MT evaluation with high levels of correlation
with human judgments. In Proceedings of the Second Workshop on Statistical Machine Translation
(StatMT ’07). Association for Computational Linguistics, Stroudsburg, PA, USA, 228–231. http://dl.acm.
org/citation.cfm?id=1626355.1626389

ACM Transactions on Asian Language Information Processing, Vol. V, No. N, Article A, Publication date: January YYYY.



A:13

C.-Y. Lin and F. J. Och. 2004. Automatic evaluation of machine translation quality using longest common
subsequence and skip-bigram statistics. In Proceedings of the 42nd Annual Meeting on Association for
Computational Linguistics (ACL ’04). Association for Computational Linguistics, Stroudsburg, PA, USA,
Article 605. DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.3115/1218955.1219032

A. Mayor, I. Alegria, A. Dı́az de Ilarrraza, G. Labaka, M. Lersundi, and K. Sarasola. 2011. Matxin, an open-
source rule-based machine translation system for Basque. Machine Translation 25 (2011), 53–82.

I. A. McCowan, D. Moore, J. Dines, D. Gatica-Perez, M. Flynn, P. Wellner, and H. Bourlard. 2004. On the
Use of Information Retrieval Measures for Speech Recognition Evaluation. Idiap-RR Idiap-RR-73-2004.
IDIAP, Martigny, Switzerland.

F.J. Och. 2003. Minimum Error Rate Training In Statistical Machine Translation. In Proc. of the 41th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics. 160–167.

F.J. Och and H. Ney. 2003. A Systematic Comparison of Various Statistical Alignment Models. Computa-
tional Linguistics 29, 1 (March 2003), 19–51.

F.J. Och and H. Ney. 2004. The Alignment Template Approach to Statistical Machine Translation. Compu-
tational Linguistics 30, 4 (December 2004), 417–449.

K Papineni, S. Roukos, T. Ward, and W.-J. Zhu. 2002. BLEU: A method for automatic evaluation of
machine translation. In Proceedings of the 40th Annual Meeting on Association for Computational
Linguistics (ACL ’02). Association for Computational Linguistics, Stroudsburg, PA, USA, 311–318.
DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.3115/1073083.1073135

Q-SuccessConsulting. 2013. Web Technology Surveys. (Accessed on-line September 2013). http://w3techs.
com/technologies/overview/content\ language/all

A. Rafalovitch and R. Dale. 2009. United Nations General Assembly Resolutions: A Six-Language Parallel
Corpus. In Proc. of the MT Summit XII. Ottawa, 292–299. http://www.uncorpora.org/

V. Sánchez-Cartagena. 2014. To be published. Ph.D. Dissertation. PhD thesis 2014. Departament de Llen-
guatges i Sistemes Infomtics, Universitat d’Alacant, Spain.

F. Sánchez-Martı́nez and M. L. Forcada. 2009a. Inferring shallow-transfer machine translation rules from
small parallel corpora. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research 34 (2009), 605–635.

F. Sánchez-Martı́nez and M. L. Forcada. 2009b. Inferring shallow-transfer machine translation rules from
small parallel corpora. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research 34 (2009), 605–635.

A. Stolcke. 2002. SRILM: an extensible language modeling toolkit.. In Proc. of the Int. Conf. on Spoken
Language Processing. Denver, CO, 901–904.

F. M. Tyers. 2013. Feasible lexical selection for rule-based machine translation. Ph.D. Dissertation. PhD
thesis 2013. Departament de Llenguatges i Sistemes Infomtics, Universitat d’Alacant, Spain.

Y. Zhang, N. Wu, and M. Yip. 2006. Lexical ambiguity resolution in Chinese sentence processing. Handbook
of East Asian Psycholinguistics 1 (2006), 268–278.

ACM Transactions on Asian Language Information Processing, Vol. V, No. N, Article A, Publication date: January YYYY.


