









































Microsoft Word - ISROMAC-258.doc


Failure investigation of a Francis turbine under the 
cavitation conditions 

 
Xin Liu1, Zhengwei Wang1*, Lingjiu Zhou2, Xavier Escaler3, Yongyao Luo1          

ISROMAC 2016  
International 

Symposium on 
Transport 

Phenomena and 
Dynamics of 

Rotating Machinery 
 

Hawaii, Honolulu 
April 10-15, 2016 

Abstract 
Acoustic-Structural coupling methodology has been used to numerically investigate the 
failure of a Francis turbine runner that broke down within one day of operation. The goal of 
the work has been to determine the feasibility of a resonance condition under cavitating flow 
conditions. The obtained results prove that the presence of large vapor cavities increase the 
natural frequencies of the diametrical modes of vibration in comparison with the pure water 
condition. In particular, a possible tuning between the hydrodynamic excitation and the 4ND 
mode has been found. 
 
 

 
Keywords 
Turbine failures — Acoustic FSI — Cavitation — Resonance  
1 Department of Thermal Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China 
2 College of Water Resources & Civil Engineering, China Agricultural University, Beijing, China 
3Center for Industrial Diagnostics, Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya, Barcelona, Spain 
*Corresponding author:  wzw@tsinghua.edu.cn   

INTRODUCTION  
FEM-based acoustic fluid approach has not yet been used 
to estimate the added mass effects on turbine runners 
under cavitation conditions due to the difficulties of 
modelling the cavity properties and the own limitations of 
the acoustic fluid hypothesis. On the other hand, the 
previous understanding in the field of the hydroelectric is 
that cavitation leads to structural erosion, but would change 
the inherent structural dynamic characteristics because of 
lack of test data in situ and related research. From a design 
point of view, the benefit in cavitation flow analysis is 
obvious because of the fact that many submerged bodies 
suffer from this phenomenon, such as pump impellers, 
turbine runners, injectors, marine propellers, hydrofoils and 
so on. 

The case reported here corresponds to a Francis 
turbine destroyed within one day. Majority of the traditional 
analysis approaches such as static/dynamic stresses 
analysis, modal without vapor, Von Karman excitation 
estimation, have failed in this case. The new hope came 
from there was sharply noise when the turbine was running 
in situ and later CFD analysis found out the existence of 
severer cavitation. Therefore, the research purpose of this 
work is to establish a reliable FSI model, and to investigate 
whether there is some kind of relation between cavitation 
and runner failure by FEM-based acoustic fluid approach 
under cavitation conditions.  
1. METHODS 

 
In FSI problems, the structural dynamics equation must be 
considered along with the Navier-Stokes (NS) and the 

continuity equations. The discretized structural dynamics 
equation can be formulated based on the structural elements. 
The NS and continuity equations are simplified to get the 
acoustic wave equation assuming that the fluid is 
compressible, which means that its density changes due to 
pressure variations (i.e. acoustic medium), and that there is 
no fluid flow [1].  

The governing finite element matrix equations of FSI 
are expressed in Equation (1): 

     
    

 
 

S
T

0,liquid liquid F,liquid liquid
T

gas0,gas gas F,gas

S
liquidF,liquid

F,gas gas

S liquid gas

F,

M 0 0 u
ρ R M 0 p

pρ R 0 M
uC 0 0

p+ 0 C 0
0 0 C p

K - R - R
+ 0 K

                            
                  

      
















 
 
 

S

liquid F,liquidliquid

F,gas F,gasgas

u F
p F0 =

0 0 FpK

                           

             (1) 

 
where MF, CF and KF are the fluid mass, damping and 
stiffness matrices, respectively. R is a coupling matrix that 
represents the effective surface area associated with each 
node on the fluid-structure interface. FF is the applied fluid 
pressure vector at the interface obtained by integrating the 
pressure over the area of the surface. P and U are the fluid 
pressure and the structure displacement vectors, respectively. 
MS, CS and KS are the structure mass, damping and stiffness 



Article Title — 2  
matrices, respectively, and FS is the structural load vector. 
 
2. Description of Francis unit and damage 
 
This hydropower plant has three Francis units with the 
same design and dimensions as outlined on Figure 1. The 
runners have 14 blades and a diameter of 2.72 m. The 
wicket gates have 24 guide vanes. The runner rotational 
speed is 250 rpm. The rated discharge and power per unit 
are 164 m3/s and 44 MW respectively. When units 1 and 2 
were put into start test during one day, almost all blades 
suffered a local fracture starting close to the junction 
between the trailing edge and the band, as shown on 
Figure 2. 

 
Figure 1. Schematic of the unit. 

 
Figure 2. Photograph of the broken runner. 

 
3. CFD simulation under cavitation 

 
A steady CFD numerical simulation using a Zwart-Gerber-
Belamri (ZGB) cavitation model [2] was carried out. 
According to the actual trial operating conditions, one 
typical output power operating condition, G1, were selected 
corresponding to 16MW. 

Using the state-of-the-art polyhedral and trimmed cell 
meshing technique, the grid convergence test was carried 
out based on the flow features. The final mesh adopted had 
about 227000 elements in the spiral case, about 150000 
elements in the guide vanes, 347000 elements in the 
turbine runner and 100000 elements in the draft tube. The 
Reynolds-averaged Navier-Stokes equations with RNG k-ε 
turbulence model were applied. The ZGB cavitation model 
considers the total interphase mass transfer rate per unit 
volume, R, as indicated: 

 
e

3 (1 ) 2          if      3
vnuc v v

vap v
l

P PR F P P   
   

 3 2          if      3 vv vc cond vl
P PR F P P  
   

where the evaporation coefficient Fvap=50, the condensation 
coefficient Fcond=0.01, the bubble radius 62 10  mB     
and the nucleation site volume fraction αnuc=5×10-4 . 

To visualize large cavitation structures and to determine 
their locations, dimensions and shapes the void ratio, α, 
which is defined as: 

VV
V                                        

where VV is the vapor volume and V is the total volume of the 
cavity. Consequently, the cavity density, c, can now be 
calculated as: 

 1c V L                            
where V is a vapor density of and L is the water density, 
which have been taken as 1.7410-2 (saturated vapor at 
20 C) and as 1000 kg/m3, respectively. 

 

Figure 3. Visualization of cavitation vortexes in the turbine 
runner. 

The predicted cavities can be clearly identified in Figure 
3. The largest cavities are observed in condition G1 at 16 
MW. In each of the runner channels, a single inter blade 
vortex cavity is observed that detaches from the band and 
extends towards the blade suction side close to the trailing 
edge. 

 
4. Runner dynamic behavior in water with 

cavitation 
 
The runner material parameters for the FEM model were 
specified according to the actual values indicated in Table 1. 
 
Table 1. Properties of the Francis turbine runner material. 
Properties Young’s modulus (GPa) 

Density 
(kg/m3) 

Poisson’s 
ratio 

Value 201 7850 0.3 
 
To consider the effect of the water, the runner was 

surrounded by the fluid domain. The water properties were 
set as 1000 kg/m3 for density and 1450 m/s for speed of 



Article Title — 3  
sound. The fluid mesh was built by extending the structure 
mesh so that the nodes on the interface could be shared by 
both domains, as shown in Figure 4.  

 
Figure 4. Mesh of the Francis turbine runner with the 

surrounding water 
In order to simulate the main cavities in the acoustic 

FSI model, the shapes of the vapor volumes calculated with 
CFD have been mapped into the FEM keeping unchanged 
the loads and physical geometries. The nodes of the 
elements located on the cavity surface have been 
transferred to the FE model using mapping nodes to the 
nearest nodes, as shown in Figure 5. 

 
Figure 5. Mapping of cavity shapes into FE model (right) from 

CDF simulation results 
 

The numerical modal analysis has permitted to calculate 
the five first natural frequencies and mode shapes of the 
runner which are shown in Figure 7. 

To characterize the heterogeneous mixture of vapor and 
water inside the mapped cavity volumes various simulations 
have been carried out considering that the average void ratio 
could range from 0.1 to 0.9. However, the numerical results 
indicate that the central core of the cavities present a higher 
void ratio meanwhile the outer layers of the volumes have 
lower void ratios that approach the zero value for pure water. 
Consequently an average void ratio of 0.8 with an average 
density of 200 kg/m3 and a sonic velocity of 29.72 m/s has 
been considered to be an accurate choice [3], as shown in 
Figure 6, for the mapped volumes obtained with isocontours 
of α = 0.1. 

 
Figure 6. Speed of sound in a bubbly air/water mixture at 

 

 0ND  1ND  2ND 

 3ND  4ND 
 

Figure 7. Bottom view of runner mode shapes in water. 
 



Article Title — 4  
Table 2. Natural frequencies and frequency reduction ratios in air and water. 

Mode 0ND 1ND 2ND 3ND 4ND 
fair 83.67 117.9 149.81 228.83 270.52 

fwater 59.87 62.99 69.03 84.85 90.51 
FRRwater 28.4% 46.6% 53.9% 62.9% 66.5% 

fG1 61.65 64.45 68.65 87.02 98.406 
FRRG1 26.3% 45.0% 53.0% 60.7% 63.4% 
 

 
The natural frequencies in air, fair, water, fwater, and with 

cavitation, fG1, and the frequency reduction ratios, FRR’s, 
calculated in relation to the natural frequencies in air are 
indicated in Table 2. 

To calculate the possible excitations and their 
diametrical nodes, the classical RSI formula (Kubota et al., 
1983; Tanaka, 2011) is given: 

g rn Z k m Z     
where k is the diametrical mode, Zg is the number of guide 
vanes, Zr is the number of runner blades and n an m are an 
arbitrary integers. 

Taking into account the current runner design, an 
excitation with a diametrical mode number of k = 4 is 
obtained for n = 1 and m = 2 that corresponds to a 
frequency of 24fn = 100 Hz from the rotating point of 
reference. This result predicts that there is a risk of 
resonance if the 24fn excitation frequency coincides with the 
natural frequency of the 4ND runner mode of vibration. 

Considering the numerical accuracy of the acoustic FSI 
method, a ±5% error has been added to the frequency 
results of 4ND. In particular, the frequency at which the 
mode achieves the 100 Hz value corresponds to an average 
void ratio of 0.8 which is a feasible estimation. 

 
5. Conclusion 
 
The acoustic FSI method has been applied considering 
surrounding water, heterogeneous vapor cavities and solid 
boundaries to analyze the added mass effects on a 
Francis turbine runner with the aim of understanding the 
reason for an actual catastrophic failure. 

The numerical results show that the presence of the 
cavities is indeed able to affect the dynamic characteristics 
of the structure. A set of feasible hydrodynamic parameters 
have been found that permit to hypothesize the tuning of the 
RSI pressure fluctuations with the 4ND mode of vibration in 
terms of natural frequency and rotating mode that would 
explain a fast blade cracking due to fatigue loading. 

Nevertheless, more studies with different types of 
turbines compared against experimental data will be 
necessary to further validate the methodology used to 
simulate added mass effects under cavitation.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

 
This work was supported by National Natural Science 

Foundation of China (Nos. 51279083 and 51409148). 
 
REFERENCES 

 
[1] ANSYS Inc. Ansys theory reference (Ansys), 2013. 
[2] P. J. Zwart, A. G. Gerber, T. Belamri. A two-phase 

flow model for predicting cavitation dynamics. 
Proceedings of the Fifth International Conference on 
Multiphase Flow, Yokohama, Japan, 2004. 

[3] C. E. Brennen. Homogeneous bubbly flows - in 
Cavitation and bubble dynamics. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 1995. 

[4] Y. C. Kubota, T. Suzuki, H. Tomita, T. Nagafugi, C. 
Okamura. Vibration of rotating bladed disc excited by 
stationary distributed forces. Bulletin of JSME 26, 
1983: 1952-1957. 

[4] H.Tanaka. Vibration behavior and dynamic stress of 
runners of very high head reversible pump-turbines. 
International Journal of Fluid Machinery and Systems 
4, 2001: 289-306. 


