










































E N G I N E E R I N G
Vol. 04 / Issue. 01 / 2015

Accelerate Innovation 
with CFD & Thermal 
CharacterizationEDGE

mentor.com/mechanical

ThyssenKrupp 
Designing a Modern 
Submarine 
Page 10

TsAGI, 
Zhukovsky
Helicopter Rotor 
Simulation 
Page 38

Danfoss Drives 
GmbH 
Liquid Cooling the 
ShowerPower® 
Turbulator 
Page 14



22  mentor.com/mechanical

ALBA Synchrotron Cooling 
System Evaluation Using 
Flowmaster ®

LBA is a 3rd generation 
Synchrotron Light facility in 
Barcelona, Spain. Made up of 
a complex network of electron 

accelerators that produce synchrotron 
light, it allows for the visualization of the 
atomic structure of matter as well as the 
study of its properties. 

The 3 GeV electron beam energy at ALBA 
is achieved by powerful combinations of 
a LInear ACcelerator (LINAC) and a low-
emittance, full-energy BOOSTER located 
in the same tunnel as the STORAGE RING. 
ALBA's 270 meter perimeter has 17 straight 

A

By Marcos Quispe, ALBA Synchrotron Light Source; Xavier Escaler and 
Montserrat Prieto, Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya (UPC); and 
Morten Kjeldsen, Flow Design Bureau AS 

After five years in operation, the ALBA 
Synchrotron Light Source realize the first upgrade 
process of its cooling system. 

sections all of which are used for the 
installation of insertion devices.
ALBA currently has seven operational state-
of-the-art phase-I beamlines, comprising 
soft and hard X-rays, which are devoted 
mainly to biosciences, condensed matter 
(magnetic and electronic properties, 
nanoscience), and materials science. 
Additionally, two phase-II beamlines are in 
construction (infrared microspectroscopy 
and low-energy ultra-high-resolution angular 
photoemission for complex materials).

This large scientific infrastructure provides 
more than 5,000 hours of beam time per 

year for the academic and the industrial 
sector, serving over 1,000 researchers every 
year. 

ALBA is a facility committed to scientific 
excellence and to improving the well-being 
and progress of society as a whole.

After five years in operation, the ALBA 
Synchrotron Light Source has realized the 
first upgrade process of its cooling system. 
The main objective of the project was to 
enhance the hydraulic plant and its control 
system. Specifically, this enhancement 
is expected to significantly improve the 

Figure 1. Alba 3rd Generation Synchrotron Light Facility in Barcelona, Spain



mentor.com/mechanical  23

Research

facility’s reliability by providing more 
protection against single point failure, its 
stability as a result of more robust in-
front-of-load variations and/or external 
perturbations, and tolerability in fail mode to 
ensure maximum service readiness.
To embark on this objective a Project 
Manager structure was defined and all the 
activities were grouped in the following five 
work packages (WP) as detailed in Figure 
1. This article will focus on Work Package 
1 (WP1) which set out to better understand 
the cooling system from a fluid dynamics 
control point of view.

The ALBA Cooling System 
The ALBA cooling system is outlined on 
the left of Figure 2 and comprises two main 
parts: production and consumption. For 
the purposes of this article, the focus will 
be mainly on the consumption side which 
is composed of four rings that require 
refrigeration. They are named Experimental 
Area (EA), Service Area (SA), Storage Ring 
(SR), and Booster (BO) as indicated on the 
right of Figure 2. Both the Storage and the 
Service Area rings operate with a pair of 
twin-pumps mounted in parallel and the rest 

Figure 1. Organization of work 
packages for the project “ALBA 
Cooling System Upgrade”.

Figure 2. Outline of the cooling system (left) and of the consumption side (right)

with a single pump. The deionized water is 
heated through all the rings and is collected 
in a common return line. Another pump 
(P11) takes the heated water from the return 
and feeds heat exchangers that cool it. The 
cooled water is brought to a large volume 
accumulator from which a suction line takes 
water again to the rings’ pumps. In order 
to regulate the water temperature, a series 
of controlled mixing valves allow for the 
combination of the cooled and heated water 
to take place, prior to being pumped to the 
rings. Moreover, a pressure maintenance 
system with a compressor is mounted at the 
exit line of the heat exchangers before the 
accumulator. Finally, a pipe line connecting 
the accumulator with the common return 
line enables the compensation for the lack 
or excess of flow to the cooling loop when 
the total flow rate changes in the rings’ 
loops.

The Rings Model 
As can be seen in Figure 2, each ring (EA, 
BO, SR and EA) consists of two concentric 
ring-shaped pipelines (inlet and return flow) 
that refrigerate a specific number of sub-
systems. At the same time, most of these 

sub-systems are made up of additional sub-
networks that supply the cooled deionised 
water to final consumptions. 

Currently, Experimental Area Ring feeds nine 
sub-systems, seven of which correspond to 
Beam Lines (each Beam Line has various 
components to refrigerate) and the rest are 
provisional by-passes. The Booster Ring 
has 104 sub-systems. One of them is a 
Radiofrequency Cavity (RF) that refrigerates 
14 components by the means of a manifold. 
The remaining 103 sub-systems are single 
electromagnets which are present in eight 
variations. With regards to the Storage 
Ring’s sub-systems, 21 are different types of 
electromagnets (8 to 17 magnets are fed by 
each sub-system), ten are Front Ends (each 
one cools one to five consumptions), and 
three correspond to RFs Cavities. In relation 
to the Service Area Ring’s sub-systems, 
nine supply cold water to Power Supplies, 
one feeds the LINAC and some Power 
Supplies and the last four sub-systems are 
connected to RFs Plants. 

The rings’ models have been built up from 
the available components in Flowmaster 



24  mentor.com/mechanical

software. The properties of each component 
have been selected based on the 
information provided by the corresponding 
manufacturer in the form of construction 
planes, technical documentation and so 
on. The lack of reliable information has 
been overcome with visual inspections and 
measurements in-situ. However, for the 
current study such level of detail has not 
been achieved on each ring due to their 
dense and complex structure as well as 
owing to the lack of time. As a result, the 
selected rings’ sub-systems to model with 
detail, according to the needs of the ALBA 

Synchrotron, are as follows.

The completely modeled sub-system of 
the Experimental Area Ring is one Beam 
Line (BL). Nevertheless, the by-pass piping 
networks for two future BLs have also 
been modeled, and the remainder ignored. 
The different consumptions of these BLs 
have been simplified with a unique heat 
exchanger. 

When considering the Booster Ring’s sub-
systems, all have been modeled down to 
the last detail. For instance, the top of Figure 

3 shows the modeling of the two main pipes 
of the Booster Ring and nine of its sub-
systems (eight electromagnets and the RF 
Cavity); with bottom of Figure 3 depicting 
this section. Another example is the model 
of the RF Cavity which is shown in Figure 4 
where we can see the configuration of the 
manifold which supplies water to 14 local 
consumptions.

In contrast, the Storage Ring’s fully modeled 
sub-systems are only four: one is the 
secondary distributor at sector 15 (which 
is grouping 16 electromagnets) and the 
other three are RFs cavities. Again, the 
geometry of the pipelines of the rest of the 
sub-systems has not been considered. In 
addition, the combination from one to five 
consumptions of each Front End has been 
modeled with a single heat exchanger. 
Despite this, a characterized heat exchanger 
element models each one of the various 
consumptions fed by the rest of the 
simplified sub-systems.

The Service Area Ring’s are two detailed 
sub-systems: the RF Plant at sector 14 (see 

Figure 3. Comparison between a section of the Booster Ring (bottom) and its modeling (top)

Figure 4. Schematic of the Radiofrequency Cavity of the Booster Ring



mentor.com/mechanical  25

blue highlighted zoom of Figure 5) and the 
sub-system that combines the LINAC and 
some Power Supplies. A duly characterized 
heat exchanger element models each one 
of the different consumptions of these two 
sub-systems. Once again, the geometry 
of the other two RFs’ manifold and of the 
pipelines of the rest of the sub-systems 
has not been modeled. A heat exchanger 
emulates not only the two simplified RFs’ 
components but also the combination of 
Racks refrigerated by each one of the rest 
of the sub-systems (see green highlighted 
zoom of Figure 5). The contrast between the 
detailed and simplified sub-systems can be 
observed in Figure 5. Furthermore, Figure 6 
demonstrates how meticulous the modeling 
of one RF’s consumption is. 

Improving Pipe Velocity 
Distribution
Originally, the four rings had the same flow 
distribution: (i) the inlet flow was equally 
distributed to the left and right branch 
through a T-junction, by opening the two 
exit valves so that they tend to converge 
towards the opposite 180º ring location; 
(ii) for the return flow, the directions were 
reversed and two flows tend to converge 
towards the main outlet pipe. This original 
flow distribution is indicated as “180º 
circulation” on the left of Figure 7. This 
configuration causes the reduction of 
the flow velocities, as the two inlet flows 
approach and a zero velocity point should 
be ideally achieved in some undefined 
location which is dependent on the local 
consumption distributions. Consequently, 
there is a risk of air accumulation in a 
zone that might be close to some critical 

Figure 5. Schematic of a section of the Service Area ring model

Figure 6. Comparison between the real appearance (CAD pictures) and Flowmaster modeling of one the 
RF’s consumption

Figure 7. Schematic of the 180º original flow distribution (left) and of the 360º current flow distribution (right) at Experimental Area ring.

Research



26  mentor.com/mechanical

sub-system. In order to improve the flow 
velocity distribution along the rings, it 
was considered to change the position 
of the valves by closing one valve of the 
T-junction exit branches and to force a 360º 
circulation as indicated on the right of Figure 
7. According to the opening or closing 
of T-junction exit valves, it is possible to 
distinguish a total of five flow distributions 
in each ring (one of 180º and four of 360º 
circulations) as observed in Table 1.

In summary, the Flowmaster software has 
been used to simulate all the possible 
configurations with the aim of establishing 
the existence of an optimal flow distribution 
that minimizes the locations with the lowest 
velocities. 

Accuracy of the Model
A preliminary validation of the Flowmaster 
model has been carried out with the 
production side comprising the pumping 
units. For that, the simulated results have 
been compared with the real hydraulic 

variables like flow rates (Q), pump rotating 
speeds (n) and pump delivery pressures 
(Pimp). Table 2 shows the comparative 
studies for a real working point of the 
cooling system. For the overall variables of 
the hydraulic system, the maximum average 
deviation equals – 6.8% corresponding to 
pump rotating speeds. The deviation for the 
main flow rate at the rings is less than  
0.1%.

Regarding the rings and their previously 
described sub-systems, they obviously 
require a fixed flowrate to cool their 
consumptions. In order to evaluate the 
accuracy of the modeled rings, the 
simulated results (flow rate in each one of 
the sub-systems) have been compared with 
the on-site measured ones as indicated in 
Table 3 in terms of averaged deviations. It 
must be noted that some local sub-systems 
were presenting larger deviation values.
It can be observed that the maximum 
average deviation for the simulated flow 
rates in three of the rings is about 6.5% 
corresponding to the Service Area. 

Nevertheless, the Booster Ring shows a 
larger deviation that can be explained by the 
fact that the measured data is not reliable 
due to a detected calibration problem of its 
flowmeter. As a result, the 23.7% deviation 
does not represent the actual goodness of 
the Booster Ring’s model. It must be noted 
that this flowmeter issue does not take 
place in the other three rings.

The Optimal Flow Configurations
The presence of air in pipelines may cause 
instabilities of the water flow. To avoid air 
problems in pipelines it is widely accepted 
that minimum flow velocities are required 
above 0.5 m/s. 

In this work the five possible flow distribution 
in the main pipe rings has been modeled 
(as is detailed in Table 1). The simulations 
results show the map of the water flow 
velocities and allow quantification of the 
zones where the velocities are lower than 
0.5 m/s. Then the recommended 360º 
flow distribution is the one that minimizes 
the lower map with velocities respect to 
the case 180º circulation. Table 4 indicates 
which one of the four possible 360º flow 
distributions is the optimal for each ring and 
the percent of improvement for both the 
inlet and return flow distributions through 
the main ring pipes.

Table 3. Average Flow Rate Deviation of Simulated Value to Measured Value in Each Ring.

Table 1. Studied Flow Distributions

Table 2. Comparative Analysis between the Real Measurements and the Flowmaster Simulated Results.



mentor.com/mechanical  27

The values shown in Table 4 are calculated 
with the following expression:

Improvement   = 100 |N
opt

 - N
180

 |
          N

180
 

Where N
opt

 and N
180

 are the number of pipes 
with flow velocities lower than 0.5 m/s in 
the optimal and in the 180º configurations, 
respectively.

Figure 8 illustrates the evolution of the 
flow velocity along the EA ring’s inlet flow 
main pipe caused by the 180º and 360º 
circulations. Whereas almost all of the 
EA ring’s sectors have velocities lower 
than 0.5 m/s (shown in red) when the 
flow distribution is 180º, the 360º current 

Figure 8. Velocity along the Experimental Area ring’s inlet flow main pipe due to the 180º circulation (left) and to 360º current circulation (right).

circulation restricts these undesirable 
velocities to less than a half of the EA ring. 
However, there is obviously a zero velocity 
point next to the closed valve (indicated by 
the blue cross) but the good point is that it 
is located relatively far from any sub-system. 
Therefore, it is clearly observed the fact that 
the flow distribution change from 180º to 
360º entails a significant velocity rise in most 
of the pipe sectors. 

Conclusions
Thanks to Flowmaster 1D Thermo-fluid 
simulation software, ALBA Synchrotron 
has been able to improve the fluid dynamic 
behavior of the cooling system consumption 
rings.

Table 4. Optimal Flow Distribution for Each Ring and Percent of Improvement

Actually, each ring has been modeled with a 
high level of detail of its local consumptions. 
The accuracy of the model has been 
validated with real operation data. The 
resultant models have allowed for the study 
of the rings’ original flow distribution as well 
as all the alternative possible circulations. 
As a result, for each ring it has been 
identified that the 360º flow distribution 
make it possible to increase those deficient 
velocities that take place in the original 
configuration (180º circulation). 
The suggested 360º circulations have 
reduced these undesirable velocities by 
around 49% on average. Consequently, 
the cooling system’s reliability has been 
significantly increased.

For more information:
www.cells.es/en

Research


	Section 1.pdf
	Section 2
	Section 3
	Section 4

