













































Article Title Article Title Article Title Article Title Article Title Article Title Article Title Article Title Article Title


Added  mass effects of attached cavitation on the 

blades of a Francis runner 
 

Xingxing Huang, Andritz Hydro, Vevey, Switzerland 

Xavier Escaler, Center for Industrial Diagnostics, Universitat Politècnica de 

Catalunya, Barcelona, Spain 

 
 
 
 

Long Abstract 
 

 
 
 
 
 

Abstract 

 

Hydropower, a clean and renewable energy resource, has been developed worldwide for 

the economic development and improvement of people's living standards. It has also been 

used to improve the stability of the smart power grid. 

 

Depending on the water head of hydropower plants, various types of hydraulic turbines 

such as Francis, Kaplan and Pelton have been designed to maximize efficiency. Francis 

turbines, which combine radial and axial flow, are the most common type in use nowadays 

since they can operate in a quite wide water head range. Due to the extreme hydrodynamic 

conditions found by the flow inside the runner channels at off-design operation, attached 

blade cavitation may occur with different dimensions and locations.  

 

In order to avoid damages provoked by structural resonances and material fatigues, the 

structural behavior of the Francis runner has to be carefully investigated during design 

phase. Many research works have been carried out to predict the dynamic behavior of 

Francis runners in air and in still water based on both measurement and simulation [1-12]. 

However, the presence of attached cavitation on the runner blades has not been 

considered yet with enough detail. Only limited work has been performed on a hydrofoil to 

investigate the added mass effects under cavitation demonstrating their significance[13,14]. 

However, the hydrofoil is only a very simple structure compared with the complex Francis 

runner. Therefore, it is necessary to investigate the added mass effects of blade attached 

cavitation on the structural response of Francis runners. 

 

Consequently, a Francis runner with 13 blades has been selected to carry out the structural 

behavior analysis by numerical simulation of the fluid structure interaction phenomenon. In 

particular, the added mass effects of different types of attached cavitation on the dynamic 

responses of both just one blade and of the entire runner have been investigated in detail 

and the results are presented in this paper. 



 

 
References 

 

[1]  H. Tanaka. Vibration and dynamic stress of runners of very high head reversible pump- turbines, 

15th IAHR Symposium. Belgrade, 1990. 

[2]  C.G. Rodriguez, E. Egusquiza, X. Escaler, Q.W. Liang, F. Avellan. Experimental investigation of 

added mass effects on a Francis turbine runner in still water. Journal of Fluids and Structures, 22: 

699–712, 2006. 

[3]  Q.W. Liang, C.G. Rodriguez, E. Egusquiza, X. Escaler, M.Farhat, F. Avellan. Numerical simulation 

of fluid added mass effect on a Francis turbine runner. Computer and Fluids, 36:1106–1118,2007. 

[4]  X. Huang, Valero M, E. Egusquiza. The effect on boundary condition on the structural response of 

a pump-turbine, 3rd IAHRWG Meeting. Brno, 2009. 

[5]  X. Escaler et al. Modal behavior of a reduced scale pump-turbine impeller. Part I. Experiments, 

25th IAHR Symposium on Hydraulic Machinery and Systems, Timisoara, Romania, 2010. 

[6]  C. Valero, X. Huang et al. Modal behavior of a reduced scale pump-turbine impeller. Part II. 

Numerical Simulation, 25th IAHR Symposium on Hydraulic Machinery and Systems, Timisoara, 

Romania, 2010. 

[7]  X.Huang. Contribution to the Dynamic Response of Hydraulic Turbomachinery Components, 

Ph.D. Thesis, Technical University of Catalonia (UPC), Barcelona, Spain, 2011. 

[8]  E. Egusquiza, C. Valero, X. Huang, E. Jou E, A. Guardo, C.G. Rodriguez. Failure investigation of 

a large pump-turbine runner, J. Engineering Failure Analysis, Vol. 23: 27–34,2012. 

[9]  A. Presas, C. Valero, X. Huang, E. Egusquiza, M.Farhat, F. Avellan. Analysis of the dynamic 

response of pump-turbine runners Part I: Experiment, 26th IAHR Symposium on Hydraulic 

Machinery and Systems. Beijing, China, 2012. 

[10] X. Huang, E. Egusquiza et al. Dynamic behaviour of pump-turbine runner: From disk to prototype 

runner, 6th International Conference on Pumps and Fans with Compressors and Wind Turbines. 

Beijing, China, 2013. 

[11] X. Huang, C. Oram, M. Sick. Stress analysis of the prototype high head Francis runner based on 

site measurement, 27th IAHR Symposium on Hydraulic Machinery and Systems. Montreal, 

Canada, 2014. 

[12] X. Huang, et al. Fatigue analyses of the prototype Francis runners based on site measurements 

and simulations, 27th IAHR Symposium on Hydraulic Machinery and Systems. Montreal, Canada, 

2014. 

[13] O. De La Torre, X. Escaler, E. Egusquiza et al.  The effect of cavitation on the natural frequencies 

of a hydrofoil. Proceedings of the 8th International Symposium on Cavitation. Singapore, 2012. 

[14] O. De La Torre, X. Escaler, E. Egusquiza, M. Farhat. Experimental investigation of added mass 

effects on a hydrofoil under cavitation conditions. Journal of Fluids and Structures, 39:173–187, 

2013. 

 

 

 


