















































Volume 3 • July, 2016  
ISSN 2317-126X • US$: 15.00  

American Journal of 
Hydropower, W ater and 

Environment Systems 
 
 
 
 

 
Technical Papers 

 
6 DAM BURST IN THE SAPUCAÍ RIVER (MG): A HEC-RAS SOFTWARE SIMULATION 

Barbosa,Alexandre Augusto; Rissatto, Lucas Stéfano; Franco, Patrícia Mara; Silva, Laércio Rafael Colucci Marques da 
 

11 SIMPLE MODELLING FOR MAXIMUM FLOW RATES DETERMINATION TO 
BE APPLIED IN ECONOMICALLY FEASIBLE SMALL HYDROPOWER PLANTS 
Santos, Ivan Felipe Silva dos; Vieira, Nathalia Duarte Braz; Tiago Filho, Geraldo Lúcio; Barros, 

Regina Mambeli; Souza,André Luiz 
 

14 ALE FINITE ELEMENT METHOD FOR FLUID FLOW SIMULATIONS 
OVER MOVING GUIDE VANES 
Noleto, Luciano Gonçalves; Barcelos Junior, Manuel Nascimento Dias; Brasil Junior, Antonio C. P. 

 
19 ON THE HYDRODYNAMICS OF A ROW ARRANGEMENT OF 

HYDROKINETIC PROPELLER TURBINES 
Brasil Junior, Antonio C.P.; Mendes, Rafael C. F.; Oliveira, Taygoara F.; Andriamparany, Tamby; Kouidri, Smaine; Mesquita, 

André L.A. 
 

25 NUMERICAL SIMULATIONS OF COMPLEX FLOWS IN HYDRAULIC TURBOMACHINERY. ACTUAL R&D LINES 
IN THE ‘CFD/APPLIED MATHS LABORATORY’ GROUP 
Coussirat M., Fontanals A., Panella L., Henderson G., Aguirre R 

 
35 AN ANALYSIS OF THE MECHANICAL STRESS IN HYDROELECTRIC TURBINES STAY-VANES UNDER 

DIFFER-ENT OPERATIONAL STATES OF THE ELECTRIC GENERATOR 
Gonzalez, Facundo E.; Kelm, Diego A.; Kolodziej,Javier E.; Tarnowski, Gabriel A.; Astelli, Raúl; Bordón, Hugo 

 
39 FLOW PROFILE INVESTIGATION AT TUCURUI HYDRO POWER PLANT TAILRACE 

Bortoni, Edson C.; 2Bertrand, Olivier; Sauvaget, Patrick; Santos, Luciano T.; Vasconcellos, Ricardo C. 

 
 
 
 

 
Technical Notes 

 
44 ANALYSIS OF STATOR WINDINGS INSULATION OF COARACY NUNES HYDROELECTRIC PLANT 

GENERATING UNITSE 
P. R. M. Vilhena; F. S. Brasil; V. Dmitriev; C. J. S. Santos 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Published with the support of  
Hydraulic Machinery and Systems  

International Association 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

latinamerican 
WORKING GROUP 

 
American Journal of Hydropower, Water and Environment Systems, july 2016 3 



 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
IAHR DIVISION I: HYDRAULICS 

TECHNICAL COMMITTEE: HYDRAULIC 

MACHINERY AND SYSTEMS 

 
Editors in Chief  
Prof. Geraldo Lucio Tiago Fº  - UNIFEI  
Prof. Eduard Egusquiza - UPC 
 
Executive Editors  
Prof. Carlos Martinez - UFMG  
Eng. Humberto Gissoni - VOITH 
 
Technical Editors  
Prof. Regina Mambeli Barros - UNIFEI  
Prof. Cecilia Lucino - UNLP 
 
Journalist in charge 
Adriana Barbosa MTb - MG 05984JP 
 
Graphic Projec/ Diagramming 

Lidiane Silva 

 
Federal University of Itajubá - UNIFEI Av. 

BPS, 1303 - Bairro Pinheirinho Itajubá - MG - 

Brasil - CEP: 37500-903 

 
 
 
 
 

 
Catalographic card prepared by Mauá Library – 

Librarian Margareth Ribeiro – CRB_6/1700 
 

R454 
 

American Journal of Hydropower, Water and 

Environment Systems, LAWG-IAHR, v.1, 2014 – 

Itajubá: LAWG-IAHR, 2015 - v.3, july. 2016. 

 
Trimestral, 
Editors Chief: Geraldo Lúcio Tiago Filho/Eduard Egusquiza  
Journalist in Charge: Adriana Barbosa – MTb_MG 05984  
ISSN 2317-126X 

 
1. Hydropower. 2. Water. 3. Enviroment Systems. 
II. Latin American Working Group 

 
 
 
 

 
LAWG-IAHR Executive Secretariat  

Lucia Garrido Rios  
latiniahrsecex@gmail.com 

 
 

 

ISSN 2317-126X 

American Journal of 

Hydropower, Water and 

Environment Systems 
 
 
 
 

 

Editorial 
 

A publication of Latin American Working Group of the International Association on Hydraulic 

Research  
The search for renewable energy sources is presented as one of the pillars for actions aiming 

the reduction of greenhouse gases (GHG) net emissions. Among the renewable energy sources, 

hydropower is presented as fundamental because it provides greater security in the amount of 
energy when compared to other forms of energy, such as wind and solar. However, it is necessary 

to do mention that all forms of above mentioned energy are subject to the inherent uncertainties 
to predictability of power generation based on historical data and by the fact that their forecasts 

are based on statistical models. On the other hand, there is growing demand for energy in order to 
support industrial growth, society development, and both must be carried out in a sustainable 

manner, with social and environmental constraints.  
In this search for a common point that makes feasible the growth based on sustainable development, 

and taking into account the limitations imposed by nature itself, the American Journal of Hydropower, 

Water and Environmental Systems (AJHWE) aims to present papers that can effectively contribute to the 

development of new technologies. Among the emerging technologies of scientific studies, the hydrokinetic 

turbines that take advantage from the velocity of a discharge for power generation, or the low- or very 

low- head turbines, which generate energy much more from the watercourse discharge contribution than 

by the net available head can be mentioned.  
All these researches have the potential to support new policies to make the new technologies 

development feasible under technical, social and economic point of view and to subsidize to 

renewable energy sources aiming a search of a better future.  
We hope to contribute in some way in this direction. We wish you to enjoy reading of the 

papers selected for this edition of AJHWES.  
Yours sincerely, 

 

 
Geraldo Lúcio Tiago Filho 

Editor in Chief 
 

Regina Mambeli Barros  
Technical Editor 

 
 
 
 

 
9 772317 126001 0 0 0 0 2 



INSTRUCTIONS FOR AUTHORS  
 
 

AMERICAN JOURNAL OF HYDROPOWER,  
WATER AND ENVIRONMENT SYSTEMS 

 
A publication of Latin American Working Group of the 

International Association for Hydro-Environment Engineering 

and Research-IAHR 

All papers must be submitted in English. In case the author 

wants to translate the article through the journal all costs for the 

translation will be charged on the account of the author. 
 
1. Formatting articles 
 

1.1. Article structure 
 

1.1.1 Subdivision - numbered sections 
 

Divide your article into clearly defined and numbered sections. 

Subsections should be numbered 1.1 (then 1.1.1, 1.1.2, ...), 1.2, 

etc. (the abstract is not included in section numbering). Use this 

numbering also for internal cross-referencing: do not just refer to 

‘the text’. Any subsection may be given a brief heading. Each 

heading should appear on its own separate line. 
 

1.1.2 Format 
 

All text of the manuscript must be located within a 170 

mm by 252 mm rectangle of a white A4 page or within 170 

mm by 240 mm for the letter format. The margins are given 

in Table 1. An example of the page format is given in Fig. 1 
 
[Table 1]: Page margin for manuscripts. 
 

Margin Position Top Bottom Left Right 
     

Margin size (cm) 2.0 2.5 2.0 2.0 
      

All text should be single spaced, black and in 12-point 

type. “Times News Roman” or a similar proportional font 

should be used. Total length 15 pages in Word. 

The terminology given in the IEC Technical Report for the 

Nomenclature of Hydraulic Machinery is recommended. 
 
Introduction 
 

State the objectives of the work and provide an adequate 

background, avoiding a detailed literature survey or a 

summary of the results. 
 
Material and methods 
 

Provide sufficient details to allow the work to be 

reproduced. Methods already published should be indicated by 

a reference: only relevant modifications should be described. 
 
Theory/calculation 
 

A Theory section should extend, not repeat, the background to 

the article already dealt with in the Introduction and lay the 

foundation for further work. In contrast, a Calculation section 

represents a practical development from a theoretical basis. 
 
Results 
 

Results should be clear and concise. 
 
Discussion 
 

This should explore the significance of the results of the 

work, not repeat them. A combined Results and Discussion 

section is often appropriate. Avoid extensive citations and 

discussion of published literature. 
 
Conclusions 
 

The main conclusions of the study may be presented in a 

short Conclusions section, which may stand alone or form a 

subsection of a Discussion or Results and Discussion section. 

 
 
References 
 

Within the text, references should be cited in numerical 

order according to their order of appearance. The numbered 

reference citation within text should be enclosed in brackets.  
After the second edition all papers must have at least one 

reference of the American Journal of Hydropower, Water and 

Environment Systems.  
Example: It was shown by Prusa [1] that the width of the 

plume decreases under these conditions.  
In the case of two citations, the numbers should be 

separated by a comma [1,2]. In the case of more than two 

references, the numbers should be separated by a dash [5-7].  
List of References. References to original sources for cited 

material should be listed together at the end of the paper; 

footnotes should not be used for this purpose. References should 

be arranged in numerical order according to the sequence of 

citations within the text. Each reference should include the last 

name of each author followed by his initials. 
 
(1) Reference to journal articles and papers in serial 

publications should include: 

• last name of each author followed by their initials  
• year of publication  
• abbreviated title of publication in which it appears  
• full title of the cited article in quotes, title capitalization  
• volume number (if any) (Do not include the abbreviation, “Vol.”) 
 

• issue number (if any) in parentheses (Do not include the 

abbreviation, “No.”) 

• inclusive page numbers of the cited article (include “pp.”) 
 
(2) Reference to textbooks and monographs should 

include: 
 
• last name of each author followed by their initials  
• year of publication  
• titles in examples may be in italic  
• publisher  
• city of publication  
• inclusive page numbers of the work being cited (include “pp.”)  
• chapter number (if any) at the end of the citation following 

the abbreviation, “Chap.” 
 
(3) Reference to individual conference papers, papers 

in compiled conference proceedings, or any other 

collection of works by numerous authors should 

include: 
 
• last name of each author followed by their initials  
• year of publication  
• full title of the cited paper in quotes, title capitalization  
• individual paper number (if any)  
• full title of the publication  
• initials followed by last name of editors (if any), followed 

by he abbreviation, “eds.” 

• publisher  
• city of publication  
• volume number (if any) in boldface if a single number, include, 

“Vol.” if part of larger identifier (e.g., “PVP-Vol. 254”) 

• inclusive page numbers of the work being cited (include “pp.”) 
 
(4) Reference to theses and technical reports should 

include: 
 
• last name of each author followed by their initials  
• year of publication  
• full title in quotes, title capitalization  
• report number (if any)  
• publisher or institution name, city 

 

2 American Journal of Hydropower, Water and Environment Systems, july 2016 



INSTRUCTIONS FOR AUTHORS  
 
 
Sample References 
 
[1] Ning, X., and Lovell, M. R., 2002, “On the Sliding Friction 

Characteristics of Unidirectional Continuous FRP 

Composites,” ASME J. Tribol., 124(1), pp. 5-13. 

[2] Barnes, M., 2001, “Stresses in Solenoids,” J. Appl. Phys., 

48(5), pp. 2000–2008. 

[3] Jones, J., 2000, Contact Mechanics, Cambridge University 

Press, Cambridge, UK, Chap. 6. 

[4] Lee, Y., Korpela, S. A., and Horne, R. N., 1982, “Structure of 

Multi-Cellular Natural Convection in a Tall Vertical Annulus,” 

Proc. 7th International Heat Transfer Conference, U. Grigul et 

al., eds., Hemisphere, Washington, DC, 2, pp. 221–226.  
[5] Hashish, M., 2000, “600 MPa Waterjet Technology Development,” 

High Pressure Technology, PVP-Vol. 406, pp. 135-140. 

[6] Watson, D. W., 1997, “Thermodynamic Analysis,” ASME 

Paper No. 97-GT-288. 

[7] Tung, C. Y., 1982, “Evaporative Heat Transfer in the 

Contact Line of a Mixture,” Ph.D. thesis, Rensselaer 

Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY. 

[8] Kwon, O. K., and Pletcher, R. H., 1981, “Prediction of the 

Incompressible Flow Over A Rearward-Facing Step,” Technical 

Report No. HTL-26, CFD-4, Iowa State Univ., Ames, IA.  
[9] Smith, R., 2002, “Conformal Lubricated Contact of Cylindrical 

Surfaces Involved in a Non-Steady Motion,” Ph.D. thesis, 

http://www.cas.phys.unm.edu/rsmith/homepage.html 
 

1.1.2 Essential title page information 
 
• Title. Concise and informative. Titles are often used in 

information-retrieval systems. Avoid abbreviations and 

formulae where possible. 
• Author names and affiliations. Where the family name may be 

ambiguous (e.g., a double name), please indicate this clearly. 

Indicate all affiliations with a number immediately after the 

author’s name and in front of the appropriate address. Provide 

the full postal address of each affiliation, including the country 

name and, if available, the e-mail address of each author.  
• Author résumé. The author must inform the graduation 

degree, post graduation, affiliation and email address. The 

résumé must not exceed 150 characters. 

• Corresponding author. Clearly indicate who will handle 

correspondence at all stages of refereeing and publication, 

also post-publication. Ensure that e-mail address and the 

complete postal address are provided. Contact details 

must be kept up to date by the corresponding author.  
• Present/permanent address. If an author has moved 

since the work described in the article was done, or was 

visiting at the time, a ‘Present address’ (or ‘Permanent 

address’) may be indicated as a footnote to that author’s 

name. The address at which the author actually did the 

work must be retained as the main, affiliation address. 

Superscript Arabic numerals are used for such footnotes. 
 
Abstract 
 

A concise and factual abstract is required. The abstract should 

state briefly the purpose of the research, the principal results and 

major conclusions. An abstract is often presented separately from 

the article, so it must be able to stand alone. For this reason, 

References should be avoided, but if essential, then cite the 

author(s) and year(s). Also, non-standard or uncommon 

abbreviations should be avoided, but if essential they must be 

defined at their first mention in the abstract itself. 
 
Keywords 
 

Immediately after the abstract, provide a maximum of 6 

keywords, using American spelling and avoiding general and 

plural terms and multiple concepts (avoid, for example, ‘and’, 

 
 
‘of’). Be sparing with abbreviations: only abbreviations firmly 

established in the field may be eligible. These keywords will be 

used for indexing purposes. 
 
Abbreviations 
 

Define abbreviations that are not standard in this field in a 

footnote to be placed on the first page of the article. Such 

abbreviations that are unavoidable in the abstract must be 

defined at their first mention there, as well as in the footnote. 

Ensure consistency of abbreviations throughout the article. 
 
Acknowledgements 
 

Collate acknowledgements in a separate section at the end 

of the article before the references and do not, therefore, 

include them on the title page, as a footnote to the title or 

otherwise. List here those individuals who provided help 

during the research (e.g., providing language help, writing 

assistance or proof reading the article, etc.). 
 
Nomenclature and units 
 

Follow internationally accepted rules and conventions: use 

the international system of units (SI). If other quantities are 

mentioned, give their equivalent in SI. 
 
Math formulae 
 

Present simple formulae in the line of normal text where possible 

and use the solidus (/) instead of a horizontal line for small fractional 

terms, e.g., X/Y. In principle, variables are to be presented in italics. 

Powers of e are often more conveniently denoted by exp. Number 

consecutively any equations that have to be displayed separately from 

the text (if referred to explicitly in the text). 
 
Footnotes 
 

Footnotes should be used sparingly. Number them consecutively 

throughout the article, using superscript Arabic numbers. Many 

wordprocessors build footnotes into the text, and this feature may be 

used. Should this not be the case, indicate the position of footnotes in 

the text and present the footnotes themselves separately at the end of 

the article. Do not include footnotes in the Reference list. 
 
Table footnotes 
 

Indicate each footnote in a table with a superscript 

lowercase letter. 
 
Artwork 
 

Electronic artwork  
General points  

• Make sure you use uniform lettering and sizing of your 

original artwork. 

• Save text in illustrations as ‘graphics’ or enclose the font.  
• Only use the following fonts in your illustrations: Arial, 

Courier, Times, Symbol. 
• Number the illustrations according to their sequence in the text. 
 

• Use a logical naming convention for your artwork files.  
• Provide captions to illustrations separately.  
• Produce images near to the desired size of the printed version.  
• Submit each figure as a separate file.  
• Pictures, graphics and images must be submitted in a JPG 

or GIF format with 300 dpi. 
 
2 Conducting the Review 
 
2.1 Originality 
 

You might wish to do a quick literature search using tools 

such as Scopus to see if there are any reviews of the area. If 

the research has been covered previously, pass on references 

of those works to the editor. 

 

American Journal of Hydropower, Water and Environment Systems, july 2016 3 



INSTRUCTIONS FOR AUTHORS  
 

 

2.2 Structure 
 

Consider each element in turn: Title; Abstract; Introduction (It should describe the experiment, the hypothesis(es) and 

the general experimental design or method); Method; Results; Conclusion/Discussion; Language: you do not need to correct 

the English. You should bring this to the attention of the editor, however. 
 

2.3 Previous Research 
 

If the article builds upon previous research does it reference that work appropriately? Are there any important works that 

have been omitted? Are the references accurate? 
 

2.4 Ethical Issues 
 

Plagiarism: If you suspect that an article is a substantial copy of another work, please let the editor know, citing the 

previous work in as much detail as possible  
Fraud: It is very difficult to detect the determined fraudster, but if you suspect the results in an article to be untrue, 

discuss it with the editor 

 

AUTHORIZATION FOR PUBLICATION OF PAPERS 
 

LICENSE FOR USE OF INTELLECTUAL WORK (Author) 
 
 
 
 

For this private instrument the AUTHOR, below signed authorizes the IAHR Latin American Working Group, to 

publish its work authorship, without any obligation and in exclusiveness character for the period of six months 

starting from the publication in the AMERICAN JOURNAL OF HYDROPOWER, WATER AND ENVIRONMENT 

SYSTEMS, or in another official publication of IAHR. 

 
 

In case of joint authorship, the first author signs as AUTHOR, assuming before IAHR the commitment of 

informing the other authors of the granted license. 

 
 
 

AUTHOR (full name in form letter): 
 
 
 

 
Title of the Paper:  

 
 
 

 
JOINT AUTHORS [full name in form letter]:  

 
 
 

 
ADDRESS:  

 

 
.  

 

 
Email:  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

4 American Journal of Hydropower, Water and Environment Systems, july 2016 



 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

IAHR DIVISION I: HYDRAULICS 
TECHNICAL COMMITTEE: HYDRAULIC 

MACHINERY AND SYSTEMS 

 
Scientific Committee 
 
Alexandre Kepler 
 
André Mesquita 
 
Antonio Brasil Júnior 
 
Arthur Leotta 
 
Augusto Nelson Viana 
 
Benedito Márcio de Oliveira 
 
Carlos Barreira Martinez 
 
Cecilia Lucino 
 
Daniel Fernández 
 
Daniel Rodriguez 
 
Edmundo Koelle 
 
Facundo González 
 
Fernando Zárate 
 
Gabriel Tarnowski 
 
Geraldo Lucio Tiago Filho 
 
Humberto de Camargo Gissoni 
 
Jaime Espinoza 
 
José Carlos Amorim 
 
José Cataldo 
 
José Geraldo P. de Andrade 
 
Juan Carlos Cacciavillani 
 
Lubienska Cristina Lucas Jaquie Ribeiro 
 
Luciano dos Santos 
 
Miguel Tornell 
 
Orlando Anibal Audisio 
 
Rafael Acedo Lopes 
 
Regina Mambeli Barros 
 
Ricardo Vasconcellos 
 
Roque Zanata 
 
Segen Farid Estefen 
 
Sergio Galván 
 
Sergio Liscia 
 
Ticao Siguemoto 
 
Victor Hidalgo 
 
Zulcy de Souza 

American Journal of 

Hydropower, Water and 

Environment Systems 
 
 
 
 
 

 

Number 3 JULY 2016  
 
 
Technical Papers 
 
6 DAM BURST IN THE SAPUCAÍ RIVER (MG): A HEC-RAS SOFTWARE SIMULATION 

Barbosa,Alexandre Augusto; Rissatto, Lucas Stéfano; Franco, Patrícia Mara; Silva, Laércio Rafael 

Colucci Marques da  
11 SIMPLE MODELLING FOR MAXIMUM FLOW RATES DETERMINATION TO 

BE APPLIED IN ECONOMICALLY FEASIBLE SMALL HYDROPOWER PLANTS 
Santos, Ivan Felipe Silva dos; Vieira, Nathalia Duarte Braz; Tiago Filho, Geraldo Lúcio; Barros, 

Regina Mambeli; Souza,André Luiz  
14 ALE FINITE ELEMENT METHOD FOR FLUID FLOW SIMULATIONS OVER  

MOVING GUIDE VANES  
Noleto, Luciano Gonçalves; Barcelos Junior, Manuel Nascimento Dias; Brasil Junior, Antonio C. P.  

19 ON THE HYDRODYNAMICS OF A ROW ARRANGEMENT OF HYDROKINETIC 
PROPELLER TURBINES 
Brasil Junior, Antonio C.P.; Mendes, Rafael C. F.; Oliveira, Taygoara F.; Andriamparany, Tamby; 

Kouidri, Smaine; Mesquita, André L.A.  
25 NUMERICAL SIMULATIONS OF COMPLEX FLOWS IN HYDRAULIC TURBOMACHINERY.  

ACTUAL R&D LINES IN THE ‘CFD/APPLIED MATHS LABORATORY’ GROUP  
Coussirat M., Fontanals A., Panella L., Henderson G., Aguirre R  

35 AN ANALYSIS OF THE MECHANICAL STRESS IN HYDROELECTRIC TURBINES STAY-

VANES UNDER DIFFERENT OPERATIONAL STATES OF THE ELECTRIC GENERATOR 

Gonzalez, Facundo E.; Kelm, Diego A.; Kolodziej,Javier E.; Tarnowski, Gabriel A.; Astelli, 

Raúl; Bordón, Hugo  
39 FLOW PROFILE INVESTIGATION AT TUCURUI HYDRO POWER PLANT TAILRACE  

Bortoni, Edson C.; 2Bertrand, Olivier; Sauvaget, Patrick; Santos, Luciano T.; Vasconcellos, Ricardo C. 

 
Technical Notes 
 
44 ANALYSIS OF STATOR WINDINGS INSULATION OF COARACY NUNES HYDROELEC-

TRIC PLANT GENERATING UNITSE 
P. R. M. Vilhena; F. S. Brasil; V. Dmitriev; C. J. S. Santos 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

American Journal of Hydropower, Water and Environment Systems, july 2016 5 



American Journal of Hydropower, 
Water and Environment Systems 
Publisher: Acta Editora/LAWG-IAHR  
DOI:10.14268/ajhwes.2016.00033  
ISSN: 2317-126X 
Subject Collection: Engineering, 
Subject: engineering, measurement,  
environment Systems 

 
 

 

Numerical Simulations of Complex Flows in 

Hydraulic Turbomachinery. Actual R&D Lines 

in the ‘CFD/Applied Maths Laboratory’ 

Group 
 

1Coussirat M., 2Fontanals A., 1Panella L., 1Henderson G., 1Aguirre R  
 

ABSTRACT 
 

A modern design of hydrodynamic equipment requires a sophisticated analysis. In the specific case of present 

turbomachinery exploitation requirements involve a good performance when the machine is operated under several flow 

conditions. The consequence is that an ‘elastic hydrodynamic behavior’ is required, but an undesired outcome of these 

requirements is the apparition of both fluid-structure interaction and cavitation phenomena in many cases. Several issues 

concerning to turbulence and cavitating flows must be considered to obtain suitable results in these designs and to obtain a 

better knowledge of the machine behavior. Numerical simulations become a useful tool to design hydraulic equipments, but 

in order to obtain accurate simulations it is necessary to know the capabilities of the available numerical models for 

turbulence and cavitation processes which involve several calibration/optimization tasks based on the physics of these kinds 

of flow. It is possible to study the complex flow in hydraulic devices once this calibration/optimization work is achieved, 

because physical experimentation is very expensive and, in many cases, it is not possible to observe the precise details of 

the fluid flow that allow to improve the final design of the device. This work demonstrates that it is possible to capture these 

fine details of the unsteady fluid flow in turbomachinery working under design and off-design conditions, and aims to provide 

several quantitative criteria for suitable simulations. It was also demonstrated that the numerical results obtained with non-

calibrated models could be improved by means of a careful selection of the turbulence models and their suitable calibration. 

 
KEYWORDS: turbomachinery design, turbulence, CFD, validation, calibration, RSI.  

 

 
1. INTRODUCTION 
 

Nowadays, the trend in the imposed working requirements 

for hydraulic equipments is an 'elastic hydrodynamic behavior' 

what means to cover several operation conditions during its 

exploitation. 

In many cases (e.g. hydraulic turbomachinery, valves, 

injectors, others) and under certain working conditions, the flow 

behavior inside the equipment leads to the apparition of complex 

phenomena such as a fluid-structure interaction, FSI, and a 

cavitating flow. Both phenomena are potentially dangerous 

because they provoke a low performance of the machine in its 

operation and the life of the equipment is shortened too.  
The design of the hydraulic equipment that fulfills this 

elastic behavior requires a broader and deeper knowledge of 

the Mechanics science. It is broadly known that the branch of 

the Mechanics science called Computation Fluid Dynamics, 

CFD, is a useful tool in engineering design; but, to obtain 

accurate simulations of industrial flows it is necessary to 

assess the capabilities of the available numerical models for 

turbulence and cavitation. This assessment involves several 

calibration/ optimization tasks based on the physics of these 

kinds of flow. Industrial engineers from companies involved in 

CFD tasks rarely spend enough time to perform these 

analyses, because it is broadly known that ‘time is money’ for 

companies. At present, collaboration between companies and 

universities are trying to ‘fill this gap’.  
In order to cover the growing requirements of human 

resources possessing these specific skills (that imply tasks meant 

to form/train people competent enough to deal with these 

requirements), a Research&Development+innovation Group, 

R&D+i CFD/LAMA Group, was created in the Departamento 
 

 

 
de Electromecánica of the Universidad Tecnológica Nacional, 

Facultad Regional Mendoza, Argentina. This University has 

recently joined the LAWG/IAHR Group in order to enhance this 

collaborative environment among several Latin American 

universities and companies.  
The main subject of the CFD/LAMA is to apply numerical 

methods to the engineering design, both in the branches of the 

thermo- fluid- mechanics as well as in the solid mechanics. One of 

the goals of CFD/LAMA is to apply the CFD science for modeling 

complex flows in hydraulic equipment trying to improve the 

equipment designs, by means of the study of the flow behavior 

inside this kind of equipment with more detail. Some of the 

specific subjects are the study of the FSI in turbomachinery, 

pointed to the pressure fluctuation simulations, and the 

multiphase flows oriented to the simulation of cavitating flows.  
It was mentioned that a good knowledge of the ‘CFD 

environment’ in complex flows involving turbulence and cavitation 

phenomena implies a deeper understanding of several transport 

phenomena depicted by transport equations (mass, momentum, 

energy, turbulence and multi-phase mixture). It is possible to 

write them starting from each particular form (i.e., mass, 

momentum, energy, turbulence, etc. equation) in a generalized 

form, by introducing a general scalar φ that represents the 

‘transported’ property, and a subscript m that represents the 

‘mixture’, i.e., the multiphase flow [1]: 
 
 

(1) 

 

Where ρ is the density, 


c is the velocity vector, SФ is a general 

source term, Γm is the diffusion coefficient; and Ф represents the 

dependent variables (scalars as the fluid temperature T, the 

 
1CFD/LAMA, Depto Ing. Electromecánica, Universidad Tecnológica Nacional.C/Rodriguez 273. 5500 Mendoza, Argentina, corresponding author: 

miguel.coussirat@frm.utn.edu.ar 2Escola Universitaria d’Enginyeria Tècnica Industrial de Barcelona.C\ Compte d’Urgell, 187. 08036. Barcelona, Spain. Centre de Diagnòstic 

Industrial i Fluidodinàmica (CDIF), Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya Av. Diagonal, 647. ETSEIB. – 08028 Barcelona, Spain 

 

American Journal of Hydropower, Water and Environment Systems, july 2016 25 



mass fraction for jth species Yj, the turbulence kinetic energy 

k, or its dissipation rate ε ; or vectorials as the velocity 


c ) 

in the system. It is highlighted again that the subscript m 
designates ‘mixture’, i.e., remarking that the fluid is a two- or 
multi- phase fluid. With the introduction of a cavitation model, 
the complete set of governing equations for turbulent 
cavitating flows can be derived from the foregoing generalized 
scalar transport equation. 
 
1.1 Common strategies for modeling the turbulence 
 

In order to define a turbulence model, the momentum 

equation from Eq.1 is transformed by means of a special 

averaging, obtaining the so called Reynolds Averaged Navier 

Stokes equations, RANS, where the turbulence fluctuations 

are set in an explicit form, giving place to a new term in this 

equation. Then, this term is modeled by means of a 

turbulence model to transfer the effects provoked by these 

fluctuations to the computed mean flow (see details of some 

Refs. in Table 1, and Ref. [2]). This modeling gives place to 

the apparition of, e.g. k and ε variables in the generalized Eq. 

1, when the variable Ф is replaced by k or by ε, typical 

variables of the broadly known Std k-ε, model, see Refs. in 

Table 1, (see more details in [2]). 

 
Several modeling strategies for the turbulence are available 

nowadays, starting from model of zero equations to models of 

one, two or four equations in the family of the Eddy Viscosity 

Models, EVM, so-called scalar models. More sophisticated ones are 

the Reynolds Stress Models, RSM, (so called tensorial models), 

and arriving finally to the more recent ones, the so-called Large 

Eddy Simulation, LES models [2]. The latter models use quite a 

different strategy for averaging the Navier Stokes equations 

(spatial filtering), but this one also leads to a turbulence (or eddy) 

viscosity definition. Here, it is important to note that once a 

turbulence model is introduced into the momentum equations, 

these equations no longer carry any information concerning to 

their derivation (i.e., some kind of averaging technique). Both the 

RANS as well as the LES models are EVM that are used to 

substitute either the Reynolds- or the sub-grid stress tensor 

resspectively.  
After the introduction of a turbulent (or eddy) viscosity, 

both the RANS and LES equations are formally identical. The 

difference lies exclusively in the turbulence scale represented 

by the eddy viscosity used/computed by the underlying 

turbulence model. 
 
1.2 Common strategies for modeling the cavitation 
 

In order to define a cavitation model in a general CFD code 

a vapor transport equation is introduced, since there is a 

process of liquid-vapor mass transfer for cavitating flows. It is 

considered that this liquid-vapor mass transfer process 

(evaporation and condensation) is governed by the following 

vapor transport equation, (see details in [1]):  
 

(2) 

 
Where α is the phase volume fraction, the subscript ‘v’ 

indicates the vapor phase; Re and Rc are respectively the mass 

transfer source terms connected to the growth and collapse of the 

vapor bubbles. These terms account for the mass exchange 

between the vapor and the liquid phases during the cavitation 

process. Then, these terms can be modeled using the Rayleigh-

Plesset equation [3-7] that describes the growth of a single 

 
vapor bubble in a liquid. The final set of Eqs. (3-4) form the 

basis of several two-phase cavitation transport models 

included in several CFD codes after some manipulations, (e.g., 

see details in [1]). 
 

 

(3)  
 
 
 

(4) 

 

Here, RB is bubble radius;ρl, ρv, ρm are liquid, vapor and 

mixture densities; P and PB are fluid and bubble surface 

pressures respectively. 
 
1.3 Applying CFD for turbomachinery design 
 

A general code to apply to the modeling of a real 

turbomachinery comprises the set of equations aforementioned. 

To solve this set of equations comprising turbulence and cavitation 

is a not trivial task, and it is necessary to take into account a lot of 

calibration parameters, togheter with the necessity of a careful 

validation of submodels (turbulence and cavitation ones). In order 

to perform the validation/ calibration task, experimental databases 

are necessary and they are of paramount importance. 

Unfortunately, experimental measurements for turbulent 

cavitating flows in turbomachinery are very scarce because the 

major problem of physical experimentation is its high cost. In 

general, the experimental studies related to the vapor cavities 

structures present in the cavitating flow and their behavior are 

challenging due to the fact that cavitation is a very complex 

phenomenon and typically occurs in locations where the access to 

measuring instruments is limited; and it is also due to the 

presence of high velocities, high void fraction, and a considerable 

splitting of the dispersed phase [8,9]. It is also necessary either to 

measure or to control a lot of parameters (i.e., local pressure and 

temperatures in the flow, the dissolved gases content, others). 

 
More complexity is added when, in some cases, cavitating 

flows start showing a periodic behavior in its development, 

strongly dependent on the fluid-flow state.  
Similar observations concerning to the measurement 

difficulties can be made at the moment of take measurements 

of the unsteady turbulent flow pattern when different FSI 

phenomena are present in turbomachinery, e.g., to 

characterize the complete flow pattern, the boundary layer 

growing in the rotor or to measure fluctuating pressures when 

the Rotor Stator Interaction, RSI, occurs between the rows of 

fixed and moving blades.  
It is interesting to highlight that turbulence and cavitation 

are closely related. Turbulence affects cavitation inception 

since a nucleus may be found in the core of a vortex, where 

the local pressure level is lower than the mean value of the 

pressure in the flow. Hence, the nucleus could cavitate when it 

might not do so under the influence of the mean pressure 

level. This fact points out that cavitation may alter the global 

pressure field by altering the location of flow separation and 

the induced variations of the local turbulence level; thus, 

turbulence may promote cavitation and viceversa.  
Despite the fact that there are some general characteristics in 

several turbulent cavitating flows, the observed flow structures 

depend not only on the hydraulic device geometry but also on the 

fluid/flow parameters. Unfortunately, experiments 

 

26 American Journal of Hydropower, Water and Environment Systems, july 2016 



provide detailed information ‘case-by-case’ only. For all the 

above mentioned reasons, CFD applied to this kind of flows is 

an active field of research and has significant importance for 

design engineers.  
Both turbulence and cavitation phenomena offer several 

challenges for a suitable modeling by means of the available 

CFD codes; and the moving reference frame, a tool commonly 

used for unsteady modeling of flow in turbomachinery, adds 

more difficulties to obtain credible CFD results. 

 
2. VALIDATION/CALIBRATIONS TASKS, RESULTS 

AND DISCUSSION 
 

To obtain a deeper knowledge of the available CFD codes 

capabilities for modeling complex flow, a brief summary of the 

work recently developed by the CFD/LAMA Group, where several 

modeling test cases studied using experimental databases, is 

presented here. The main goal of these works was to provide 

several quantitative criteria for suitable simulations in the branch 

of turbomachinery design, due to the fact that databases having 

detailed experimental information for turbulent cavitating flow in 

turbomachinery are very scarce. Using this previous experience, 

this work is focused on the study of the RSI phenomena and the 

set of cases selected here are related to specific RSI phenomena 

that appear in turbomachinery under normal or off-design 

operation conditions (a similar work focused to study cavitating 

flows is being also performed but the obtained results are not 

presented here).  
It was already mentioned that a RSI phenomenon is a 

complex flow involving potential and turbulent effects. In order to 

have a systematic approach to this complex phenomenon, simpler 

test cases than a real turbomachine, but closely linked to the RSI 

in the machine were selected for CFD modeling. These 

experimental databases are related to steady and unsteady flow 

around isolated airfoils/hydrofoils (see Figs.2, 3 and 4) and RSI in 

a cascade of moving blades, (see Fig.5). Several validation/ 

calibration tasks were carried out to obtain information about the 

capabilities for modeling this kind of flows by means of available 

turbulence models (see more details in Refs. [10,15-18]).  
The main goal of these previous studies carried out and 

summarized here, was to observe the behavior of several EVM 

models (see Table 1) related to: a) reproduce the pressure 

coefficient Cp, the mean velocity field (see Fig.2) and its turbulent 

fluctuations (see Fig.3) for a steady fluid flow over a supercritical 

profile airfoil; b) reproduce the fluid flow field and the typical 

oscillation frequency in the wake (von Kàrmàn vortex street) for 

an unsteady flow over a NACA profile hydrofoil (see Fig.4); c) 

reproduce the boundary layer fluctuations along a plane plate 

(stator) and their characteristic oscillation frequencies due to the 

RSI phenomena in a cascade of moving blades (see Fig.5); d) 

reproduce the flow pattern in cavitating flows in injectors, Venturis 

and other hydrodynamic devices with simple geometry (results 

obtained in this last item are not shown in the present work). 

 
This previous work allows to define a suitable CFD setup 

for subsequent RSI simulations in turbomachinery (geometry 

meshing, boundary layer definitions, discretization schemes, 

etc.); because, several sensitivity tests related to: a) the 

mesh size and cells distribution in the boundary layer, and b) 

the discretization schemes influence on the results, were 

performed (not shown, see details in [15]). By means of these 

previous simulations, some ideas about the capabilities of the 

different turbulence models used for recovering the detailed 

structure of these flow patterns were obtained too. 

 
[Table 1]: Turbulence models used, (see details of 

the references cited in this Table in [2,13]). 
 

 Turbulence 
Notation Reference  

models    
    

1 Spalart Allmaras SA Spalart and Allmaras [Spalart, 1994] 
    

2 Standard k-ε Std k-ε Launder and Spalding [Launder, 1974] 
    

3 Realizable k-ε Rlz k-ε Shi et al.[Shih, 1995] 
    

4 

Re Normalization 

RNG k-ε Yakhot and Orzag [Yakhot, 1986] Groups k-ε 
    

5 Standard k-ω Std k-ω Wilcox [Wilcox, 1998] 
    

6 

Shear Stress 

SST k-ω Menter, 1994 [Menter, 1994] Transport k-ω 
    

7 

Reynolds Stress 

RSM Launder at al.[Launder, 1975] Model 
    

 
Several useful conclusions were obtained from these 

previous CFD works, and some of them are summarized here:  
a) When a flow around a thin trailing edge isolated foil, or 

around a stage of fixed and moving cascade of blades was 

modeled, the SST k-ω turbulence model shows a good 

performance to compute the profile of velocities in the 

boundary layer and the general flow pattern of the wake; 

results obtained with other EVM (see Table 1) do not show big 

differences in both cases. The fluctuating velocities u' in 

general were underest imated; but, v' and u'v' fluctuations 

were overestimated for all the EVM tested.  
b) When a flow around a truncated (i.e., non thin trailing 

edge) isolated foil was modeled, the SST k-ω turbulence 

model shows a good performance to compute the velocity 

profiles along the boundary layer, and it also shows a slight 

overestimation of the shedding frequency.  
c) When a flow around a stage of fixed and moving cascade of 

blades was modeled, the EVM used shows underestimations 
 
of the turbulence intensity compared against 
 
experiments, as well as for isolated foils having thin trailing 

edges and low flow incidence angles.  
d) In all the cases tested not big differences were observed in 

the results obtained by means of EVM, DES or LES models. 

If big differences were not observed in the results obtained, it 

is possible to say that the main advantage of the EVM models is its 

low computational cost when compared to more accurate 

turbulence models (but more resource-consuming) such as the 

RSM or the LES (see details of these comparison in Refs. 
 
[10,19]); being this fact of paramount importance when a 

flow in a complete turbomachine is modeled. 

On the other hand, and despite that the DES is an hybrid 

formulation between EVM and LES that need less 

computational resources than LES, some results obtained (not 

shown) allow to say that there is not a clear improvement 

compared to the results obtained by using EVM [10,19]. 
 
2.1 Database selected for Rotor Stator Interaction (RSI) 

Phenomena 
 

In turbomachinery design, the RSI is an important 

phenomenon, which has a strong influence in the machine 

behavior. These interactions can have a significant impact in 

the vibrational and acoustical characteristics of the machine, 

because unsteadiness and turbulence play a fundamental role 

in complex flow structures. The RSI can be divided into two 

different mechanisms: potential flow interaction and wake 

interaction. The nature of the flow due to the wake interaction 

 

American Journal of Hydropower, Water and Environment Systems, july 2016 27 



is unsteady and turbulent, and there it also appear three-

dimensional (3D) boundary layers, curvature and system 

rotation effects (see more details in [15]). 

The choice of an appropriate turbulence model and the 

boundary layer treatment is far from trivial, and a suitable 

turbulence modeling plays an important role for successful 

CFD results [10]. The experimental data used here are for a 

single-stage pump with a specific number, nq~53 [rpm, 

(m3/s)0,5, m0,75); being a vaned diffuser pump with five 

impeller blades Zi, eight diffuser vanes, Zg and a volute casing 

as shown in Fig.1, (see complete details in [11]). A detailed 

description of the pump and its specifications of the essential 

components are summarized in Tsukamoto et al. 1995 [11]. 

The unsteady pressure measurements was made at several 

places (stations) in the vaned diffuser passage (see Fig.1), 

and a comprehensive survey of instantaneous pressure within 

the diffuser passages was obtained, (see Figs. 8 and 9).  
The unsteady pressures were measured by semi-conductor-

type pressure transducers, which were installed directly on the 

pressure taps to prevent the decrease of natural frequency in the 

pressure measurement systems. Figs.8 and 9 illustrates the 

unsteady pressure measurement stations in the shroud casing side 

of the diffuser in the test pump. Due to the limited space in the 

measuring sections, the pressure taps for tangential traverse were 

located at one radial location in each passage of the diffuser only. 

The blade-to-blade distributions of unsteady pressure were 

identified by a phase shift of the measured data. The coordinates 

of the static pressure taps were formed by the cross of five radial 

grid lines and five stream-wise grid lines in a blade-to-blade 

passage as shown in Fig.1 
 
2.2 CFD results obtained for the pump working under 

the design condition 
 

Two dimensional, unsteady incompressible Reynolds-

averaged Navier-Stokes equations were solved by means of 

the commercial CFD code Ansys Fluent 12.1 [12]. An entire 

2D stage of a diffuser pump was modeled to study the 

pressure fluctuations due to the interaction between the 

impeller and the diffuser of the pump. Unsteady fluctuations of 

pressure in the steady vane and frequencies of the pressure 

fluctuations in the diffuser passage were computed and 

compared against experimental results from Tsukamoto et al., 

1995 [11]. Full RANS equations coupled with several EVM (see 

Table 1) were solved for the 2D stage to establish the most 

accurate modeling strategy for a diffuser pump.  
A constant pressure value was imposed at the fluid inlet 

and a constant pressure value was imposed at the pump 

outlet. These values were obtained from the characteristic 

curve of the pump (see mode details in [11]), checking that 

the maximum efficiency is obtained at this point, i.e., working 

under the design condition. A non slip boundary condition was 

imposed in the runner blades, diffuser vanes and volute casing 

wall. A rotational speed, N, of 2066 rpm was imposed to the 

blade impeller implying that this validation/calibration study is 

made for the turbomachine working under design conditions 

(optimal performance).  
Applying this previous experience, an entire 2D stage of a 

diffuser pump was modeled to accomplish the proposed 

turbulence model performance study. The setup defined for 

this case consists in an unsteady simulation including a 

second-order implicit velocity formulation and a pressure-

based solver. The SIMPLE pressure-velocity coupling algorithm 

was used, and a second order scheme discretization was 

selected for the numerical experiments. 

 
The maximum number of iterations for each time step was set 

to 40 in order to reduce all computed normalized numerical 

residuals to an order of O(10-5). The interface between the rotor 

blade and the diffuser vane was set to a sliding mesh, in which the 

relative position between the rotor and the stator was updated 

every time step. The adopted computational time step was about 

1/360 of the rotor revolution time. Due to the unsteady nature of 

the flow, it is required that the whole flow domain be affected by 

the unsteady fluctuations. In order to check the aforementioned 

situation, a flow rate monitoring was made at the domain outlet. 

 
After starting the simulation, the machine must spin some 

time while the flow pattern is computed to obtain the uniform 

unsteady flow and then, check the uniformity in the shape of 

pressure fluctuations; uniform unsteady flow behavior was 

obtained after 10 revolutions.  
For checking the performance of the turbulent models from 

Table 1, the results obtained for pressure fluctuations in three 

monitoring points r1c1, r1c3 and r2c3 of the vaned diffuser 

passage were recorded for every numerical simulation 

developed. These points correspond to the reported 

measurement points for the experimental data set from 

Tsukamoto, and their location can be seen in Fig.1 and Fig.6.  
In order to capture the RSI effects, the relationship 

between the pressure fluctuations and the movement of the 

rotor vanes in front of the diffuser vanes was extracted from 

the computed unsteady pressure field. Using a Fourier 

transform, the characteristic frequencies of the pressure 

fluctuations were obtained at points r1c1, r1c3 and r2c3. 

Results obtained show that the pressure fluctuates with the 

impeller blade passing frequency ZiN and its higher 

harmonics, (e.g. see Fig.8, more details in Refs. [15,16]).  
After that, a detailed analysis of the obtained results 

allows to notice that using a mesh with y+~25 (i.e., first cell 

center at a distance of y+~25 from the wall) the Spalart-

Allmaras, the Rlz k-ε and the SST k-ω turbulence models 

show the best adjustment for the experimental pressure 

fluctuations (see Fig.7). This mesh is also suitable to use Wall 

Functions, WF, for turbulence models that need this kind of 

near-wall treatment. Similar results were obtained for refined 

meshes, (i.e. y+~5), requiring a Two-Layer Modeling, TLM, for 

the near-wall treatment for some turbulence models (not 

shown, see details in [15-17,19]).  
It can be noticed that both the Std k-ω as well as SST k-ω 

turbulence models have some difficulties to capture some of the 

representative frequencies of the fluctuations, while all the other 

models accurately tested capture the characteristic frequencies of 

the phenomena (see details in Table 3, Ref. [15]).  
An interesting result is that it could be possible to recover 

the unsteady signal from the frequency spectra obtained, 

allowing to separate the potential and viscous effects. Since 

the potential effect can be recovered applying a typical 

theoretical frequency analysis [20], a subsequent subtraction 

of the potential effect from the total signal obtained by CFD 

computation (potential+turbulence) would permit the 

recovering of the turbulence effect, (see Fig.9). This proposal 

could be useful to analyze turbulence spectra or which 

frequency affects more the pressure fluctuations.  
On the other hand, the analysis of the associate velocity 

field to the pressure fluctuations is of great interest in order to 

understand RSI phenomenon more completely. Unfortunately, 

the Tsukamoto database has only pressure fluctuations 

measurements and there is no information about the velocity 

 

28 American Journal of Hydropower, Water and Environment Systems, july 2016 



field. Despite this fact, the velocity field was computed and 

compared qualitatively against similar experiments from Pedersen 

et al., 2003 [21] and CFD results from Feng et al., 2011 [22] to 

obtain a more complete idea about the capabilities of CFD to 

reproduce the flow pattern (see Figs.10 and11). Fig.10 shows the 

velocity field obtained for the Tsukamoto centrifugal pump both 

for the rotor as well as for the stator. The CFD results obtained for 

the rotor were compared to qualitatively against the experimental 

ones from Pedersen et al., 2003 [21] showing similar velocity 

distributions in the rotor. The potential effect in the rotor vane is 

clearly observed, and the structure of the boundary layers along 

the pressure side and the suction side of the blades was observed 

too.  
Comparisons of the relative velocity components against a 

numerical database for a centrifugal pump with a vaned 

diffuser from Feng et al., 2011 [22] was also performed, 

giving similar flow field configuration, (see Fig.11, and more 

details in Refs. [16,19]).  
After a careful analysis of the obtained CFD results, some 

conclusions were obtained. All the models tested showed good 

results for the pressure fluctuations in the vaned diffuser 

when compared against experimental results from Tsukamoto, 

except the Std k-ω model. It is possible to notice that the 

Spalart-Allmaras, Rlz k-ε and SST k-ω turbulence models 

show better adjustments than other EVM for the experimental 

pressure fluctuations (not shown, see Refs. [15,16,19] for 

details). When the influence of the boundary layer treatment 

applied on the results is analysed, it can be observed that 

meshes with y+~25 are able to reproduce the RSI pressure 

fluctuations accurately, despite the fact that they do not allow 

to recover the boundary layer flow in detail.  
In summary, a general conclusion from the CFD results 

obtained for a vaned pump working under design conditions is 

that the relationship between the pressure fluctuations and 

the movement of the rotor vanes in front of the diffuser vanes 

was well determined. The characteristic frequencies of the 

pressure fluctuations were obtained, resulting that the 

pressure fluctuates with the impeller blade passing frequency 

ZiN and its higher harmonics as the experiments show. All the 

turbulence models tested showed a periodic pattern in the 

pressure fluctuation in which each cycle is produced by the 

movement of a rotor blade in front of a diffuser vane, except 

for the Std k-ω and the SST k-ω turbulence models. For 

these two models, the pressure fluctuations values were 

different from each pass of an impeller blade in front of a 

diffuser blade, but the overall behavior for one revolution of 

the impeller followed a regular pattern.  
Despite some difficulties found to capture all the 

frequencies of the pressure fluctuations (only the 2ZiN was 

not well captured), the idea that the promising behavior of the 

SST k-ω model could lead to future unsteady simulations by 

using the Scale Adaptive Simulation (SAS) option, available 

for this turbulence model, was explored.  
SAS is a recent development related to unsteady 

turbulence modeling, [23-25], and it is an improved Unsteady 

Reynolds Averaged Navier Stokes (URANS) formulation, which 

allows the resolution of the turbulence spectrum in unstable 

flow conditions. Contrary to the standard URANS, SAS 

provides two independent scales to the source terms of the 

underlaying two equations model (e.g., SST k-ω model).  
In addition to the standard input for the length scale in form of 

a velocity gradient tensor ∂Ui /∂xj , SAS model computes a second 

length scale, called the von Kàrmàn length-scale, LvK 

from the second derivative of the velocity field (see details in 

[24]). The information provided by LvK allows the model to 

react more dynamically to capture scales in the flow field 

which cannot be handled by standard URANS models, because 

URANS recovers only the large-scale unsteadiness, whereas 

the SAS-SST k-ω model adjusts to the already resolved 

scales in a dynamic way and allows the development of a 

turbulent spectrum in the detached regions.  
As a result, SAS offers a single framework, which covers 

steady state regions (computed normally by RANS) as well as 

unsteady detached flow regions (which must be computed by 

LES to solve their details), without an explicit switch in the 

model formulation [24,25]. SAS would allow studies of 

unsteady flow behavior by means of an Unsteady RANS 

simulation including a technique for adapting the length scales 

automatically (SAS-URANS) instead of the more expensive, in 

terms of CPU requirements, LES option. The SAS-URANS 

option can be a very interesting tool, since LES modeling for 

turbulent flows in complex geometries (industrial flows) are 

not affordable nowadays [14,25].  
In summary, the functionality of SAS is similar to the 

Detached Eddy Simulations (DES), being DES a hybrid 

formulation that uses both EVM and LES. The LES activity in 

DES is enforced by the grid limiter, whereas SAS allows a 

breakdown of the large unsteady structures by adapting the 

turbulence model to the locally resolved length scale.  
This functionality could be explored more extensively to 

open the possibility to perform unsteady CFD simulations with 

affordable CPU costs not using so big computational meshes. 

At the moment the SAS option is only coupled to the SST k-ω 

model in Ansys Fluent v12.1 [12], and for this reason the 

behavior of the SST k-ω model was observed carefully.  
In order to explore this option, in the present work, the results 

by using SAS simulations were obtained and compared with the 

previous ones obtained using EVM, for the vaned diffuser pump 

under design conditions. Fig.12 shows a comparison among the 

results obtained using several EVM models, and SAS modeling 

with some calibration of the Cs parameter. This parameter has a 

control over the Lvk scale allowing the model to react more or less 

dynamically, and in this way it is possible to recover more or less 

unsteady effects. It is showed that a suitable calibration of SAS 

permits to adjust the pressure peaks in a better way at the r1c3 

position, i.e., in the middle of the stator channel, just when the 

flow from the rotor goes into it (see Fig.6). Near the wall, i.e., at 

the r1c1 position, the viscous effects are more important than 

inertial ones and then, the unsteady effect is not so relevant and 

the SAS term is more insensitive to calibrations. 

 

 
3. CFD FOR THE TURBOMACHINE UNDER OFF-DESIGN 

CONDITIONS 
 

Bearing in mind the presented validation/calibration work, 

now it is possible to select better options for a subsequent 

CFD study for this turbomachine working under off-design 

work conditions, being this subject the main goal of this work.  
Despite that an experimental database for off-design 

conditions is not available for this case, it is interesting to highlight 

that after an extensive validation/calibration of the models it is 

possible to ‘extrapolate the models performance’, but carefully, to 

obtain new results when the machine is working under off-design 

conditions. It is necessary to remark that these conditions provoke 

an enhancement of the boundary 

 

American Journal of Hydropower, Water and Environment Systems, july 2016 29 



layer thickness and the possibility of flow detachment 

becomes possible, being a challenge for the EVM models 

without any calibration.  
The knowledge of the behavior of the turbomachine working 

under off-design conditions is of paramount importance for design 

engineers, and to obtain credible trends in its behavior by means 

of CFD becomes an interesting option to explore. By varying the 

flow rate, and defining the suitable head, some results were 

obtained for off-design conditions, (see Fig.13).  
Fig.13 shows the results obtained for several cases, (marked 

with squares) by means of changing the boundary conditions to 

simulate the turbomachine working under design or off-design 

conditions. Notice that if the machine was working under the 

design point, the mean value for the pressure (non dimensional 

value ψ) is well captured by the CFD simulation. The enhancement 

of secondary flows under off-design operating conditions provokes 

strong secondary flows that affect the boundary layers thickness 

and their structure leading to an increase of the turbulence level. 

To manipulate this flow condition is very hard for EVM, and SAS 

option could become an interesting one, because LES option is 

very consuming in terms of CPU resources. Some details of the 

fluid flow under design and off-design work conditions can be seen 

in Fig.14. Notice that the CFD adjustments of the curve for off-

design condtions go down, but the trend is well reproduced.  
Therefore, by means of CFD it is possible to observe details of 

the complex flow in the turbomachine that sometimes is very hard 

to obtain by means of experiments. Fig.14 shows that under off-

design operation conditions secondary flows and instabilities 

appear in the rotor, affecting the general flow pattern. These 

perturbations are convected to the rotor outlet and then, start 

affecting the stator flow into the channels, leading to a ‘stalling 

cycle’ in the channel. This ‘stalling cycle’ has a completely 

unsteady behavior that affects the general performance of the 

machine. In some cases, and depending on de local flow behavior, 

a cavitating flow can appear too.  
A complete analysis of these stalling cycles can be performed 

by means of CFD. In Fig.15 the pressure fluctuations in the 

diffuser are presented, showing an unsteady behavior related with 

the ‘stalling cycle’ in the channel diffuser. The cycle showed is 

related to an equivalent time of nine cycles of the rotor blades 

passing at this point (i.e., t=9t*). It can also be seen that the 

sequence of stall/unstall appears every two diffuser channels.  
For cases of low flow rates, i.e., Q<Qd, the pressure 

pulsations are stronger than for high flow ratios; this fact is 

confirmed by experimental results for hydraulic machinery 

working under this condition (see details in [16]).  
Finally it is necessary to remark that all the CFD results 

presented here, give good adjustments of the experimental 

results despite they are obtained in 2D geometry. The 

obtained results were also compared against CFD results for 

other 2D geometry from the literature [22] giving similar 

trends for the pressure fluctuations. The experimental 

measurements from Tsukamoto were obtained in a mixed flow 

pump (nq~53). It is broadly known that mixed machines have 

double curvature blades; therefore, the experimental machine 

has a full 3D geometry.  
It is quite easy to obtain a 2D geometry of a turbomachine 

from the mean characteristics of the pump, pictures and drawings 

are given in the references found in the literature (e.g. see 

Tsukamoto, 1995 [11], Feng, 2011 [22]). Instead, obtaining a 3D 

geometry from the available data is not a trivial task, because the 

available experimental databases do not 

provide complete information of the full 3D geometry normally. 

Despite the fact that to obtain a 3D geometry is not easy, future 

work will consist in 3D simulations in order to check the RSI 

phenomena and other fluid-structure interaction (e.g. stator-

volute interaction, casing tongue-stator interaction, others).  
To reach this goal, it is necessary to reconstruct the 3D 

geometry using the given characteristics of the machine [11], 

by means of a ‘classical design’ of turbomachinery, (a skill not 

very common in the industrial engineers nowadays). A 

classical preliminary design was carried out to obtain the 3D 

geometry for this machine (see Fig.16), and the obtained 3D 

geometry of the rotor can be seen in Fig.17. It can be 

compared to the geometry used by Shi et al., 2001 [26], in 

his CFD work. After completing the 3D geometry design, a line 

of the future work comprises the 3D simulation of the 

complete machine using the quantitative criteria for the 

assessment of internal flow state obtained in this work.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[Figure 1: Experiments from Tsukamoto et al., 1995 [11]. It can be 

seen a schematics of the tested diffuser pump showing positions of 

the pressure measurement stations for the vaned diffuser and the 

locations of the volute pressure taps. Meshes showed correspond to 

2D and 3D CFD cases from Shi et al, 2001[26].]  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
[Figure 2: CFD Results for Boundary Layer and Wake flows over a 

supercritical profile airfoil: Left, Cp coef.; Right, mean velocities. 

Exp. from Nakayama et al., 1985 (see details in Refs. [16,17]). 
Nomenclature: x/C distance from leading edge of the 
hydrofoill/chord, u/Uref: local velocity value/mean velocity value.] 

 

30 American Journal of Hydropower, Water and Environment Systems, july 2016 



 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
[Figure 3: CFD Results for Boundary Layer flow around a 

supercritical airfoil: fluctuating velocities along the boundary layer. 

Exp. from Nakayama et al., 1985 (see details in Refs. [16,17]). 

Nomenclature: x'x'/Uref
2: local fluctuation / mean velocity value.]  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[Figure 4: CFD Results, Unsteady flow over a NACA 0009 truncated 

hydrofoil. The frequency of the von Kàrmàn vortex street is 

compared against experiments from Ausoni et al. 2005 (B/W 

pictures, see details in Ref. [17]).]  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
[Figure 5: CFD Results for a RSI phenomena. Up, mesh and geometry of 

the experimental setup for CFD. Down, Results obtained for fr=20Hz, 

30Hz and 40Hz for turbulence intensity,  , (see details  
in Refs. [16,17]. CFD results show that depending on fr, a different 

structure of the flow along the plate was obtained.]  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
[Figure 6: Details of the meshed geometry for a diffuser pump. Notation:  
rici places where the unsteady pressures were measured [11].] 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
[Figure 7: CFD results using a mesh with y+~25. Left, point r1c3; Right,  
point r2c3. ΔΨ=(p-ps)/(0.5ρU2U2) vs t*, where: ΔΨ, non-

dimensional unsteady pressure; (p-ps) unsteady component of the 

relative pressure; ps, total pressure at pump suction; U2, peripheral 

speed of the impeller; t*= t/Ti , non-dimensional time; Ti , time 
required to traverse one pitch of impeller blade.]  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
[Figure 8: CFD results for design conditions, (Q=1,0Qd) for the 
Spalart-Allmaras model. Left, CFD results for the pressure 

fluctuations at point r1c3 (see Fig.1); Right, frequency domain 
showing the harmonics of the unsteady pressure fluctuations 
obtained from the CFD computations.]  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
[Figure 9: CFD results using for design conditions, (Q=1,0Qd). From 

the frequency spectra obtained by CFD it is possible to recover the 
complete (potential+turbulence) unsteady signal. The arrows point 
out the composition process for obtaining the complete signal 
starting with individual frequencies by means of their addition.]  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
[Figure 10: CFD results using a mesh with y+~25 for design 

conditions (Q=1,0Qd). Left, rotor velocity field; Right, diffuser 

(stator) velocity field. Notice that quantitatively, the velocity field is 
similar as one from Pedersen, 2003 [21]. This database corresponds 
to a centrifugal pump without diffuser.] 

 

American Journal of Hydropower, Water and Environment Systems, july 2016 31 



 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
[Figure 11: Comparison of the CFD results obtained against a similar  
radial machine (Feng et al., 2011 [22]): velocity field obtained, for 

design conditions (Q=1,0Qd). Notation: LDV Laser Doppler 
Velocimeter measurements [22]; Wu, tangential component of the 
relative velocity; Wr, radial component of the relative velocity.]  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
[Figure 12: CFD  results  for  the  non-dimensional  head-flow  rate 

ψ = (2gHmU2
-2) vs t*. Up: r1c1 position; Down: r1c3 position; Left: EVM; 

Right: SAS. Nomenclature: • Experimental data (Tsukamoto, 1995).]  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
[Figure 14: CFD results for the flow field under three operation 

conditions, vaned pump: Left: Flow pattern in the rotor, Right: Flow 

pattern in the diffuser (stator).]  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
[Figure 15: CFD results for velocity field and pressure fluctuations, 

point r1c3, Q/Qd=0.61. In the sequence of pictures the stalling cycle 

in the stator (curve in blue) joined with the related velocity field is 
shown.]  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
[Figure 13: CFD results, (ψ, φ) Left: curve for the vaned pump; 
Rigth: Assocciated fluid flow pattern for some working conditions.  
Notation: Non-dimensional head-flow rate curve (ψ, φ); pressure 

coeff., ψ = (2gHmU2
-2); flow rate coeff., φ = (Q) x (2�b2R2U2)

-1; Ο, 

Exp. from Tsukamoto, 1995 [11].] 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
[Figure 16: Summary of steps followed for obtaining a 3D rotor 

configuration by means of a semi-empirical ‘classical design’ of a mixed 

pump (Tables and curves are extracted from the common literature found, 

developed for specific undergraduated Fluid Mechanics courses).] 

 

32 American Journal of Hydropower, Water and Environment Systems, july 2016 



 
 
 
 
 
 

 
[Figure 17: Left: Rotor configuration obtained by means of a 

‘classical design’ of a mixed pump. Right: rotor configuration from 

Shi et al, 2001 [26].] 

 
4. CONCLUSIONS 
 

It is known that EVM models have advantages related to 

CPU costs compared against other more sophisticated options 

(e.g. RSM or LES), but it is also true that they have some 

known deficiencies when used for turbulent cavitating flows 

simulations. Then, in order to check the capabilities of the 

available EVM models applied to the turbulent flows 

simulations, an extensive validation/calibration work was 

performed. This work was focused on the study of the 

capabilities of EVM to capture the characteristics of the RSI 

phenomenon in a vaned diffuser pump.  
This work proves by means of a very detailed comparison 

of the results obtained against experimental databases and 

other CFD works found in the literature, that it is possible to 

observe the flow instabilities due to RSI phenomenon that 

affect the general flow pattern when the machine works under 

design and off-design conditions. This information is very 

useful for the design engineer in order to analyse and to 

propose a more efficient design without carrying out several 

and very expensive experiments.  
It was observed that the SAS modeling option improves the 

results obtained in some cases when it is compared with the ones 

obtained by means of EVM models for meshes of similar size. This 

allows performing unsteady simulations with lower CPU costs 

compared with DES/LES simulations, because DES/ LES 

simulations need bigger meshes than SAS modeling.  
Despite the promising results obtained with SAS, more 

intensive validation/calibration work is needed for modeling 

both design as well as off-design conditions using 

experimental databases having more complete information. At 

moment these databases are very scarce in the literature. 

 
5. REFERENCES 
 
[1] Li H., Kelecy F., Egelja-Maruszewski A., Vasquez S., 

2008, ‘Advanced Computational Modeling of Steady And 

Unsteady Cavitating Flows’, Proceedings of IMECE2008, 

2008 ASME International Mechanical Engineering Congress 

and Exposition, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.  
[2] Coussirat M., 2003, ‘Theoretical/Numerical Study of Flows 

with Strong Streamlines Curvature’, PhD Thesis, Universitat 

Politècnica de Catalunya, Barcelona, Spain.  
[3] Kubota A., Kato H., and Yamaguchi H., 1992, ‘A New 

Modeling of Cavitating Flows: A Numerical Study of 

Unsteady Cavitation on a hydrofoil section’, J. Fluid Mech., 

240, pp. 59–96.  
[4] Singhal A., Athavale M., Li H., and Jiang Y., 

2002,‘Mathematical Basis and Validation of Full Cavitation 

Model’, ASME J. Fluids Eng. 124, pp. 617–624.  
[5] Zwart J., Gerber A., Belamri T., 2004, ‘Two-Phase Flow Model 

for Predicting Cavitation Dynamics’, Proc. 5th International 

Conference on Multiphase Flow, Yokohama, Japan, paper 152. 

[6] Kozubková M., Rautová J., and Bojko M., 

2012,‘Mathematical Model of Cavitation and Modeling of 

Fluid Flow in Cone’, Procedia Engineering 39, pp. 9–18.  
[7] Franc J. and Michel J,, 2004, Fundamentals of Cavitation, 

Kluwer Academic Publ., New York USA. 

[8] Peters A., Sagar H., Lantermann U., Moctar O., 2015, 

‘Numerical modeling and prediction of cavitation erosion’, 

Wear 338 339, pp. 189 201.  
[9] Duan L., Yuan S., Hub L., Yang W., Yu J., Xia X., 2016, 

‘Injection performance and cavitation analysis of an 

advanced 250 MPa common rail diesel injector’, Int. J. of 

Heat and Mass Transfer 93, pp. 388-397.  
[10] Coussirat, M., Fontanals, A., Grau, J., Guardo, A. and 

Egusquiza. E., 2008, ‘CFD study of the boundary layer 

influence on the wake for turbulent unsteady flow in rotor-

stator interaction’. IAHR 24th Symposium on Hydraulic 

Machinery and Systems. Foz do Iguassu, Brazil (2008).  
[11] Tsukamoto, H., Uno, M., Hamafuku, H., and Okamura, 

T., 1995, ‘Pressure Fluctuation Downstream of a Diffuser 

Pump Impeller,’ The 2nd Joint ASME/JSEM Fluids 

Engineering Conference, Forum of Unsteady Flow, FED-Vol. 

216, pp. 133– 138.  
[12] Ansys Inc. Ansys Fluent Software, 

http://www.ansys.com/ Industries/Academic/Tools/ 

[13] Coussirat M., Moll F., Cappa F., Fontanals A., 2016, ‘Study of 

Available Turbulence and Cavitation Models to Reproduce 

Flow Patterns In Confined Flows‘,Journal of Fluids Engineering,  
(in press)  

[14] Fontanals A., Coussirat M., Guardo A. and Egusquiza E., 

2010, ‘Detailed Study of the Rotor-Stator Interaction 

Phenomenon in a Moving Cascade of Airfoils’, IAHR 25th 

Symposium on Hydraulic Machinery and Systems. 

Timisoara, Romania.  
[15] Fontanals A., Guardo A., Coussirat M. and Egusquiza E., 

2011, ‘Numerical Study of the Fluid–Structure Interaction in 

the Diffuser Passage of a Centrifugal Pump’, COUPLED 

PROBLEMS 2011, IV Int. Conf. on Comput. Methods for 

Coupled Problems in Scie. and Eng.  
[16] Fontanals A., 2012,‘Caracterització del flux a causa de la 

interacció rotor-estator en turbomàquines mitjançant CFD’, 

PhD Thesis, Universitat Politètcnica Catalunya, Barcelona, 

Spain.  
[17] Coussirat M., Fontanals A., Guardo A., 2012 ‘CFD Study of 

the Rotor-Stator Interaction in a Centrifugal Pump With 

Diffuser’, Anales AFA Vol. 23 Fluidos (34-38) Bs.As., Argentina. 
 
[18] Fontanals A., Guardo A. Zobeiri A., Egusquiza E., Farhat 

M. and Avellan F., 2014, ‘Boundary Layer Effects on the 

Vortex Shedding in a Donaldson- type Hydrofoil’, IAHR 27th 

Symposium on Hydraulic Machinery and Systems. Montreal, 

Canada.  
[19] Guardo A., Fontanals A., Coussirat M., 2013, ‘Estudio 

Numerico de la Interaccion Rotor Estator en el Difusor se 

Una Bomba,’ Mecánica Computacional Vol XXXII, AMCA, 

págs. 1155-1168.  
[20] Rodriguez C., Egusquiza E. and Santos I., 2007, 

‘Frequencies in the vibration induced by the rotor stator 

interaction in acentrifugal pump turbine’, Journal of Fluids 

Engineering, vol.129, no. 11, pp. 1428–1435  
[21] Pedersen, N., Larsen, P., Jacobsen, C., 2003 ‘Flow in 

centrifugal pump impeller at design and off design 

conditions- Part I: Particle Image Velocimetry (PIV) and 

Laser Doppler Velocimetry (LDV) measurements’. Journal of 

Fluids Engineering, Vol. 125. 

 

American Journal of Hydropower, Water and Environment Systems, july 2016 33 



[22] Feng J. Benra F, Dohmen H., 2011, ‘Investigation of 

periodically unsteady flow in a radial pump by CFD simulations 

and LDV measurements’. Journal of Turbomachinery, Vol 133. 
 
[23] Menter F., Kuntz M. and Langtry R., 2003, ‘Ten Years of 

Industrial Experience with the SST Turbulence Model’, 

Turbulence, Heat and Mass Transfer 4, K. Hanjalic et al., 

eds., House, Inc., pp. 625–632.  
[24] Menter F. and Egorov Y., 2010, ‘The Scale-Adaptive 

Simulation Method for Unsteady Turbulent Flow Predictions. 

Part 1: Theory and Model Description’, Flow Turbulence 

Combust. 85, pp. 113–138. 

[25] Egorov Y., Menter F., Lechner R., and Cokljat D., 

2010,‘The Scale-Adaptive Simulation Method for Unsteady 

Turbulent Flow Predictions. Part 2: Application to Complex 

Flows’, Flow Turbulence Combust. 85, pp. 139–165.  
[26] Shi, F., and Tsukamoto, H., 2001, ‘Numerical Study of 

Pressure Fluctuations Caused by Impeller-Diffuser 

Interaction in a Diffuser Pump Stage, ’ASME J. Fluids Eng., 

123, pp. 466–474. [Launder, 1974] Launder B. and 

Spalding D., 1974, ‘The Numerical Computation of Turbulent 

Flows’, Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and 

Engineering 3, pp. 269– 289. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

34 American Journal of Hydropower, Water and Environment Systems, july 2016 


