















































 

Proceedings 2017, 1, 32; doi:10.3390/ecsa-3-E010 www.mdpi.com/journal/proceedings 

Proceedings 

On the Use of PZT-Patches as Exciters in Modal 
Analysis: Application to Submerged Structures † 
Alexandre Presas *, David Valentin, Eduard Egusquiza, Carme Valero,  
Mònica Egusquiza and Matias Bossio 

CDIF-UPC, Av. Diagonal 647, 08028 Barcelona, Spain; david.valentin@upc.edu (D.V.); 
eduard.egusquiza@upc.edu (E.E.); valero@mf.upc.edu (C.V.); monica.egusquiza@upc.edu (M.E.); 
matias.alberto.bossio@upc.edu (M.B.) 
* Correspondence: alexandre.presas@upc.edu; Tel.: +34-93-4016-715 
† Presented at the 3rd International Electronic Conference on Sensors and Applications,  

15–30 November 2016; Available online: https://sciforum.net/conference/ecsa-3. 

Published: 14 November 2016 

Abstract: Modal Analysis is an experimental technique widely used to determine the dynamic 
response of structures. One of the most critical part is the selection of the actuator that will excite 
the tested structure. In many cases, traditional exciters, such as hammers and shakers, have been 
used for this purpose. Nevertheless, these exciters may have the disadvantage of modifying the 
modal parameters (as reported in some cases) and they are difficult to be used when the structure 
is not accessible (confined and/or submerged). For these cases PZT-patches, that are very light 
structures (compared to the tested structure), have been recently used as exciters. Although, in the 
analyzed studies the natural frequencies of the structure have been determined using PZTs, the rest 
of parameters that determine the FRF (Frequency response Function) have been not obtained.  
This could be, because the calibration of PZTs as dynamic force transducers is a complicated task 
and not an information given by the manufacturers, as in other exciters used for the same purpose. 
This paper analyzes experimentally and analytically the use of PZT-patches as exciters for modal 
analysis. For this purpose, a tested structure is excited in different ways with a PZT and its response 
is compared with a reference case, obtained with a classical exciter. Analyses show how to obtain 
different modal parameters that determine the FRF of the structure, without previous calibration of 
the PZT. Finally, and in order to show the potential advantages of these exciters for inaccessible 
structures, the procedure is repeated for the same structure submerged in water, showing that PZT 
are much more appropriated exciters in these cases. 

Keywords: PZT actuators; Modal Analysis; exciters; submerged structures 
 

1. Introduction 

In many engineering components that are subjected to dynamic loads it is of paramount importance 
to analyze the dynamic structural response to avoid dynamic problems such as resonances or fatigue 
that can drastically reduce their useful life. For this purpose, the technique known as Modal Analysis 
has been widely used in the past [1–4]. In Experimental Modal Analysis one of the first steps is to 
determine the Frequency Response Function (FRF), which means to determine the relation between 
response of the structure (in terms of vibration) and the dynamic force, for the frequency range of 
interest. Therefore, with the FRF the dynamic response of the structure can be analyzed around the 
resonance conditions. 

One of the keypoints when performing Modal Analysis is the selection of the exciters that have 
to be used to determine the FRF. These have to be capable to excite the structure in the desired 
frequency range and they have to not affect the tested structure when they are used (load mass effect [5]). 



Proceedings 2017, 1, 32 2 of 7 

 

Furthermore the sensitivity of the sensors, i.e., relationship between electrical and mechanical signal, 
has to be known. The most used actuators for Modal Analysis are instrumented hammers (no fixed 
excitation device) and different kind of shakers that can be fixed or not to the structure. In both cases, 
generally the sensitivity of the transducer and therefore the force that is being applied to the tested 
structure is known. Nevertheless, for some kind of inaccessible structures (such as confined and/or 
submerged structures) the use of these classical exciters can be very difficult due to the inaccessibility 
of the structure in operating conditions. For this kind of structures, exciters such as piezoelectric 
patches (PZT-patches) have been used in the past [6–9]. These studies show that natural frequencies, 
which are one of the structural parameters that define the FRF, can be determined by using PZTs. 
Nevertheless the FRF and the rest of associated parameters have not been determined by using this 
kind of transducers. This could be because the sensitivity of the transducer (relation between voltage 
and dynamic force) is not directly given by the manufacturers and it is well known that is not linear 
in all the frequency range. 

This paper has the objective to analyze how PZT-patches can be used to determine all the modal 
characteristics (natural frequencies, mode shapes, damping and scaling factors) that define the 
complete FRF of a structure. For this purpose the FRF of a tested structure is determined with a 
classical excitation method (instrumented hammer) and compared with the response obtained with 
a PZT-patch excitation. In this way it is shown how to extract modal parameters when using PZTs. 
Finally, the advantages of using PZT exciters to determine the FRF of inaccessible structures are evaluated 
testing the same structure submerged in water. 

2. Modal Analysis Model 

The basic assumption of the modal analysis is that each structure can be understood as a 
superposition of masses, springs and dampers interconnected to each other. The matritial equation 
that express this model is typically written as [1,2]: + + = ( ) (1) 

, 	 ,  are respectively the displacement, velocity and acceleration vector in the discretized 
points.	 , , 	 are respectively the matrices of mass, dampers and springs. In order to estimate 
the modal parameters that define the dynamic response of the structure the Frequency Response 
Function (FRF) has to be obtained. This is defined as the relationship between displacement and force 
in the frequency domain ( ): ( ) = ( ) · ( )  (2) 

The FRF ( ( ) ) of a proportionally damped system (which is a common model for damping) 
can be expressed as: 

( ) = 2( + − ) − 2  (3) 
Each structure has infinite vibration modes but with the discretization used in modal analysis 

just N of them are obtained. Equation (3) express the FRF as the superposition of parameters that 
define each mode r: 

• Natural frequency:  is the natural frequency of the corresponding mode r 
• Damping:  is the damping factor. Damping determines the amplitude of the structural 

response when the system is close to a resonance condition =  
• Mode shapes:  define the deformation of the structure close to resonance condition 
• Scaling factor:  for each mode r 

Due to the definition of ( ) , these parameters can be also obtained experimentally by 
measuring simultaneously ( )  and ( )  with appropriate transducers. ( )  is tipically obtained with a motion sensor such as an accelerometer (fixed to the structure) 
or with a non contact sensor (proximity probe, Laser Doppler Vibrometer…). ( ) 	 has to be measured 



Proceedings 2017, 1, 32 3 of 7 

 

with a calibrated actuator, i.e., sensitivity of the sensor in force (V/N), has to be known. With classical 
exciters such as an instrumented hammer or shakers this parameter is known and given by the 
manufacturer. For PZT-patches this information is not directly given by the manufacturers and 
according to the authors knowledge this has not been successfully obtained in the past. 

3. Experimental Set-Up 

The use of PZT-patches as exciters in Modal Analysis has been tested in a structure consisting of 
a circular disk hanged with a thin rope. The structure has been also excited with a calibrated Hammer 
in order to have a reference FRF. 

3.1. Equipment Used 

3.1.1. Tested Structure 

It is a stainless steel disk with 200 mm diameter. The total mass of the disk is approximately 7.6 kg. 

3.1.2. PZT-Patch 

The patch used for this test is the PI-876-A12. This has been glued on the disk with an epoxy 
component (LOCTITE 9466). 

3.1.3. Signal Generator and Amplifier 

The electrical signal sent to the patch is generated with the module NI-9263 and conditioned to 
the PZT voltage range (−100 V to 250 V) with an amplifier OEM 835. 

3.1.4. Instrumented Hammer 

The hammer used to obtain the reference FRF is the instrumented hammer Dytran 9722A2000 
with a sensitivity of 2 mV/N. 

3.1.5. Accelerometer 

To measure the structural response of the disk an accelerometer Dytran 3006A with a sensitivity 
of 100 mV/g has been used. 

3.1.6. Acquisition System 

All the signals have been acquired using a B&K LANXI 5023 module with 12 channels and 
maximum acquisition frequency of 66 kHz. All the equipment used can be seen in Figure 1. 

 
Figure 1. Equipment used. 



Proceedings 2017, 1, 32 4 of 7 

 

3.2. Excitation Charactersitic 

A chirp signal of 8 s varying the frequency from 0–1000 Hz (linear variation) is used to excite the 
disk. The disk is excited 5 times in this way for averaging and calculation of the coherence [2]. When using 
the impact hammer, the disk is hit 5 times on the middle of the patch but on the opposite side (Figure 1). 

3.3. Tests with the Disk Submerged 

The same procedure as explained in the previous points is used to excite the disk submerged in water. 

4. Results and Discussion 

The FRF ((m/s2)/N) is obtained with the impact hammer and compared with the relation voltage-
force ((m/s2)/V) that is obtained when using the PZT-patch (Figure 2). Note that this second function 
is just the relation between the signal of the accelerometer and the excitation signal sent to the patch 
in the frequency domain (not the FRF). As mentioned before the relation voltage-dynamic force is not 
generally known for PZT-patches. 

 
Figure 2. FRF obtained with the Hammer (true FRF) and relation (V/(m/s2)) obtained with the PZT. 

4.1. Natural Frequencies 

The peaks shown in Figure 2 are the analyzed natural frequencies (range 0–1 kHz) for the tested 
structure. The value of these natural frequencies obtained with both methods is shown in Table 1.  
As in other studies [6–9], it is shown that when using PZTs the natural frequencies of the tested 
structure can be well determined. In case of very light structures, where the load mass effect of the 
actuator could affect the results[5], the natural frequencies of the tested structure could be determined 
more precisely with PZTs than with the impact Hammer. 

Table 1. Comparison modal parameters (natural frequencies, mode shapes and damping ratio) with 
hammer excitation and PZT-patch excitation). 

 Natural Frequency (Hz) Mode Shape 
(COMAC %) 

Damping Ratio (%) 
 Hammer PZT Hammer PZT 

Mode 1 256.25 256.18 99.4 0.032 0.034 
Mode 2 411.75 411.75 98.7 0.064 0.065 
Mode 3 598.00 597.938 98.9 0.030 0.031 
Mode 4 963 962.813 99.3 0.095 0.097 

  



Proceedings 2017, 1, 32 5 of 7 

 

4.2. Damping 

The damping ratio ( = / ) is estimated with the classical half power method [1,2] applied 
on the peaks of the FRF. For each mode r: = , − ,2  (4) 

The values , , ,  determine the frequency band around , where the amplitude of the FRF 
is /√2 (see Figure 2). From Table 1, it can be seen that when using the same method for the 
peaks of the function obtained with the PZT ((m/s2)/V) the damping ratio can be also determined. In 
fact, the damping ratio could be estimated with the same method also with the response only ( )  
(or autospectrum) if the force in the frequency band ( , : , )  would be constant (impact 
excitation). This means, that although the force of the patches varies with the frequency (easily 
deduced comparing the two curves in Figure 2) it can be assumed that is approximately constant in 
the small frequencybands used for the damping estimation. 

4.3. Mode Shapes 

Since for =  the motion of the structure is dominated by the mode shape [1,2] it can be 
easily demonstrated that both methods will give the same mode shape (also experimentally demonstrated 
in [8]). The classical way to compare two modal vectors is with the MAC indicator [1,2]. In this case, the 
MAC has been obtained analyzing the mode shapes defined in 16 equidistant points on the periphery 
of the disk. The values close to 100% (Table 1) show that the mode shapes obtained with the two 
methods are practically the same. 

4.4. Scaling Factors 

Looking at Equation (3), the only remaining modal parameter to determine the complete FRF 
when using the PZT-patch is the scaling factor , which defines the real amplitude of the peaks for 
each mode r. Note that for the estimation of all the previous modal parameters the calibration 
voltage/force of the PZT-patch was not necessary, as demonstrated experimentally in this paper 
(Table 1). Nevertheless, to have the amplitude of the peaks it would be necessary to have such 
calibration, which is complicated to be obtained experimentally, as mentioned in previous sections. 

For this reason and in order to obtain the true amplitude of the peaks in the FRF, the method 
proposed here is to combine the information obtained experimentally with the PZTs (natural 
frequencies & damping) and to use it in a computational Finite Element Model of the tested structure. 
For this kind of computational models the structure is generally modeled as an assembly of masses 
and springs but without considering the damping [10] and therefore, the real amplitude of the FRF 
cannot be obtained. Nevertheless, the estimation of the real amplitude can be obtained if the 
experimental damping factor obtained experimentally, is introduced in the model. 

For the current structure ANSYS v.16 was used. With Numerical Modal Analysis and without 
damping, it was checked that the natural frequencies obtained experimentally and numerically had 
a discrepancy of less than 2.5%. The next step was to introduce the damping obtained experimentally 
in the model (for every mode) and to perform the numerical analysis again (harmonic analysis).  
For this second analysis, the force was applied in the same point than the middle point of the patch 
and the response evaluated in the same position than the accelerometer (Figure 1). In this way the 
real amplitude of the FRF is obtained by means of numerical simulation and therefore the scaling 
factors 	 can be calculated and the function ((m/s2)/V) shown in Figure 2 can be corrected according to 
these factors. Figure 3 shows the comparison of the estimated FRF function when using the PZT (after 
correction with the numerical model) with the FRF (obtained with the Hammer). 



Proceedings 2017, 1, 32 6 of 7 

 

 
Figure 1. FRF with the hammer and FRF estimated combining the PZT-excitation and simulation model. 

It can be seen that now both functions have aproximately the same amplitude on the resonant peaks 
(discrepancy of less than 6%), which means that with the use of PZT, the real FRF can be well estimated. 

4.5. Modal Parameters of the Structure Submerged in Water 

For submerged and/or inaccesible structures it can be dificult to use clasical exciters due to the 
inaccesibility of the tested structure. Even if they could be used, the use of them can modify the 
boundary conditions of the test. In this case it is very advantageous to use PZT. Aplying the same 
procedure explained before, now the tested structure has being excited submerged in water and close 
to a rigid wall. Modal parameters are obtained for the Hammer excitation and for the PZT excitation 
(Table 2). 

As seen in this table, the experimental values of the frequencies are very close when comparing 
both methods but damping values are totally diferent. The reason for this diference is that when 
impacting the structure with the Hammer, the structure is slightly moving in the water affecting the 
velocity profile of the surrounding fluid and therefore affecting the fluid damping. This demonstrates, 
that for this kind of structures, the modal parameters can be better determined using PZTs. 

Table 2. Comparison modal parameters (natural frequency and damping) between PZT excitation 
and hammer. 

Natural Frequency (Hz) Damping Ratio (%) 
Hammer PZT Hammer PZT 

Mode 1 160.063 160.500 0.382 0.180 
Mode 2 268.188 268.063 0.242 0.125 
Mode 3 410.250 409.688 0.218 0.107 
Mode 4 632.063 630.188 0.25 0.148 

5. Conclusions 

In this paper, it has been shown how to use PZT patches as exciters in Experimental Modal 
Analysis (EMA) of a generic structure. This is particularly interesting, because these exciters, which 
are extremely light and thin, can be used for inaccessible structures (confined, rotating, submerged…) 
where other classical exciters used in EMA are almost impossible to be installed and can disturb the 
boundary conditions of the test. 

For a tested structure, the excitation made with a PZT-patch has been compared with the excitation 
made with a classical method (calibrated Hammer). Results show, that when PZTs are used as exciters, 
most of the modal parameters, such as natural frequencies, mode shapes and damping, that define 
the Frequency Response Function (FRF) of the structure, are correctly obtained, without a previous 
calibration voltage/force of the PZT-patch. 



Proceedings 2017, 1, 32 7 of 7 

 

In order to determine the Frequency Response Function (FRF) of the tested structure completely 
when using PZTs, this paper proposes a combined method, introducing modal parameters obtained 
experimentally in a numerical Finite Element Model. 

Finally, the potentiality of PZTs patches as exciters of inaccessible structures has been proved 
using them in the same structure submerged. Results show that other classical exciters (Impact Hammer), 
typically used in Modal Analysis, disturb the boundary conditions making a wrong estimation of some 
of the modal parameters. 

Acknowledgments: The authors wants to acknowledge HYPERBOLE research project, granted by the European 
Commission (ERC/FP7- ENERGY-2013-1-Grant 608532). 

Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest. 

Abbreviations 

The following abbreviations are used in this manuscript: 

PZT Piezoelectric Transducer 
FRF Frequency Response Function 

References 

1. Ewins, D.J. Modal Testing Theory and Practice; Research Studies Press: Letchworth, UK, 1984. 
2. Heylen, W. Modal Analysis Theory and Testing; Katholieke Universiteit Leuven: Leuven, Belgium, 2007. 
3. Hearn, G.; Testa, R.B. Modal analysis for damage detection in structures. J. Struct. Eng. 1991, 117, 3042–3063. 
4. Hermans, L.; Van der Auweraer, H. Modal testing and analysis of structures under operational conditions: 

Industrial applications. Mech. Syst. Signal Process. 1999, 13, 193–216. 
5. Bi, S.; Ren, J.; Wang, W.; Zong, G. Elimination of transducer mass loading effects in shaker modal testing. 

Mech. Syst. Signal Process. 2013, 38, 265–275. 
6. De La Torre, O.; Escaler, X.; Egusquiza, E.; Farhat, M. Experimental investigation of added mass effects on 

a hydrofoil under cavitation conditions. J. Fluids Struct. 2013, 39, 173–187. 
7. Valentín, D.; Presas, A.; Egusquiza, E.; Valero, C. Experimental study on the added mass and damping of 

a disk submerged in a partially fluid-filled tank with small radial confinement. J. Fluids Struct. 2014, 50, 1–17. 
8. Presas, A.; Valero, C.; Huang, X.; Egusquiza, E.; Farhat, M.; Avellan, F. Analysis of the Dynamic Response of 

Pump-Turbine Runners-Part I: Experiment; IOP Conference Series: Earth and Environmental Science; IOP 
Publishing: Bristol, UK, 2012; p. 052015. 

9. Presas, A.; Egusquiza, E.; Valero, C.; Valentin, D.; Seidel, U. Feasibility of using pzt actuators to study the 
dynamic behavior of a rotating disk due to rotor-stator interaction. Sensors 2014, 14, 11919–11942. 

10. Madenci, E.; Guven, I. The Finite Element Method and Applications in Engineering Using Ansys®; Springer: 
Berlin, Germany, 2015. 

© 2016 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access 
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution 
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/). 


