









































Microsoft Word - ISROMAC-192.doc


Numerical investigation of the cavitation effect on natural 
frequencies of a hydrofoil 

 
Xin Liu1, Lingjiu Zhou2*, Xavier Escaler3, Zhengwei Wang1          

ISROMAC 2016  
International 

Symposium on 
Transport 

Phenomena and 
Dynamics of 

Rotating Machinery 
 

Hawaii, Honolulu 
April 10-15, 2016 

Abstract 
The added mass effects on a NACA0009 hydrofoil under cavitation conditions determined in 
a cavitation tunnel have been numerically simulated using finite element method (FEM). 
Based on the validated model, the effects of averaged properties of the cavity considered as 
a two-phase mixture have been evaluated. the simulation results point out that the average 
properties of the cavity, considered as a mixture of vapor/water, have a significant effect on 
added mass coefficients and mode shapes. These effects appear to be more important for 
higher modes of vibration. For instance, the first torsion mode can evolve towards the second 
bending mode when reducing the cavity void ratio from 1 to 0.9. 
 

 
Keywords 
Added mass — Sheet cavitation — Fluid-structure interaction — Mode transition  
1 Department of Thermal Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China 
2 College of Water Resources & Civil Engineering, China Agricultural University, Beijing, China 
3Center for Industrial Diagnostics, Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya, Barcelona, Spain 
*Corresponding author:  zlj@cau.edu.cn   

INTRODUCTION  
If large scale cavitation attaches to a solid surface, 
additional uncertainties will be added to the FSI (Fluid-
Structure Interaction) phenomenon. Both cavitation flow 
and classic FSI problems have been studied for years 
separately, but it is still a challenge to estimate added mass 
effects in a cavitation flow. The mixture of water and vapor 
phases that forms the macroscopic hydrodynamic cavities 
can create averaged properties that are difficult to quantify 
and that vary from the expected effects of pure liquid water 
flow. Moreover, new boundary conditions at cavitation 
regions are not fully understood. In fact, many studies have 
noted the cavitation effects on FSI for various bodies, 
especially propeller blades and hydrofoils. Nevertheless, 
estimations of such effects are only seldom found. 

The FEM-based acoustic fluid approach, that avoids the 
modeling effort and the time duration of the 2-way FSI 
simulation, can be easily applied to model complex 
structural and fluid geometries with high efficiency 
particularly at the design stage for safety assessment. In 
spite of that, this method has not yet been used to estimate 
the added mass effects on hydrofoils under cavitation 
conditions due to the difficulties of modelling the cavity 
properties.  

The added mass effects under cavitation conditions on a 
NACA0009 hydrofoil determined in a cavitation tunnel will 
be numerically simulated using finite element method 
(FEM). A coupled acoustic fluid-structural system 
comprising the tunnel test section will be solved for different 
fluid conditions. The numerical results for a NACA0009 
hydrofoil with partial cavitation have been compared with 
the experimental ones obtained by De La Torre, et al. [1]. 

The hydrofoil modes of vibration will be determined for only 
air, only water and for various vapor-water conditions. In 
particular, several leading edge attached partial cavities with 
different dimensions and made of pure vapor will be 
simulated. 
 
1. METHODS 

 
In FSI problems, the structural dynamics equation must be 
considered along with the Navier-Stokes (NS) and the 
continuity equations. The discretized structural dynamics 
equation can be formulated based on the structural elements. 
The NS and continuity equations are simplified to get the 
acoustic wave equation assuming that the fluid is 
compressible, which means that its density changes due to 
pressure variations (i.e. acoustic medium), and that there is 
no fluid flow [2].  

The governing finite element matrix equations of 
multiphase FSI are expressed in Equation (1): 

     
    

 
 

S
T

0,liquid liquid F,liquid liquid
T

gas0,gas gas F,gas

S
liquidF,liquid

F,gas gas

S liquid gas

F,

M 0 0 u
ρ R M 0 p

pρ R 0 M
uC 0 0

p+ 0 C 0
0 0 C p

K - R - R
+ 0 K

                            
                  

      
















 
 
 

S

liquid F,liquidliquid

F,gas F,gasgas

u F
p F0 =

0 0 FpK

                           

            (1) 



Article Title — 2  
where MF, CF and KF are the fluid mass, damping and 
stiffness matrices, respectively. R is a coupling matrix that 
represents the effective surface area associated with each 
node on the fluid-structure interface. FF is the applied fluid 
pressure vector at the interface obtained by integrating the 
pressure over the area of the surface. P and U are the fluid 
pressure and the structure displacement vectors, 
respectively. MS, CS and KS are the structure mass, 
damping and stiffness matrices, respectively, and FS is the 
structural load vector. 
2. Numerical Model 
 
The simulated case corresponds to a NACA0009 hydrofoil, 
as shown in Figure 1, under various cavitation conditions 
experimentally tested at the EPFL High-Speed Cavitation 
Tunnel. On the left of Figure 3, a photograph of the typical 
attached partial cavitation as described in De La Torre, et 
al. [1] is shown. The foil is made of aluminum alloy with a 
Young’s modulus of 0.54 GPa, a Poisson’s ratio of 0.33 
and a density of 2770 kg/m3. 

 
Figure 1. Truncated NACA0009 hydrofoil.  

The FSI domain, which comprises the whole test section 
of the cavitation tunnel, was meshed with hexahedral 
elements as shown in Figure 2. The hydrofoil was fixed with 
an incidence angle of 0º. 

 
Figure 2. Discretized finite element mesh of the FSI 

domain with the surrounding water. 
 

One lateral section of the hydrofoil was constrained in the 
model. The rest of hydrofoil surfaces were in contact with 
the fluid. A FSI condition was set at these interfaces so that 
the displacement of the structure is identical to that of the 

fluid in normal direction. Considering the coupling 
characteristics of vibration in water, the fluid boundaries were 
modeled as fully reflective. The water properties were set as 
1000 kg/m3 for density and 1450 m/s for speed of sound. 

Regarding the modelling of the attached cavity, it was 
considered to be of a constant length along the whole span 
as shown on Figure 3. Acoustic elements were used like for 
the water domain. At the interface of the vapor cavity with the 
surrounding water, the acoustic pressure and the normal 
component of the water/vapor velocity are continuous. The 
vapor properties were set as 0.174 kg/m3 for density and 340 
m/s for speed of sound. 

 
Figure 3. Lateral view of the cavity numerical model. 

 
For simplification purposes, the simulated cavity 

represents a constant thickness and length domain which 
obviously differs from the actual cavity shape. Regarding the 
cavity thickness, that could not be measured during the 
experiments, the visual impression was that it was quite 
constant, as shown in Figure 4.  

 
Figure 4. View of the cavitation from the top. 

 
3. Results and Discussion 
 
The effects on the added mass coefficients and on the mode 
shapes have been evaluated when the cavity is assumed to 
be a two-phase mixture. During the experiments in the 
cavitation tunnel, De La Torre et al. [1] observed that the 
attached cavity morphology was not homogeneous. In most 



Article Title — 3  
of the cases, two different regions, named as transparent 
and foamy, could be identified depending on the visual 
aspect. The transparent region was considered to be 
mainly composed by a single phase of vapor and the foamy 
one was considered to be mainly composed by a 
homogeneous mixture of vapor and water. 

In our cavity model, it is possible to simulate a non-pure 
vapor cavity by assuming the averaged properties of a two-
phase flow based on the void fraction, α, which is defined 
as: 

VV
V                                       (2) 

where VV is the vapor volume and V is the total volume of 
the cavity. Consequently, the cavity density, c, can now be 
calculated as: 

 1c V L                           (3) 
where V is a vapor density of and L is the water density, 
which have been taken as 1.7410-2 (saturated vapor at 
20噛C) and as 1000 kg/m3, respectively. 

The speed of sound in a bubbly air/water mixture at 
atmospheric pressure tested by Brennen [3] as well as the 
cavity density are plotted in Figure 5 as a function of void 
fraction. These data have been taken as the reference 
values to carry out the numerical simulations with a cavity 
of fixed length (l/c = 0.318) detaching from the leading edge 
and fixed width of 1.8 mm. 

 
Figure 5. Speed of sound in a bubbly air/water mixture at 
atmospheric pressure and cavity density as a function of 

void ratio. 
 

 
Figure 6. Natural frequency evolution as a function of 

cavity void ratio for first seven order modes. 
The significant differences in the f3 mode shapes shown in 

Figure 7 between the air and cavitation conditions obtained 
with the acoustic model are in close agreement with 
experimental measurements. 

 
 

Figure 7. Measured and predicted  f3 mode shapes. 
Based on such data from Brennen, a series of cases have 

been simulated considering the void ratio in the range from 
0.6 to 1 as shown on Figure 6. When the void ratio is below 
0.9, the natural frequency of each mode does not change 
significantly. But when the void ratio is larger than 0.9, 
particularly above 0.99, the natural frequency of each mode 
changes sharply. The mode transition, as shown as in Figure 
8 and Figure 9, exits but cannot distinguished easily. 
Moreover, the mode transition can happen more than once 
for the same order mode, such as f5, f6 and f7. 

 
 

 α = 0.9 α = 0.95 α = 0.965 α = 0.97 α = 0.98 
f3 

     
f4 

     
Figure 8. Example of the first kind of mode transitions for f3 and f4, and some modal shapes at particular void ratios. 

 



Article Title — 4  
 α = 0.992 α = 0.994 α = 0.995 α = 0.996 α = 0.998 

f2 
     

f3 
     

Figure 9. Example of the first kind of mode transitions for f2 and f3, and some modal shapes at particular void ratios. 
The two modes of transition can intersect at a narrow 

frequency range. For example, as shown in Figure 7, the 
intersection void ratio is 0.965; before this value, the 
frequency and modal shape of f4 keep unchanged while the 
frequency and modal shape of f3 is approaching to f4 along 
with the void ratio increase. At α = 0.965, f3 and f4 have a 
very close frequency and almost the same shapes. After 
0.965, it turns that the f3 is unchanged while f4 begins to 
change both frequency and modal shapes.  
 
4. Conclusion 
 
The added mass effects on a NACA0009 hydrofoil under 
cavitation conditions have been numerically calculated 
using acoustic FEM. The simulation results point out that 
the average properties of the cavity, considered as a 
mixture of vapor/water, have a significant effect on added 
mass coefficients and mode shapes. These effects appear 
to be more important for higher modes of vibration. For 
instance, the second bending mode can evolve towards a 
second bending mode when reducing the cavity void ratio 
from 1 to 0.9.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

 
This work was supported by National Natural Science 
Foundation of China (Nos. 51279083 and 51409148).  
REFERENCES 

 
[1] O. De La Torre, X. Escaler, E. Egusquiza and M. 

Farhat. Experimental investigation of added mass 
effects on a hydrofoil under cavitation conditions. 
Journal of Fluids and Structures, 39:173-187, 2013. 

[2] ANSYS Inc. Ansys theory reference (Ansys), 2013. 
[3] C. E. Brennen. Homogeneous bubbly flows - in 

Cavitation and bubble dynamics. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 1995. 

 


