






















































Transmission of High Frequency Vibrations in Rotating Systems. Application to Cavitation Detection in Hydraulic Turbines


applied  
sciences

Article

Transmission of High Frequency Vibrations in
Rotating Systems. Application to Cavitation
Detection in Hydraulic Turbines

David Valentín * ID , Alexandre Presas, Mònica Egusquiza ID , Carme Valero and Eduard Egusquiza

Center for Industrial Diagnostics and Fluid Dynamics (CDIF), Polytechnic University of Catalonia (UPC),
Av. Diagonal, 647, ETSEIB, 08028 Barcelona, Spain; alexandre.presas@upc.edu (A.P.);
monica.egusquiza@upc.edu (M.E.); m.del.carmen.valero@upc.edu (C.V.); eduard.egusquiza@upc.edu (E.E.)
* Correspondence: david.valentin@upc.edu; Tel.: +34-934-017-132

Received: 21 December 2017; Accepted: 13 March 2018; Published: 16 March 2018

Abstract: One of the main causes of damage in hydraulic turbines is cavitation. While not all
cavitation appearing in a turbine is of a destructive type, erosive cavitation can severely affect the
structure, thus increasing maintenance costs and reducing the remaining useful life of the machine.
Of all types of cavitation, the maximum erosion occurs when clouds of bubbles collapse on the
runner surface (cloud cavitation). When this occurs it is associated with a substantial increase in
noise, and vibrations that are propagated everywhere throughout the machine. The generation
of these cavitation clouds may occur naturally or it may be the response to a periodic pressure
fluctuation, like the rotor/stator interaction in a hydraulic turbine. Erosive bubble cavitation
generates high-frequency vibrations that are modulated by the shedding frequency. Therefore,
the methods for the detection of erosive cavitation in hydraulic turbines are based on the
measurement and demodulation of high-frequency vibrations. In this paper, the feasibility of
detecting erosive cavitation in hydraulic turbines is investigated experimentally in a rotating disk
system, which represents a simplified hydraulic turbine structure. The test rig used consists of
a rotating disk submerged in a tank of water and confined with nearby axial and radial rigid surfaces.
The excitation patterns produced by cloud cavitation are reproduced with a PZT (piezoelectric patch)
located on the disk. These patterns include pseudo-random excitations of different frequency bands
modulated by one low carrier frequency, which model the erosive cavitation characteristics. Different
types of sensors have been placed in the stationary and in the rotating parts (accelerometers, acoustic
emission (AE), and a microphone) in order to detect the excitation pattern. The results obtained for
all the sensors tested have been compared in detail for the different excitation patterns applied to the
disk. With this information, the best location and type of sensor to detect the different excitations have
been identified. This study permits improving the actual technique of detecting erosive cavitation in
hydraulic turbines and, therefore, to avoid operation under these circumstances.

Keywords: erosive cavitation; hydraulic turbine; acoustic emission; high frequency; vibration

1. Introduction

Nowadays, hydropower plays an important role in the energy market since it is the only
renewable source which is able to compensate for the non-constant energy production of wind or solar
power [1–3]. This means that hydro units regulate their power depending on the other renewable
sources’ production to ensure the stability of the grid and to satisfy the energy demand. However,
when hydraulic turbines regulate their power below and above their best efficiency point (BEP),
they present different dynamic problems [4–7] which affect the useful life of the mechanical parts of
the turbine.

Appl. Sci. 2018, 8, 451; doi:10.3390/app8030451 www.mdpi.com/journal/applsci

http://www.mdpi.com/journal/applsci
http://www.mdpi.com
https://orcid.org/0000-0001-7125-0734
https://orcid.org/0000-0003-1777-1840
http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/app8\num [minimum-integer-digits = 2]{3}\num [minimum-integer-digits = 4]{451}
http://www.mdpi.com/journal/applsci


Appl. Sci. 2018, 8, 451 2 of 18

One of the most important problems that always appear in hydraulic turbines is cavitation [8,9].
Cavitation is the formation of vapor cavities in a liquid due to rapid changes in pressure [10].
These cavities can grow, collapsing implosively and emitting large-amplitude shock-waves [11].
This cavitation phenomenon is very important in Francis or reversible pump turbines [8], since their
runners are designed to have the maximum efficiency for a given head and flow rate, hence, cavitation
appears out of this design point. In Kaplan turbines, cavitation is less likely to occur because they can
regulate the angle of their runner blades depending on the head and the flow rate, ensuring a high
performance in the whole operating range. The cavitation phenomenon in hydraulic turbines has been
studied for many years, especially in laboratory models [12–16].

Different types of cavitation can appear in hydraulic turbines [8,9]. The most important are:
leading edge cavitation ((1) in Figure 1), travelling bubbles cavitation ((2) in Figure 1), draft tube
swirl ((3) in Figure 1), inter-blade vortex cavitation ((4) in Figure 1), von Karman vortex cavitation
((5) in Figure 1), and tip vortex cavitation (only in Kaplan turbines). Of all types of cavitation,
the maximum erosion occurs when clouds of bubbles collapse on the runner surface (cloud cavitation).
The generation of these cavitation clouds may occur naturally or it may be the response to a periodic
pressure fluctuation like the RSI (rotor stator interaction) in the hydraulic turbine.

The cavitation phenomenon may be different in a real prototype than in the laboratory model
because it depends on the operating conditions, therefore, its detection on-site in the power plant
is necessary [17,18]. In the past, different studies [9,17–24] were published about the experimental
detection of cavitation in hydraulic turbine prototypes. The idea was to detect the shockwaves
generated by the collapse of the cavitating bubbles, which are transmitted through the hydraulic
turbine structure, by means of analyzing high-frequency vibrations. To do so, accelerometers and
acoustic emission (AE) sensors were placed in different parts of the machine. The advantages and
drawbacks of every location tested are summarized in the following points:

- Detection with accelerometers in the guide vanes [9,17,19,20,22]: It is a direct measurement
but it is only useful for entrance cavitation. It is difficult to separate from erosive and
non-erosive cavitation.

- Detection with accelerometers and AE sensors in the turbine bearing [9,17,22]: Only erosive
cavitation is detected, but it is an indirect measurement and the transmission characteristics from
the runner to the bearing are unknown and filtered.

- Detection with accelerometers in the draft tube [17,22]: Only for draft tube swirl cavitation. It is
non-representative of the erosion suffered by the runner.

- Detection with accelerometers in the shaft [21]: Direct path from the runner, but more complicated
measurement with the possibility of having also generator excitations.

Two different high-frequency analysis techniques were used to detect erosive cavitation in the
previous studies: analyzing the RMS (root mean square) value at high-frequency bands (over 10 kHz)
and applying amplitude demodulation techniques, such as the Hilbert transform [25], to obtain the
low-frequency oscillation of the cavitation cloud. Figure 1 shows an example of a prototype Francis
turbine analyzed with the aforementioned technique. In this case, the power spectrum and amplitude
demodulation of a high-frequency band (10–15 kHz) are shown for an accelerometer located in the
turbine bearing. Three different operating conditions were analyzed: 70%, 85%, and 100% of the guide
vane opening or the maximum power. It is observed than the amplitudes of the spectrum are higher
for the 100% of the maximum power and lower for the 70% operating condition. Moreover, the main
frequencies related with the rotating speed, RSI, and their harmonics are present when demodulating
the signal for the case of 100% of the maximum power, whereas they are not seen in the 70% operating
condition. After several hours of operation at 100% of maximum power, severe erosion damage was
found in the blades, which was associated with unstable inlet leading edge cavitation.



Appl. Sci. 2018, 8, 451 3 of 18
Appl. Sci. 2018, 8, x FOR PEER REVIEW  3 of 18 

 
Figure 1. Sketch of a Francis turbine runner showing different types of cavitation and the current 
method to detect cavitation. The typical cavitation zones are highlighted in green. Adapted with 
permission from [9], Elsevier, 2006. 

Therefore, it seems that the power spectrum amplitude increases and that different peaks appear 
in the demodulation of the high-frequency bands when erosive cavitation is present in comparison 
with the non-cavitation case. However, there are still some problems to be solved with this method: 

- The transmission path from the runner to the measuring position can only be known in air (the 
runner could be impacted during an overhaul [17]) but not in water and under operation. 

- No correlation between existing cavitation and the measured signals can be obtained: the 
cavitation cannot be visualized in the prototype [25].  

- The excitation characteristics of the cavitation are an unknown. 
- It is not clear which high-frequency bands have to be used for every sensor for the analysis. 

In this paper, all of these uncertainties are studied using an experimental test rig. The test rig 
consists of a rotating disk submerged and confined in water. The disk has been instrumented with a 
PZT (piezoelectric patch) [26–30] and different sensors (accelerometers, AE, and a microphone) have 
been located in the rotating and stationary parts of the test rig. In that way, the transmission of 
different excitation patterns simulating cavitation to the different parts of the test rig can be studied 
in detail. Therefore, since the excitation is completely known, the best transmission path from the 
excitation to the measuring point can be obtained, as well as the best sensor for its detection. The 
results obtained in this study permit improving the current methods to detect and monitor [20,31,32] 
erosive cavitation in hydraulic turbines. 

2. Experimental Investigation 

The experimental investigation carried out in a laboratory test rig is explained in this section. 
First, the test rig used is described, then the instruments used are listed and, finally, all the 
experimental tests conducted are explained. 
  

Figure 1. Sketch of a Francis turbine runner showing different types of cavitation and the current
method to detect cavitation. The typical cavitation zones are highlighted in green. Adapted with
permission from [9], Elsevier, 2006.

Therefore, it seems that the power spectrum amplitude increases and that different peaks appear
in the demodulation of the high-frequency bands when erosive cavitation is present in comparison
with the non-cavitation case. However, there are still some problems to be solved with this method:

- The transmission path from the runner to the measuring position can only be known in air
(the runner could be impacted during an overhaul [17]) but not in water and under operation.

- No correlation between existing cavitation and the measured signals can be obtained:
the cavitation cannot be visualized in the prototype [25].

- The excitation characteristics of the cavitation are an unknown.
- It is not clear which high-frequency bands have to be used for every sensor for the analysis.

In this paper, all of these uncertainties are studied using an experimental test rig. The test rig
consists of a rotating disk submerged and confined in water. The disk has been instrumented with
a PZT (piezoelectric patch) [26–30] and different sensors (accelerometers, AE, and a microphone) have
been located in the rotating and stationary parts of the test rig. In that way, the transmission of different
excitation patterns simulating cavitation to the different parts of the test rig can be studied in detail.
Therefore, since the excitation is completely known, the best transmission path from the excitation to
the measuring point can be obtained, as well as the best sensor for its detection. The results obtained
in this study permit improving the current methods to detect and monitor [20,31,32] erosive cavitation
in hydraulic turbines.

2. Experimental Investigation

The experimental investigation carried out in a laboratory test rig is explained in this section. First,
the test rig used is described, then the instruments used are listed and, finally, all the experimental
tests conducted are explained.



Appl. Sci. 2018, 8, 451 4 of 18

2.1. Test Rig Description

The test rig used in this paper consists of a rotating disk submerged and confined in water
(see Figure 2). The disk is made of stainless steel and it rotates at f f = 4.1 Hz by means of a transmission
belt driven by a motor (Mavilor MLV-072) (Mavilor Motors S.A., Santa Perpètua de Mogoda, Spain),
which rotates five times faster than the disk (20.5 Hz). The rotating speed is controlled and stabilized
with a computer. The excitation and response signals are transmitted from the rotating to the stationary
frame through a Michigan S10slip ring. This system is mounted at the tip of the shaft. This test
rig has been used in previous studies to analyze the dynamic behavior of the submerged disk-like
structures [26,28,29,33–35].

Appl. Sci. 2018, 8, x FOR PEER REVIEW  4 of 18 

2.1. Test Rig Description 

The test rig used in this paper consists of a rotating disk submerged and confined in water (see 
Figure 2). The disk is made of stainless steel and it rotates at ff = 4.1 Hz by means of a transmission 
belt driven by a motor (Mavilor MLV-072) (Mavilor Motors S.A., Santa Perpètua de Mogoda, Spain), 
which rotates five times faster than the disk (20.5 Hz). The rotating speed is controlled and stabilized 
with a computer. The excitation and response signals are transmitted from the rotating to the 
stationary frame through a Michigan S10slip ring. This system is mounted at the tip of the shaft. This 
test rig has been used in previous studies to analyze the dynamic behavior of the submerged disk-
like structures [26,28,29,33–35]. 

 
Figure 2. Sketch of the experimental test rig and the sensors installed. ADISK, accelerometer in the 
disk; AINF, accelerometer in the inferior cover; ABEAR, accelerometer in the bearing; ASH, 
accelerometer in the shaft; ESH, acoustic emission sensor in the shaft; ETT, acoustic emission sensor 
in the superior cover; ATT, accelerometer in the superior cover; ALAT, accelerometer in the lateral 
cover. 

2.2. Instrumentation 

The disk was instrumented with a PZT (piezoelectric patch) (PI-876A12) glued to the disk with 
an epoxy component, LOCTITE 454 (Loctite, Hartford, CT, USA). This PZT was used to excite the 
disk at the desired frequency bands. The PZT works in a range of −100 V to 250 V. For the signal 
generation, a NI-9263 (National Instruments, Austin, TX, USA) module was used. This module could 
generate four independent analog outputs with an amplitude of −10 V to 10 V. With an OEM-835 
(OEM Systemas Company, Reno, NV, USA) amplifier the analog signal was amplified by 25, so the 
sent signal to the patch had the desired level. Additionally, a signal to monitor the excitation was sent 
to the data acquisition system. 

To measure the excitation and response of the rotating structures, the disk was instrumented 
with a miniature and submergible accelerometer (ADISK in Figure 2) (Dytran 3006-A, sensitivity: 100 
mV/g) and the shaft with another accelerometer (ASH in Figure 2) (MMF Type KS91B, sensitivity: 10 
mV/g) and an AE sensor (ESH in Figure 2) (Brüel and Kjaer Type 8313) (Brüel & Kjaer, Naerum, 
Denmark).  

Moreover, different sensors were located in the stationary parts of the test rig: one accelerometer 
in the upper cover (ATT in Figure 2) (Kistler 8752A50, sensitivity: 100 mV/g) (Kistler, Winterthur, 
Switzerland), one in the lower cover (AINF in Figure 2) (MMF Type KS91B, sensitivity: 10 mV/g) 
(Metra Mess-und Frequenztechnik, Radebeul, Germany), one in the side cover (ALAT in Figure 2) 
(Dytran 3006-A, sensitivity: 100 mV/g) (Dytran Instruments Inc, Chatsworth, CA, USA) and another 
one in the bearing (ABEAR in Figure 2) (Dytran 3006-A, sensitivity: 100 mV/g). An AE sensor (Brüel 

Figure 2. Sketch of the experimental test rig and the sensors installed. ADISK, accelerometer in the disk;
AINF, accelerometer in the inferior cover; ABEAR, accelerometer in the bearing; ASH, accelerometer
in the shaft; ESH, acoustic emission sensor in the shaft; ETT, acoustic emission sensor in the superior
cover; ATT, accelerometer in the superior cover; ALAT, accelerometer in the lateral cover.

2.2. Instrumentation

The disk was instrumented with a PZT (piezoelectric patch) (PI-876A12) glued to the disk with
an epoxy component, LOCTITE 454 (Loctite, Hartford, CT, USA). This PZT was used to excite the
disk at the desired frequency bands. The PZT works in a range of −100 V to 250 V. For the signal
generation, a NI-9263 (National Instruments, Austin, TX, USA) module was used. This module could
generate four independent analog outputs with an amplitude of −10 V to 10 V. With an OEM-835
(OEM Systemas Company, Reno, NV, USA) amplifier the analog signal was amplified by 25, so the
sent signal to the patch had the desired level. Additionally, a signal to monitor the excitation was sent
to the data acquisition system.

To measure the excitation and response of the rotating structures, the disk was instrumented with
a miniature and submergible accelerometer (ADISK in Figure 2) (Dytran 3006-A, sensitivity: 100 mV/g)
and the shaft with another accelerometer (ASH in Figure 2) (MMF Type KS91B, sensitivity: 10 mV/g)
and an AE sensor (ESH in Figure 2) (Brüel and Kjaer Type 8313) (Brüel & Kjaer, Naerum, Denmark).

Moreover, different sensors were located in the stationary parts of the test rig: one accelerometer
in the upper cover (ATT in Figure 2) (Kistler 8752A50, sensitivity: 100 mV/g) (Kistler, Winterthur,
Switzerland), one in the lower cover (AINF in Figure 2) (MMF Type KS91B, sensitivity: 10 mV/g)
(Metra Mess-und Frequenztechnik, Radebeul, Germany), one in the side cover (ALAT in Figure 2)
(Dytran 3006-A, sensitivity: 100 mV/g) (Dytran Instruments Inc, Chatsworth, CA, USA) and another
one in the bearing (ABEAR in Figure 2) (Dytran 3006-A, sensitivity: 100 mV/g). An AE sensor
(Brüel and Kjaer Type 8313) (Brüel & Kjaer, Naerum, Denmark) was also installed in the upper cover
(ETT in Figure 2), as well as a microphone (Brüel and Kjaer Type 4957) near the test rig.



Appl. Sci. 2018, 8, 451 5 of 18

The signals were acquired using an acquisition system (Bruel and Kjaer Type 3038) module.
The acquisition frequency was set to 25.6 kHz.

2.3. Tests Conducted

In order to represent in the present test rig the typical excitation of erosive cavitation in
hydraulic turbines, different excitation patterns were applied to the disk using the PZT. In this
case, a pseudorandom excitation in three different ranges of frequency was selected [36]: in the band
1–2 kHz (PS1), in the band 10–11 kHz (PS2), and in the band 20–21 kHz (PS3). Moreover, each one of
these pseudorandom excitations was multiplied by a given low-frequency value in order to represent
the low-frequency hydraulic phenomena in hydraulic machines. The low frequencies selected were
f 1 = 22.1 Hz (see Equation (1)), which represents the RSI in the hydraulic turbine, and f 2 = 1.4 Hz
(see Equation (2)) which represents the vortex rope phenomenon. These values were selected of the
same order of those that usually appear in hydraulic turbines, and non-multiple or harmonics of
the rotating frequency of the disk. For every pseudorandom excitation, three different tests were
conducted: one with only the pseudorandom excitation, one with the pseudorandom excitation and
the f 1, and another one with the pseudorandom excitation and the f 1 and f 2 frequencies (see Table 1
and Figure 3):

Envelope1 = cos(π· f1·t) (1)

Envelope2 = cos(π· f2·t + θ) (2)

where θ is an arbitrary phase between Envelope1 and Envelope2.

Table 1. Excitation patterns applied to the disk using the PZT (piezoelectric patch).

Excitation Name Excitation Characteristics

Exc-1-2kHz-0 PS1
Exc2-1-2kHz-1 PS1*Envelope1
Exc3-1-2kHz-2 PS1*Envelope1*Envelope2
Exc-10-11kHz-0 PS2
Exc-10-11kHz-1 PS2*Envelope1
Exc-10-11kHz-2 PS2*Envelope1*Envelope2
Exc-20-21kHz-0 PS3
Exc-20-21kHz-1 PS3*Envelope1
Exc-20-21kHz-2 PS3*Envelope1*Envelope2

Appl. Sci. 2018, 8, x FOR PEER REVIEW  5 of 18 

and Kjaer Type 8313) (Brüel & Kjaer, Naerum, Denmark) was also installed in the upper cover (ETT 
in Figure 2), as well as a microphone (Brüel and Kjaer Type 4957) near the test rig. 

The signals were acquired using an acquisition system (Bruel and Kjaer Type 3038) module. The 
acquisition frequency was set to 25.6 kHz. 

2.3. Tests Conducted 

In order to represent in the present test rig the typical excitation of erosive cavitation in hydraulic 
turbines, different excitation patterns were applied to the disk using the PZT. In this case, a 
pseudorandom excitation in three different ranges of frequency was selected [36]: in the band 1–2 
kHz (PS1), in the band 10–11 kHz (PS2), and in the band 20–21 kHz (PS3). Moreover, each one of 
these pseudorandom excitations was multiplied by a given low-frequency value in order to represent 
the low-frequency hydraulic phenomena in hydraulic machines. The low frequencies selected were 
f1 = 22.1 Hz (see Equation (1)), which represents the RSI in the hydraulic turbine, and f2 = 1.4 Hz (see 
Equation (2)) which represents the vortex rope phenomenon. These values were selected of the same 
order of those that usually appear in hydraulic turbines, and non-multiple or harmonics of the 
rotating frequency of the disk. For every pseudorandom excitation, three different tests were 
conducted: one with only the pseudorandom excitation, one with the pseudorandom excitation and 
the f1, and another one with the pseudorandom excitation and the f1 and f2 frequencies (see Table 1 
and Figure 3): 1 = cos( · · ) (1) 

2 = ( · · + ) (2) 
where θ is an arbitrary phase between Envelope1 and Envelope2. 

Table 1. Excitation patterns applied to the disk using the PZT (piezoelectric patch). 

Excitation Name Excitation Characteristics
Exc-1-2kHz-0 PS1 

Exc2-1-2kHz-1 PS1*Envelope1 
Exc3-1-2kHz-2 PS1*Envelope1*Envelope2 

Exc-10-11kHz-0 PS2 
Exc-10-11kHz-1 PS2*Envelope1 
Exc-10-11kHz-2 PS2*Envelope1*Envelope2 
Exc-20-21kHz-0 PS3 
Exc-20-21kHz-1 PS3*Envelope1 
Exc-20-21kHz-2 PS3*Envelope1*Envelope2 

 
Figure 3. Example of the different excitations used. 

Therefore, a total of nine different types of excitations were applied to the disk (see Table 1). 
These nine excitations were applied to four different configurations: (1) the disk in air without 
rotation; (2) the disk in water without rotation; (3) the disk in air with rotation (ff = 4.1 Hz); and (4) 
the disk in water with rotation (ff = 4.1 Hz). In this way, the influence of the water and the rotation 
could be evaluated for the different excitations applied. 

Figure 3. Example of the different excitations used.

Therefore, a total of nine different types of excitations were applied to the disk (see Table 1).
These nine excitations were applied to four different configurations: (1) the disk in air without rotation;
(2) the disk in water without rotation; (3) the disk in air with rotation (f f = 4.1 Hz); and (4) the disk
in water with rotation (f f = 4.1 Hz). In this way, the influence of the water and the rotation could be
evaluated for the different excitations applied.



Appl. Sci. 2018, 8, 451 6 of 18

2.4. Signal Analysis

To analyze the signals acquired during the different tests, three different signal analysis methods
were applied: coherence between the sensor and the PZT, FRF (frequency response function) between
the sensor and the PZT and amplitude demodulation analysis to every sensor signal. These methods
are explained in detail in the following sections.

2.4.1. Coherence

The coherence between two signals x(t) and y(t) is defined by Equation (3) [36], where Sxy(f ) is the
cross-spectral density of the signal and Sxx(f ) and Syy(f ) are the power spectral density functions of x(t)
and y(t), respectively. f is frequency and t is time:

Coherencexy =

∣∣Sxy( f )∣∣2
Sxx( f )·Syy( f )

(3)

In this case, x(t) is any of the sensor signals and y(t) the excitation signal sent to the PZT. If this
value is close to 1, both signals are coherent, which means that the signals acquired by the sensors are
caused by the excitation of the PZT. A good coherence between the sensor and the PZT indicates that
the transmission path is good. However, if the coherence is close to 0, it means that there is no linear
causality effect between the sensor and the excitation signal and, therefore, in this case, it is not useful
for the detection of erosive cavitation.

2.4.2. Frequency Response Function (FRF)

The FRF between two signals x(t) and y(t) is defined as in Equation (4) (also known as FRFH1 [36]),
where X(f ) and Y(f ) are x(t) and y(t) in the frequency domain. Again, in this case, x(t) is any of the
sensors signal and y(t) the excitation signal sent to the PZT:

FRFH1 =
X( f )
Y( f )

·
Y∗( f )
Y∗( f )

(4)

A FRF constant along the frequency band studied means that the excitation and the response
are totally proportional, whereas a non-constant FRF gives the response of the structure due to the
excitation. To detect erosive cavitation, it is convenient to have a constant FRF along the frequency
band, which means that the sensor is directly detecting the excitation and not the structural response
due to that excitation.

2.4.3. Amplitude Demodulation Analysis

The demodulation procedure starts filtering the time domain signal in the frequency range studied
to remove the low-frequency and high-frequency content outside the frequency range. Then the
envelope of the filtered signal is computed using an algorithm based on the Hilbert transform (Hi) [9].
Mathematically, the Hilbert transform of a time signal x(t) is defined as in Equation (5):

Hi(x(t)) =
1
π

∫ ∞
−∞

x(τ)
1

t− τ
dτ (5)

The envelope is obtained by forming the complex analytical signal x̃(t), which is the sum of the
time signal x(t) (real part) and the Hilbert transform of x(t) (Equation (5)) (imaginary part):

x̃(t) = x(t) + jHi(x(t)) (6)

The analysis of the resulting envelope in Equation (6) in the frequency domain permits identifying
the modulating frequencies inside the high-frequency band selected for the study. In this case,



Appl. Sci. 2018, 8, 451 7 of 18

after applying this analysis to the signals acquired by every sensor, it is desired to obtain the rotating
frequency (f f) or the modulating frequencies f 1 = 22.1 Hz and f 2 = 1.4 Hz depending on the case.
The amplitude of the frequencies obtained after applying this analysis can be compared for all the
sensors to determine the best sensor to detect erosive cavitation.

3. Results and Discussion

The results obtained for every configuration tested are presented in this section. First,
the coherence between the sensors and the PZT is shown and commented. Then the FRF between the
different sensors and the PZT is presented and, finally, the amplitude demodulation analysis for the
different sensors is discussed.

3.1. Coherence

The coherence between the sensors and the PZT was computed for all the configurations tested.
Figure 4 shows the coherence for the sensors installed in the rotating frame and for the three different
excitation frequency bands while the disk was standing in air and in water (no rotation). It is seen
that coherence is very good for the accelerometer located in the disk (ADISK) and for the AE sensor
located in the shaft (ESH) for all the frequency bands, and in air and in water. The points with
minimum coherence correspond to antiresonances of the disk [36], so they can be neglected. However,
the accelerometer located in the shaft (ASH) presents different results for the lower frequency band
(1–2 kHz), where the response of the structure dominates and, therefore, it is not coherent in this zone.
For the higher frequency band (20–21 kHz) this accelerometer is coherent both in air and in water.

Appl. Sci. 2018, 8, x FOR PEER REVIEW  7 of 18 

3. Results and Discussion 

The results obtained for every configuration tested are presented in this section. First, the 
coherence between the sensors and the PZT is shown and commented. Then the FRF between the 
different sensors and the PZT is presented and, finally, the amplitude demodulation analysis for the 
different sensors is discussed. 

3.1. Coherence 

The coherence between the sensors and the PZT was computed for all the configurations tested. 
Figure 4 shows the coherence for the sensors installed in the rotating frame and for the three different 
excitation frequency bands while the disk was standing in air and in water (no rotation). It is seen 
that coherence is very good for the accelerometer located in the disk (ADISK) and for the AE sensor 
located in the shaft (ESH) for all the frequency bands, and in air and in water. The points with 
minimum coherence correspond to antiresonances of the disk [36], so they can be neglected. 
However, the accelerometer located in the shaft (ASH) presents different results for the lower 
frequency band (1–2 kHz), where the response of the structure dominates and, therefore, it is not 
coherent in this zone. For the higher frequency band (20–21 kHz) this accelerometer is coherent both 
in air and in water. 

 
Figure 4. Coherence between the sensors of the rotating frame with respect to the PZT. The blue line 
is the “in air” configuration, and the black line is the “in water” configuration. Non-rotating case. 

Nevertheless, the results of the sensors installed in the stationary parts of the test rig present 
different results (see Figure 5). The accelerometer in the bearing (ABEAR) shows similar results than 
the one located in the shaft, so it is thought that both are measuring the same kind of information but 
in a different reference frame. The other sensors present better coherence when the disk is submerged 
in water than in air. This means that the vibration of the disk is mainly transmitted to the stationary 
parts through the water, and that the mechanical transmission from the disk to the stationary parts 
is poor. The AE sensor has a good coherence for all the frequency bands with the disk in the water, 
whereas the microphone better detects the disk vibration for the middle frequency band tested (10–
11 kHz), also with the disk in water. The accelerometer located in the lower casing presents only good 

Figure 4. Coherence between the sensors of the rotating frame with respect to the PZT. The blue line is
the “in air” configuration, and the black line is the “in water” configuration. Non-rotating case.

Nevertheless, the results of the sensors installed in the stationary parts of the test rig present
different results (see Figure 5). The accelerometer in the bearing (ABEAR) shows similar results than
the one located in the shaft, so it is thought that both are measuring the same kind of information but in



Appl. Sci. 2018, 8, 451 8 of 18

a different reference frame. The other sensors present better coherence when the disk is submerged in
water than in air. This means that the vibration of the disk is mainly transmitted to the stationary parts
through the water, and that the mechanical transmission from the disk to the stationary parts is poor.
The AE sensor has a good coherence for all the frequency bands with the disk in the water, whereas
the microphone better detects the disk vibration for the middle frequency band tested (10–11 kHz),
also with the disk in water. The accelerometer located in the lower casing presents only good coherence
for the higher frequency band (20–21 kHz) and again only with the disk submerged in water.

Figures 4 and 5 show the coherence for different excitation bands and sensors, in air and in water
in the non-rotating case. The same kind of analysis was performed with the disk rotating at 4.1 Hz and
the results obtained were almost the same.

Appl. Sci. 2018, 8, x FOR PEER REVIEW  8 of 18 

coherence for the higher frequency band (20–21 kHz) and again only with the disk submerged in 
water. 

Figures 4 and 5 show the coherence for different excitation bands and sensors, in air and in water 
in the non-rotating case. The same kind of analysis was performed with the disk rotating at 4.1 Hz 
and the results obtained were almost the same. 

 
Figure 5. Coherence between the sensors of the stationary frame with respect to the PZT. The blue 
line is the “in air” configuration, and the black line is the “in water” configuration. Non-rotating case. 

3.2. FRF 

The frequency response function was computed for those sensors where the coherence was 
higher, both in air and in water configurations. Those sensors are the ones located in the rotating 
frame (ADISK, ASH, and ESH). Figure 6 shows the FRF of these three sensors for the excitation “Exc-
20-21kHz-0”. It is observed than the FRF in air for the three sensors is not completely constant, the 
accelerometers being the ones that better detect the structural response. In water, the accelerometer 
in the disk (ADISK) and the AE sensor in the shaft (ESH) present a constant FRF, whereas the 
accelerometer in the shaft (ASH) detects some structural response. Moreover, the phase is also 
constant for the AE sensor. This means that this sensor receives the propagation of the excitation with 
no relevant interference from the dynamic behavior of the mechanical system in the excited frequency 
range. This is an important conclusion, because it means that, in comparison with the accelerometer 
in the shaft, an AE sensor can better detect the excitation and it eliminates the structural response of 
the shaft. The same results are obtained for the other frequency bands tested and for the AE sensor 
in the shaft. 

Figure 5. Coherence between the sensors of the stationary frame with respect to the PZT. The blue line
is the “in air” configuration, and the black line is the “in water” configuration. Non-rotating case.

3.2. FRF

The frequency response function was computed for those sensors where the coherence was higher,
both in air and in water configurations. Those sensors are the ones located in the rotating frame (ADISK,
ASH, and ESH). Figure 6 shows the FRF of these three sensors for the excitation “Exc-20-21kHz-0”. It is
observed than the FRF in air for the three sensors is not completely constant, the accelerometers being
the ones that better detect the structural response. In water, the accelerometer in the disk (ADISK) and
the AE sensor in the shaft (ESH) present a constant FRF, whereas the accelerometer in the shaft (ASH)
detects some structural response. Moreover, the phase is also constant for the AE sensor. This means



Appl. Sci. 2018, 8, 451 9 of 18

that this sensor receives the propagation of the excitation with no relevant interference from the
dynamic behavior of the mechanical system in the excited frequency range. This is an important
conclusion, because it means that, in comparison with the accelerometer in the shaft, an AE sensor can
better detect the excitation and it eliminates the structural response of the shaft. The same results are
obtained for the other frequency bands tested and for the AE sensor in the shaft.Appl. Sci. 2018, 8, x FOR PEER REVIEW  9 of 18 

 
Figure 6. FRF between the sensors in the rotating frame and the PZT for the excitation in the band of 
10–11 kHz. The blue line is the “in air” configuration, and the black line is the “in water” 
configuration. Rotating case (ff = 4.1 Hz). 

3.3. Amplitude Demodulation Analysis 

An amplitude demodulation analysis was also performed for all the configurations tested. First, 
the results without modulating frequencies are shown, then the results with one modulating 
frequency and, finally, the ones with two modulating frequencies. 

3.3.1. Without Modulating Frequencies 

The results presented in this section are the ones obtained with the excitations called “Exc-1-
2kHz-0”, “Exc-10-11kHz-0”, and “Exc-20-21kHz-0” in Table 1. Without any modulating frequencies 
and only the pseudorandom excitation, after an amplitude demodulation analysis, the only frequency 
expected to be found is the rotating frequency (ff) for those cases under rotation in case there is a 
misalignment in the shaft. 

Figure 7 shows this amplitude demodulation analysis for the sensors installed in the rotating 
frame. It is observed that, for the accelerometer in the shaft (ASH), the rotating frequency is clearly 

Figure 6. FRF between the sensors in the rotating frame and the PZT for the excitation in the band of
10–11 kHz. The blue line is the “in air” configuration, and the black line is the “in water” configuration.
Rotating case (f f = 4.1 Hz).

3.3. Amplitude Demodulation Analysis

An amplitude demodulation analysis was also performed for all the configurations tested. First,
the results without modulating frequencies are shown, then the results with one modulating frequency
and, finally, the ones with two modulating frequencies.



Appl. Sci. 2018, 8, 451 10 of 18

3.3.1. Without Modulating Frequencies

The results presented in this section are the ones obtained with the excitations called
“Exc-1-2kHz-0”, “Exc-10-11kHz-0”, and “Exc-20-21kHz-0” in Table 1. Without any modulating
frequencies and only the pseudorandom excitation, after an amplitude demodulation analysis, the only
frequency expected to be found is the rotating frequency (f f) for those cases under rotation in case
there is a misalignment in the shaft.

Figure 7 shows this amplitude demodulation analysis for the sensors installed in the rotating
frame. It is observed that, for the accelerometer in the shaft (ASH), the rotating frequency is clearly
seen for both cases in air and in water, and with greater amplitude in the case of the high-frequency
band. The accelerometer in the disk (ADISK) also sees this rotating frequency, but only in the case
of the water, where probably the misalignment of the rotating structures is higher. However, the AE
sensor located in the shaft (ESH) does not capture this rotating frequency for any of the excitation
bands tested. This is another proof that this sensor is not detecting the structural response of the shaft,
but it is detecting only the excitation by the transmission of acoustic waves through the structure.

Appl. Sci. 2018, 8, x FOR PEER REVIEW  10 of 18 

seen for both cases in air and in water, and with greater amplitude in the case of the high-frequency 
band. The accelerometer in the disk (ADISK) also sees this rotating frequency, but only in the case of 
the water, where probably the misalignment of the rotating structures is higher. However, the AE 
sensor located in the shaft (ESH) does not capture this rotating frequency for any of the excitation 
bands tested. This is another proof that this sensor is not detecting the structural response of the shaft, 
but it is detecting only the excitation by the transmission of acoustic waves through the structure. 

 
Figure 7. Amplitude demodulation for the sensors on the rotating frame and the excitation without 
any modulating frequencies. Rotating case (ff = 4.1 Hz). 

The results for the stationary sensors are shown in Figure 8. The accelerometer located in the 
bearing (ABEAR) presents similar results than the one located in the shaft (ASH in Figure 7): it detects 
the rotating frequency and its harmonics, especially in the high-frequency band (20–21 kHz). 
However, the rest of sensors from the stationary frame also detect the rotating frequency of the motor 
(20.5 Hz), its harmonics, and its subharmonics. This is because the vibration of the motor at its 
rotating frequency is also transmitted through the air and through the support, which is the same 
piece as the rest of the casing. Therefore, stationary sensors, especially the microphone and the AE 
sensors in the casing, in this case, are also affected by the motor vibration and not only by the 
vibration of the rotating part. This is a particular situation in this test rig, but it has to be considered 
for the analysis of the results. Even so, the accelerometer located in the casing (ATT) is able to detect 
the rotating frequency of the disk in the case of water for the excitation of 10–11 kHz, where the 
transmission is better through the liquid, as commented in Section 3.1.  

Figure 7. Amplitude demodulation for the sensors on the rotating frame and the excitation without
any modulating frequencies. Rotating case (f f = 4.1 Hz).

The results for the stationary sensors are shown in Figure 8. The accelerometer located in the
bearing (ABEAR) presents similar results than the one located in the shaft (ASH in Figure 7): it detects
the rotating frequency and its harmonics, especially in the high-frequency band (20–21 kHz). However,
the rest of sensors from the stationary frame also detect the rotating frequency of the motor (20.5 Hz),
its harmonics, and its subharmonics. This is because the vibration of the motor at its rotating frequency
is also transmitted through the air and through the support, which is the same piece as the rest of
the casing. Therefore, stationary sensors, especially the microphone and the AE sensors in the casing,
in this case, are also affected by the motor vibration and not only by the vibration of the rotating part.
This is a particular situation in this test rig, but it has to be considered for the analysis of the results.
Even so, the accelerometer located in the casing (ATT) is able to detect the rotating frequency of the
disk in the case of water for the excitation of 10–11 kHz, where the transmission is better through the
liquid, as commented in Section 3.1.



Appl. Sci. 2018, 8, 451 11 of 18
Appl. Sci. 2018, 8, x FOR PEER REVIEW  11 of 18 

 
Figure 8. Amplitude demodulation for the sensors on the stationary frame and the excitation without 
any modulating frequencies. Rotating case (ff = 4.1 Hz). 

3.3.2. With One Modulating Frequency 

The results presented in this section are the ones obtained with the excitations called “Exc-1-
2kHz-1”, “Exc-10-11kHz-1”, and “Exc-20-21kHz-1” in Table 1. With the modulating frequency of f1 = 
22.1 Hz and the pseudorandom excitation, after an amplitude demodulation analysis, the frequencies 
expected to be found are the rotating frequency (ff) for those cases under rotation, as in the previous 
case commented in Section 3.3.1., and the modulating frequency f1 = 22.1 Hz. 

Figure 9 shows the results for the rotating sensors as well for the PZT. The results for the PZT 
give the information of the excitation for the different excitation patterns. The amplitude of the 
modulating frequency f1 is higher for the lower frequency band tested. This fact is due to the PZT 
characteristics, which behave differently at different frequency bands. Comparing the AE sensor in 
the shaft (ESH) with the excitation (PZT), the results are almost the same, which confirms that the EA 
sensor in the shaft represents very well the excitation in the disk. The cases where the rotating 
frequency was not found have been zoomed around the f1 in Figure 9. The accelerometers in the disk 
(ADISK) and in the shaft (ASH) give the same information than without any modulating frequency 
for the rotating frequency (ff), but adding the modulating frequency f1. In the case of the accelerometer 

Figure 8. Amplitude demodulation for the sensors on the stationary frame and the excitation without
any modulating frequencies. Rotating case (f f = 4.1 Hz).

3.3.2. With One Modulating Frequency

The results presented in this section are the ones obtained with the excitations called
“Exc-1-2kHz-1”, “Exc-10-11kHz-1”, and “Exc-20-21kHz-1” in Table 1. With the modulating frequency
of f 1 = 22.1 Hz and the pseudorandom excitation, after an amplitude demodulation analysis,
the frequencies expected to be found are the rotating frequency (f f) for those cases under rotation, as in
the previous case commented in Section 3.3.1., and the modulating frequency f 1 = 22.1 Hz.

Figure 9 shows the results for the rotating sensors as well for the PZT. The results for the PZT give
the information of the excitation for the different excitation patterns. The amplitude of the modulating
frequency f 1 is higher for the lower frequency band tested. This fact is due to the PZT characteristics,
which behave differently at different frequency bands. Comparing the AE sensor in the shaft (ESH)
with the excitation (PZT), the results are almost the same, which confirms that the EA sensor in the
shaft represents very well the excitation in the disk. The cases where the rotating frequency was not
found have been zoomed around the f1 in Figure 9. The accelerometers in the disk (ADISK) and in
the shaft (ASH) give the same information than without any modulating frequency for the rotating
frequency (f f), but adding the modulating frequency f 1. In the case of the accelerometer of the disk
(ADISK), this frequency (f 1) is better seen in the frequency band of 10–11 kHz, whereas in the shaft it



Appl. Sci. 2018, 8, 451 12 of 18

is better seen in the frequency band of 20–22 kHz. This is related to the frequency resonance of every
accelerometer, which is different for this both cases.

The results for some stationary sensors are shown in Figure 10. In this figure the most relevant
sensors for the detection of the f 1 modulating frequency are shown. It is observed that the accelerometer
located in the bearing (ABEAR) presents similar results than the one located in the shaft (ASH in
Figure 9). This observation was also pointed out in the analysis without any modulating frequency
(Section 3.3.1). Again, the high-frequency band is better able to detect the modulating frequency f 1.
The accelerometer installed in the upper cover (ATT) does not detect the modulating frequency in air,
since the transmission of the disk vibration without water is very poor for this sensor (this was also
confirmed in the coherence Section 3.1). However, it is clearly detected in the configuration with water,
and the results obtained are very similar to those obtained with the accelerometer installed in the
disk (ADISK in Figure 9). For this kind of accelerometer, the band 10–11 kHz is the best to detect the
modulating frequency f 1. Moreover, the microphone does not detect the modulating frequency f1 since
it is mainly receiving the information of the motor rotating speed, as it was commented in Section 3.3.1.
Again, the AE sensor located in the head cover presents the same results than the microphone, since it
is detecting the acoustic waves transmitted by the motor more than the ones transmitted by the PZT.

Appl. Sci. 2018, 8, x FOR PEER REVIEW  12 of 18 

of the disk (ADISK), this frequency (f1) is better seen in the frequency band of 10–11 kHz, whereas in 
the shaft it is better seen in the frequency band of 20–22 kHz. This is related to the frequency 
resonance of every accelerometer, which is different for this both cases. 

The results for some stationary sensors are shown in Figure 10. In this figure the most relevant 
sensors for the detection of the f1 modulating frequency are shown. It is observed that the 
accelerometer located in the bearing (ABEAR) presents similar results than the one located in the 
shaft (ASH in Figure 9). This observation was also pointed out in the analysis without any modulating 
frequency (Section 3.3.1). Again, the high-frequency band is better able to detect the modulating 
frequency f1. The accelerometer installed in the upper cover (ATT) does not detect the modulating 
frequency in air, since the transmission of the disk vibration without water is very poor for this sensor 
(this was also confirmed in the coherence Section 3.1). However, it is clearly detected in the 
configuration with water, and the results obtained are very similar to those obtained with the 
accelerometer installed in the disk (ADISK in Figure 9). For this kind of accelerometer, the band 10–
11 kHz is the best to detect the modulating frequency f1. Moreover, the microphone does not detect 
the modulating frequency f1 since it is mainly receiving the information of the motor rotating speed, 
as it was commented in Section 3.3.1. Again, the AE sensor located in the head cover presents the 
same results than the microphone, since it is detecting the acoustic waves transmitted by the motor 
more than the ones transmitted by the PZT. 

 
Figure 9. Amplitude demodulation for the sensors on the rotating frame and the excitation with one 
modulating frequency. Rotating case (ff = 4.1 Hz). 

Figure 9. Amplitude demodulation for the sensors on the rotating frame and the excitation with one
modulating frequency. Rotating case (f f = 4.1 Hz).



Appl. Sci. 2018, 8, 451 13 of 18
Appl. Sci. 2018, 8, x FOR PEER REVIEW  13 of 18 

 
Figure 10. Amplitude demodulation for the sensors on the stationary frame and the excitation with 
one modulating frequency. Rotating case (ff = 4.1 Hz). 

3.3.3. With Two Modulating Frequencies 

The results presented in this section are the ones obtained with the excitations called “Exc-1-
2kHz-2”, “Exc-10-11kHz-2”, and “Exc-20-21kHz-2” in Table 1. With the modulating frequencies of f1 
= 22.1 Hz and f2 = 1.4 Hz and the pseudorandom excitation, after an amplitude demodulation analysis, 
the frequencies expected to be found are the rotating frequency (ff) for those cases under rotation, as 
in the previous case commented in Section 3.3.1, and the modulating frequencies f1 = 22.1 Hz and f2 = 
1.4 Hz. 

The results obtained for the analysis of the two modulating frequencies and the sensors of the 
rotating frame are shown in Figure 11. The conclusions here are almost the same than in the case of 
one modulating frequency: the AE sensor in the shaft (ESH) detects the excitation and not the 
response of the structure, the accelerometer of the disk (ADISK) detects both modulating frequencies 
but better in the range of 10–11 kHz, and the accelerometer of the shaft (ASH) is affected by vibrations 
induced by the motor when water is considered, and it detects the modulating frequencies better at 
20–21 kHz. The main difference between one and two modulating frequencies is that near the f1 
modulating frequency appear two other frequencies which correspond to f1 − f2 and f1 + f2, respectively. 
This has to be considered when analyzing complex systems with more than one modulating 
frequency, as in the case of a hydraulic turbine. 

The results for the stationary sensors are plotted in Figure 12. Again, the same conclusions than 
in the case of one modulating frequency can be extracted with this results, but with the difference 
that the f2 modulating frequency can also be observed as a difference between f1 and the nearby peaks. 

Figure 10. Amplitude demodulation for the sensors on the stationary frame and the excitation with
one modulating frequency. Rotating case (f f = 4.1 Hz).

3.3.3. With Two Modulating Frequencies

The results presented in this section are the ones obtained with the excitations called
“Exc-1-2kHz-2”, “Exc-10-11kHz-2”, and “Exc-20-21kHz-2” in Table 1. With the modulating frequencies
of f 1 = 22.1 Hz and f 2 = 1.4 Hz and the pseudorandom excitation, after an amplitude demodulation
analysis, the frequencies expected to be found are the rotating frequency (f f) for those cases under
rotation, as in the previous case commented in Section 3.3.1, and the modulating frequencies
f 1 = 22.1 Hz and f 2 = 1.4 Hz.

The results obtained for the analysis of the two modulating frequencies and the sensors of the
rotating frame are shown in Figure 11. The conclusions here are almost the same than in the case of
one modulating frequency: the AE sensor in the shaft (ESH) detects the excitation and not the response
of the structure, the accelerometer of the disk (ADISK) detects both modulating frequencies but better
in the range of 10–11 kHz, and the accelerometer of the shaft (ASH) is affected by vibrations induced
by the motor when water is considered, and it detects the modulating frequencies better at 20–21 kHz.
The main difference between one and two modulating frequencies is that near the f 1 modulating
frequency appear two other frequencies which correspond to f 1 − f 2 and f 1 + f 2, respectively. This has
to be considered when analyzing complex systems with more than one modulating frequency, as in
the case of a hydraulic turbine.

The results for the stationary sensors are plotted in Figure 12. Again, the same conclusions than
in the case of one modulating frequency can be extracted with this results, but with the difference that
the f 2 modulating frequency can also be observed as a difference between f 1 and the nearby peaks.



Appl. Sci. 2018, 8, 451 14 of 18
Appl. Sci. 2018, 8, x FOR PEER REVIEW  14 of 18 

 
Figure 11. Amplitude demodulation for the sensors on the rotating frame and the excitation with two 
modulating frequencies. Rotating case (ff = 4.1 Hz). 

The microphone, as well as the AE sensor located in the upper cover, does not obtain the 
modulating frequencies f1 and f2, but it detects vibrations induced by the motor. This means that the 
transmission of the acoustic waves through the air is stronger for the motor vibrations than for the 
disk vibrations.  

The accelerometer located in the upper cover (ATT) again detects similar information than the 
one installed in the disk (ADISK) when there is water, which confirms than the transmission disk-
cover is due mainly to the water. This accelerometer senses the modulating frequencies better in the 
10–11 kHz band, which confirms that every kind of accelerometer and every position in the test rig 
has its own best high-frequency band to detect low-frequency phenomena by means of amplitude 
demodulation techniques. 

Figure 11. Amplitude demodulation for the sensors on the rotating frame and the excitation with two
modulating frequencies. Rotating case (f f = 4.1 Hz).

The microphone, as well as the AE sensor located in the upper cover, does not obtain the
modulating frequencies f 1 and f 2, but it detects vibrations induced by the motor. This means that the
transmission of the acoustic waves through the air is stronger for the motor vibrations than for the
disk vibrations.

The accelerometer located in the upper cover (ATT) again detects similar information than the one
installed in the disk (ADISK) when there is water, which confirms than the transmission disk-cover
is due mainly to the water. This accelerometer senses the modulating frequencies better in the
10–11 kHz band, which confirms that every kind of accelerometer and every position in the test rig
has its own best high-frequency band to detect low-frequency phenomena by means of amplitude
demodulation techniques.



Appl. Sci. 2018, 8, 451 15 of 18
Appl. Sci. 2018, 8, x FOR PEER REVIEW  15 of 18 

 
Figure 12. Amplitude demodulation for the sensors on the stationary frame and the excitation with 
two modulating frequencies. Rotating case (ff = 4.1 Hz). 

4. Conclusions 

In this paper, the current method to detect erosive cavitation in hydraulic turbines by analyzing 
high-frequency vibrations has been revised by studying its main existing uncertainties. This method 
is based on measuring high-frequency vibrations provoked by the collapse of cloud cavitation 
bubbles near the runner in different parts of the machine. It compares RMS values and amplitude 
demodulation of different high-frequency bands and different sensors. However, the transmission 
path from the runner to the measuring points is not known when the machine is under operating 
conditions, as there is no visual correlation of cavitation and the measured signals, and it is still not 
clear which high-frequency bands have to be used for every sensor located in every position of the 
machine. 

To optimize this current method, a simplified test rig based on a rotating disk submerged in 
water has been used. The disk has been excited with a PZT reproducing the excitation patterns caused 
by erosive cavitation, hence, the phenomenon of cavitation is not present in the test rig. Several 
sensors, including accelerometers, AE sensors, and a microphone, have been installed in the rotating 
and stationary parts of this test rig. This way, the excitation is completely known and, therefore, the 
transmission path between the excitation and the measuring point is obtained for every sensor. 
Different high-frequency bands have also been tested to study which are the best to detect the 
excitation for the different sensors. Thus, the best sensor and position to measure the given excitation 
is obtained. 

The results obtained show that the sensors installed in the rotating frame are the best to detect 
the excitation at high-frequency given to the disk. Especially, the AE sensor installed in the shaft was 
the best sensor to detect the excitation, since it is able to eliminate the structural response of the shaft 
and only obtain the information of the excitation, for all kinds of frequency bands tested. 
Accelerometers located in the shaft and in the disk detect both excitation and structural response, 

Figure 12. Amplitude demodulation for the sensors on the stationary frame and the excitation with
two modulating frequencies. Rotating case (f f = 4.1 Hz).

4. Conclusions

In this paper, the current method to detect erosive cavitation in hydraulic turbines by analyzing
high-frequency vibrations has been revised by studying its main existing uncertainties. This method is
based on measuring high-frequency vibrations provoked by the collapse of cloud cavitation bubbles
near the runner in different parts of the machine. It compares RMS values and amplitude demodulation
of different high-frequency bands and different sensors. However, the transmission path from the
runner to the measuring points is not known when the machine is under operating conditions,
as there is no visual correlation of cavitation and the measured signals, and it is still not clear which
high-frequency bands have to be used for every sensor located in every position of the machine.

To optimize this current method, a simplified test rig based on a rotating disk submerged in
water has been used. The disk has been excited with a PZT reproducing the excitation patterns caused
by erosive cavitation, hence, the phenomenon of cavitation is not present in the test rig. Several
sensors, including accelerometers, AE sensors, and a microphone, have been installed in the rotating
and stationary parts of this test rig. This way, the excitation is completely known and, therefore,
the transmission path between the excitation and the measuring point is obtained for every sensor.
Different high-frequency bands have also been tested to study which are the best to detect the excitation
for the different sensors. Thus, the best sensor and position to measure the given excitation is obtained.

The results obtained show that the sensors installed in the rotating frame are the best to detect the
excitation at high-frequency given to the disk. Especially, the AE sensor installed in the shaft was the
best sensor to detect the excitation, since it is able to eliminate the structural response of the shaft and
only obtain the information of the excitation, for all kinds of frequency bands tested. Accelerometers
located in the shaft and in the disk detect both excitation and structural response, which can be



Appl. Sci. 2018, 8, 451 16 of 18

distinguished using the amplitude demodulation analysis. For these sensors, the excitation is better
transmitted at high frequency (10 to 11 kHz or 20 to 21 kHz).

For the sensors installed in the stationary part, it has been demonstrated that the transmission of
the disk vibration was better when the disk was submerged in water than in the case of the disk in air.
This means that the disk vibration is mainly transmitted through the water. The accelerometer in the
bearing presents similar results than the one located in the shaft, and the accelerometer in the upper
cover shows relevant information also obtained by the accelerometer in the disk. The microphone and
AE sensor located in the stationary frame are contaminated by the vibration of the motor and, in this
case, they are not very useful to obtain the excitation in the disk.

The comparison made in the present study permits improving the current method to detect
cavitation in hydraulic turbines. In this case, the best position and sensor have been selected as an AE
sensor in the shaft, which works properly in both low- and high-frequency bands.

Acknowledgments: The authors would like to acknowledge the HYPERBOLE research project, granted by the
European Commission (ERC/FP7-ENERGY-2013-1-Grant 608532) for the economic support received. We would
also like to thank Voith Hydro® for helping to design, economically and technically, the test rig.

Author Contributions: Alexandre Presas, David Valentin, Eduard Egusquiza, and Carme Valero conceived and
designed the experiments; Alexandre Presas performed the experiments; Alexandre Presas, David Valentin,
and Mònica Egusquiza analyzed the data; and David Valentin wrote the paper.

Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

Nomenclature

AE Acoustic Emission
BEP Best Efficiency Point
RMS Root Mean Square
RSI Rotor Stator Interaction
PS Pseudorandom
PZT Piezoelectric Patch
f Frequency
t Time
Hi Hilbert transform
θ Phase shift
f f Rotating frequency
f 1 Modulating frequency at 22.1 Hz
f 2 Modulating frequency at 1.4 Hz
FRFH1 Frequency Response Function
Sxx(f ) Power Spectra Density function of x(t)
Syy(f ) Power Spectra Density function of y(t)
Sxy(f ) Cross-spectral Density function of x(t) and y(t)
τ Variable which satisfies τ 6= t

References

1. Bélanger, C.; Gagnon, L. Adding wind energy to hydropower. Energy Policy 2002, 30, 1279–1284. [CrossRef]
2. IEA (International Energy Agency). Key World Energy Trends. Excerpt from: World Energy Balances. 2016.

Available online: www.iea.org (accessed on 10 November 2017).
3. Gaudard, L.; Romerio, F. The future of hydropower in Europe: Interconnecting climate, markets and policies.

Environ. Sci. Policy 2014, 37 (Suppl. C), 172–181. [CrossRef]
4. Egusquiza, E.; Valero, C.; Huang, X.; Jou, E.; Guardo, A.; Rodriguez, C. Failure investigation of a large

pump-turbine runner. Eng. Failure Anal. 2012, 23, 27–34. [CrossRef]
5. Egusquiza, E.; Valero, C.; Presas, A.; Huang, X.; Guardo, A.; Seidel, U. Analysis of the dynamic response of

pump-turbine impellers. Influence of the rotor. Mech. Syst. Signal Process. 2016, 68–69, 330–341. [CrossRef]

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0301-4215(02)00089-7
www.iea.org
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.envsci.2013.09.008
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.engfailanal.2012.01.012
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ymssp.2015.05.034


Appl. Sci. 2018, 8, 451 17 of 18

6. Trivedi, C. A review on fluid structure interaction in hydraulic turbines: A focus on hydrodynamic damping.
Eng. Failure Anal. 2017, 77, 1–22. [CrossRef]

7. Frosina, E.; Buono, D.; Senatore, A. A Performance Prediction Method for Pumps as Turbines (PAT) Using
a Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) Modeling Approach. Energies 2017, 10, 103. [CrossRef]

8. Kumar, P.; Saini, R.P. Study of cavitation in hydro turbines—A review. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2010, 14,
374–383. [CrossRef]

9. Escaler, X.; Egusquiza, E.; Farhat, M.; Avellan, F.; Coussirat, M. Detection of cavitation in hydraulic turbines.
Mech. Syst. Signal Process. 2006, 20, 983–1007. [CrossRef]

10. Knapp, R.; Daily, J.; Hammitt, F. Cavitation; McGraw-Hill: New York, NY, USA, 1970; Volume 2, pp. 1–20.
11. Avellan, F.; Farhat, M. Shock Pressure Generated by Cavitation Vortex Collapse. ASME, San Francisco, December

1988, Proceedings of 3rd International Symposium on Cavitation Noise and Erosion in Fluid System of the ASME
Winter Annual Meeting, San Fransisco, CA, USA, December 1989; EPFL Scientific Publications: Lausanne,
Schweizerische; pp. 119–125.

12. Favrel, A.; Müller, A.; Landry, C.; Yamamoto, K.; Avellan, F. Study of the vortex-induced pressure excitation
source in a Francis turbine draft tube by particle image velocimetry. Exp. Fluids 2015, 56, 215. [CrossRef]

13. Favrel, A.; Müller, A.; Landry, C.; Gomes, J.; Yamamoto, K.; Avellan, F. Dynamics of the Precessing Vortex
Rope and Its Interaction with the System at Francis Turbines Part Load Operating Conditions; Journal of Physics:
Conference Series, 2017; IOP Publishing: Bristol, UK, 2017; p. 012023.

14. Müller, A.; Favrel, A.; Landry, C.; Avellan, F. Fluid–structure interaction mechanisms leading to dangerous
power swings in Francis turbines at full load. J. Fluids Struct. 2017, 69 (Suppl. C), 56–71. [CrossRef]

15. Yamamoto, K.; Müller, A.; Favrel, A.; Landry, C.; Avellan, F. Flow Characteristics and Influence Associated with
Inter-Blade Cavitation Vortices at Deep Part Load Operations of a Francis Turbine; Journal of Physics: Conference
Series, 2017; IOP Publishing: Bristol, UK, 2017; p. 012029.

16. Avellan, F.; Dupont, P.; Ryhming, I.L. Generation Mechanism and Dynamics of Cavitation Vortices Downstream
of a Fixed Leading Edge Cavity, Proceedings of the17th Symposium on Naval Hydrodynamics, The Hague,
The Netherland, 28 Aguust–2 September 1988; EPFL Scientific Publications: Lausanne, Schweizerische; pp. 1–13.

17. Escaler, X.; Ekanger, J.V.; Francke, H.H.; Kjeldsen, M.; Nielsen, T.K. Detection of Draft Tube Surge and Erosive
Blade Cavitation in a Full-Scale Francis Turbine. J. Fluids Eng. 2014, 137, 011103. [CrossRef]

18. Escaler, X.; Farhat, M.; Ausoni, P.; Egusquiza, E.; François, A. Cavitation Monitoring of Hydroturbines: Tests in
a Francis Turbine Model; CAV2006: Wageningen, The Netherlands, 2006.

19. Bajic, B. Multidimensional diagnostics of turbine cavitation. J. Fluids Eng. 2002, 124, 943–950. [CrossRef]
20. Bajić, B.; Keller, A. Spectrum Normalization Method in Vibro-Acoustical Diagnostic Measurements of

Hydroturbine Cavitation. J. Fluids Eng. 1996, 118, 756–761. [CrossRef]
21. Escaler, X.; Egusquiza, E.; Farhat, M.; Avellan, F. Vibration Cavitation Detection Using Onboard

Measurements. In Proceedings of the Fifth International Symposium on Cavitation, Osaka, Japan,
1–5 November 2003.

22. Cencič, T.; Hočevar, M.; Širok, B. Study of Cavitation in Pump-Storage Hydro Power Plant Prototype.
In Proceedings of the 6th IAHR Internation Meeting of the Workgroup on Cavitation and Dynamic Problems
in Hydraulic Machinery and Systems, Ljubljana, Slovenia, 9–11 September 2015.

23. Bourdon, P.; Simoneau, R.; Lavigne, P. A vibratory Approach to the Detection of Erosive Cavitation, Proceedings of
the ASME International Symposium on Cavitation Noise and Erosion in Fluid Systems, San Francisco, CA, USA,
December 1989; FED: Washington, DC, USA, 1989.

24. Vizmanos, C.; Egusquiza, E.; Jou, E. Cavitation detection in a Francis turbine. Int. J. Hydropower Dams 1996,
3, 161–168.

25. Escaler, X.; Farhat, M.; Egusquiza, E.; Avellan, F. Dynamics and Intensity of Erosive Partial Cavitation.
J. Fluids Eng. 2007, 129, 886–893. [CrossRef]

26. Presas, A.; Egusquiza, E.; Valero, C.; Valentin, D.; Seidel, U. Feasibility of Using PZT Actuators to Study
the Dynamic Behavior of a Rotating Disk due to Rotor-Stator Interaction. Sensors 2014, 14, 11919–11942.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]

27. Presas, A.; Valentin, D.; Egusquiza, E.; Valero, C.; Seidel, U. Influence of the rotation on the natural frequencies
of a submerged-confined disk in water. J. Sound Vib. 2015, 337, 161–180. [CrossRef]

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.engfailanal.2017.02.021
http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/en10010103
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2009.07.024
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ymssp.2004.08.006
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00348-015-2085-5
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jfluidstructs.2016.11.018
http://dx.doi.org/10.1115/1.4027541
http://dx.doi.org/10.1115/1.1511162
http://dx.doi.org/10.1115/1.2835506
http://dx.doi.org/10.1115/1.2742748
http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/s140711919
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25004151
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jsv.2014.10.032


Appl. Sci. 2018, 8, 451 18 of 18

28. Presas, A.; Valentin, D.; Egusquiza, E.; Valero, C.; Seidel, U. On the detection of natural frequencies and
mode shapes of submerged rotating disk-like structures from the casing. Mech. Syst. Signal Process. 2015,
60–61, 547–570. [CrossRef]

29. Valentín, D.; Presas, A.; Egusquiza, E.; Valero, C. On the Capability of Structural–Acoustical Fluid–Structure
Interaction Simulations to Predict Natural Frequencies of Rotating Disklike Structures Submerged in a Heavy
Fluid. J. Vib. Acoust. 2016, 138, 034502. [CrossRef]

30. Presas, A.; Valentin, D.; Egusquiza, E.; Valero, C.; Egusquiza, M.; Bossio, M. Accurate Determination of the
Frequency Response Function of Submerged and Confined Structures by Using PZT-Patches. Sensors 2017,
17, 660. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

31. Rodriguez, C.G.; Mateos-Prieto, B.; Egusquiza, E. Monitoring of Rotor-Stator Interaction in Pump-Turbine
Using Vibrations Measured with On-Board Sensors Rotating with Shaft. Shock Vib. 2014, 2014, 8. [CrossRef]

32. Egusquiza, E.; Valero, C.; Valentin, D.; Presas, A.; Rodriguez, C.G. Condition monitoring of pump-turbines.
New challenges. Measurement 2015, 67, 151–163. [CrossRef]

33. Presas, A.; Valentín, D.; Egusquiza, E.; Valero, C.; Seidel, U. Experimental analysis of the dynamic behavior
of a rotating disk submerged in water. IOP Conf. Ser. Earth Environ. Sci. 2014, 22, 032043. [CrossRef]

34. Presas, A.; Valentin, D.; Egusquiza, E.; Valero, C.; Seidel, U. Dynamic response of a rotating disk submerged
and confined. Influence of the axial gap. J. Fluids Struct. 2016, 62, 332–349. [CrossRef]

35. Presas, A.; Valentin, D.; Egusquiza, E.; Valero, C.; Seidel, U.; Weber, W. Natural Frequencies of Rotating Disk-Like
Structures Submerged Viewed from the Stationary Frame; IOP Conference Series: Earth and Environmental
Science, 2016; IOP Publishing: Bristol, UK, 2016; p. 082023.

36. Heylen, W.; Sas, P. Modal Analysis Theory and Testing; Katholieke Universteit Leuven, Departement
Werktuigkunde: Leuven, Belgium, 2006.

© 2018 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ymssp.2015.01.013
http://dx.doi.org/10.1115/1.4032726
http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/s17030660
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28327501
http://dx.doi.org/10.1155/2014/276796
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.measurement.2015.01.004
http://dx.doi.org/10.1088/1755-1315/22/3/032043
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jfluidstructs.2016.02.003
http://creativecommons.org/
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.

	Introduction 
	Experimental Investigation 
	Test Rig Description 
	Instrumentation 
	Tests Conducted 
	Signal Analysis 
	Coherence 
	Frequency Response Function (FRF) 
	Amplitude Demodulation Analysis 


	Results and Discussion 
	Coherence 
	FRF 
	Amplitude Demodulation Analysis 
	Without Modulating Frequencies 
	With One Modulating Frequency 
	With Two Modulating Frequencies 


	Conclusions 
	References

