






















































Extension of Operating Range in Pump-Turbines. Influence of Head and Load


energies

Article

Extension of Operating Range in Pump-Turbines.
Influence of Head and Load

Carme Valero *, Mònica Egusquiza, Eduard Egusquiza, Alexandre Presas, David Valentin ID

and Matias Bossio

Center for Industrial Diagnostics and Fluid Dynamics (CDIF), Polytechnic University of Catalonia (UPC),
Av. Diagonal, 647, ETSEIB, 08028 Barcelona, Spain; monica.egusquiza@upc.edu (M.E.);
eduard.egusquiza@upc.edu (E.E.); alexandre.presas@upc.edu (A.P.); david.valentin@upc.edu (D.V.);
matias.alberto.bossio@upc.edu (M.B.)
* Correspondence: m.del.carmen.valero@upc.edu; Tel.: +34-934-017-137

Received: 31 October 2017; Accepted: 15 December 2017; Published: 19 December 2017

Abstract: Due to the increasing share of new renewable energies like wind and solar in the generation
of electricity the need for power regulation and energy storage is becoming of paramount importance.
One of the systems to store huge amounts of energy is pumped storage using reversible hydropower
units. The machines used in these power plants are pump-turbines, which can operate as a pump and
as a turbine. The surplus of electrical energy during low consumption hours can be converted into
potential hydraulic energy by pumping water to a higher level. The stored energy can be converted
into electricity again by operating the runner as a turbine. Due to new regulation requirements
machines have to extend the operating range in order to match energy generation with consumption
for the grid stability. In this paper the consequences of extending the operating range in existing
pump-turbines have been studied. For that purpose, the data obtained after two years of condition
monitoring were analyzed. Vibrations and pressure fluctuations of two pump-turbines of 85 MW each
have been studied during pump and turbine operation. For turbine operation the effects of extending
the operating range from the standard range of 45–85 MW to and increased range of 20–85 MW
were analyzed. The change in vibration levels and signatures at very low load are presented with
the identification of the phenomena that occur under these conditions. The influence of head in the
vibration behavior is also presented. The appearance of fluid instabilities generated at part load that
may produce power swing is also presented. Finally, the effect of head on the vibration levels for
pump operation is shown and analyzed.

Keywords: pump-turbine; load extension; vibration monitoring; condition monitoring

1. Introduction

At present, the share of new renewable energies (NRE) in the generation of electricity is quite
important in some European countries. Because the energy generated by NRE is of random nature
instabilities in the electrical grid, where generation has to match demand at any time, can be produced.
A continuous balance between generation and consumption requires flexibility in the system. Pumped
storage plants are able to start and stop in a short time, generate different levels of power, and store
energy. Because of that, they are becoming key players in the stability of the electrical grid.

Pump-turbines are reversible machines used in pumped storage systems. They are high
performance machines that can change their operation from pump to turbine mode only by reversing
the direction of rotation of the runner. In Figure 1, a sketch of a pumped storage system has been
represented. Pump-turbines convert hydraulic energy into electrical energy (turbine mode) or vice
versa (pump mode). The surplus of energy during low consumption hours at night is used to pump the
water from the lower reservoir to the upper reservoir, thus converting electrical energy into potential

Energies 2017, 10, 2178; doi:10.3390/en10122178 www.mdpi.com/journal/energies

http://www.mdpi.com/journal/energies
http://www.mdpi.com
https://orcid.org/0000-0001-7125-0734
http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/en10122178
http://www.mdpi.com/journal/energies


Energies 2017, 10, 2178 2 of 17

hydraulic energy. When electricity demand increases, the runner operates as a turbine in order to
convert the stored energy back into electricity. The power depends on the head H (difference in levels
between reservoirs) and on the discharge Q (mass of water per time unit). For turbine operation,
the power supplied can be regulated by varying the opening degree of the guide vanes located at the
entrance of the machine.

Energies 2017, 10, 2178  2 of 17 

 

versa (pump mode). The surplus of energy during low consumption hours at night is used to pump 

the water  from  the  lower  reservoir  to  the upper  reservoir,  thus  converting  electrical  energy  into 

potential hydraulic energy. When electricity demand increases, the runner operates as a turbine in 

order to convert the stored energy back into electricity. The power depends on the head H (difference 

in  levels between  reservoirs)  and on  the discharge Q  (mass of water per  time unit). For  turbine 

operation, the power supplied can be regulated by varying the opening degree of the guide vanes 

located at the entrance of the machine. 

 

Figure 1. Sketch of a hydroelectric reversible power plant. 

Pump‐turbine sets consist of an electrical machine (motor‐generator) and a hydraulic machine 

(pump‐turbine). Because of  this  reversible behavior  they have higher  rotating  speeds and higher 

pressures than conventional hydro turbines. 

The operating range of pump‐turbines, like all other hydraulic turbines, is limited. When these 

machines operate outside  their best efficiency point vibrations and pressure  fluctuations  increase 

considerably, what can affect the operation of the machine and reduce their useful life. Therefore, the 

operating range (from minimum  to maximum power)  is  limited by  the manufacturers  in order  to 

avoid damage. Years ago, turbines used to operate around the best efficiency point but nowadays 

power  plant  operators  are  very  interested  in  increasing  the  regulation  capacity,  because  this  is 

translated into a large increase in revenues [1] even though the lifetime of the machine is reduced. 

When increasing the regulation capacity, turbines have to work at extreme off‐design conditions 

and many problems may appear [2]. Strong pressure pulsations, instabilities in the draft tube and 

excessive  turbulence  can  generate  excessive  vibration  levels  and  stresses  that  can  damage  the 

machine [3–6]. Flow instabilities are basically caused by the interaction of the vortex rope produced 

in the draft tube with the overall system [7–9]. It is also known that flow instabilities at part load and 

overload can produce power fluctuations on the electrical grid (power swing). Cavitation erosion and 

excessive vibrations can increase the maintenance costs. 

Although some of the fluid dynamic phenomena that may occur at part load on a Francis turbine 

have been much  studied  [10–12],  the  effects of deep part  load have not been as much analyzed, 

especially in pump‐turbines. Moreover, the studies are related to the fluid flow and carried out in a 

laboratory [13–19]. The only way to determine the effects of extreme off‐design operation in an actual 

turbine is by measuring it in existing machines because the dynamics of the whole system (fluid and 

structure) cannot be reproduced in a laboratory. Only a few publications deal with this topic, some 

for pump turbines [20–25] and some for Francis turbines [20–22]. 

In  this  paper,  the  effects  of  increasing  the  operating  range  of  an  existing  pumped  storage 

hydropower plant are presented and discussed. For that purpose, vibrations and pressure pulsations 

were measured  and  collected over  two years  from  the  installed pump  turbines by  a monitoring 

Figure 1. Sketch of a hydroelectric reversible power plant.

Pump-turbine sets consist of an electrical machine (motor-generator) and a hydraulic machine
(pump-turbine). Because of this reversible behavior they have higher rotating speeds and higher
pressures than conventional hydro turbines.

The operating range of pump-turbines, like all other hydraulic turbines, is limited. When
these machines operate outside their best efficiency point vibrations and pressure fluctuations
increase considerably, what can affect the operation of the machine and reduce their useful life.
Therefore, the operating range (from minimum to maximum power) is limited by the manufacturers
in order to avoid damage. Years ago, turbines used to operate around the best efficiency point but
nowadays power plant operators are very interested in increasing the regulation capacity, because this
is translated into a large increase in revenues [1] even though the lifetime of the machine is reduced.

When increasing the regulation capacity, turbines have to work at extreme off-design conditions
and many problems may appear [2]. Strong pressure pulsations, instabilities in the draft tube
and excessive turbulence can generate excessive vibration levels and stresses that can damage the
machine [3–6]. Flow instabilities are basically caused by the interaction of the vortex rope produced in
the draft tube with the overall system [7–9]. It is also known that flow instabilities at part load and
overload can produce power fluctuations on the electrical grid (power swing). Cavitation erosion and
excessive vibrations can increase the maintenance costs.

Although some of the fluid dynamic phenomena that may occur at part load on a Francis turbine
have been much studied [10–12], the effects of deep part load have not been as much analyzed,
especially in pump-turbines. Moreover, the studies are related to the fluid flow and carried out in
a laboratory [13–19]. The only way to determine the effects of extreme off-design operation in an actual
turbine is by measuring it in existing machines because the dynamics of the whole system (fluid and
structure) cannot be reproduced in a laboratory. Only a few publications deal with this topic, some for
pump turbines [20–22] and some for Francis turbines [23–25].

In this paper, the effects of increasing the operating range of an existing pumped storage
hydropower plant are presented and discussed. For that purpose, vibrations and pressure pulsations
were measured and collected over two years from the installed pump turbines by a monitoring system.
The data obtained was then processed and analyzed in order to determine the feasibility of increasing



Energies 2017, 10, 2178 3 of 17

the operating range of the machines. In case these pump turbines show a low risk of damage when
working in extreme off-design conditions, the power plant operators would be given the possibility of
increasing the flexibility of the system. With a better adjustment of the power outcome during peak
hours, grid stability issues would be overcome and revenues would be increased.

2. Hydropower Plant and System Description

Two reversible pump-turbines operate at the power plant studied. Each unit has a maximum
power of 85 MW. They are vertical shaft machines with three radial bearings (upper and lower
generator and turbine) and one axial bearing (see Figure 2). The runner has 7 blades and the distributor
16 vanes. The rotational speed is of 500 rpm.

Two accelerometers separated 90◦ in the radial direction were installed on the upper and the
lower generator bearing as well as on the turbine bearing. In addition, two accelerometers were located
on the axial bearing. Pressure transducers were installed in the draft tube. All sensors are represented
on Figure 2. The sensitivity of the accelerometers is of 100 mV/mms−1 and of 3092 V/bar for the
pressure transducers. The operating conditions of the machine (head and guide vane opening degree)
were acquired from the power plant control system (Scada).

A OneProd MVX monitoring system was installed in each unit. This system enables acquiring the
signals from all the installed sensors in real time. The time domain signals were stored in the data base,
as well as the overall vibration levels, the spectral bands and the spectra, which had to be previously
processed. Because vibrations depend on the operating conditions of the machine (head and guide
vane opening), several data bases were built-up according to these. The trending of these parameters
was used to see the evolution of the condition of the machine. In Figure 3, a sketch of the monitoring
system is shown. The acquisition system is located near the machine and connected via Ethernet cable
to a computer with the monitoring software installed. Remote monitoring and diagnosis from outside
the power plant is also possible using a remote access.

Energies 2017, 10, 2178  3 of 17 

 

system. The data obtained was then processed and analyzed in order to determine the feasibility of 

increasing  the operating  range of  the machines.  In  case  these pump  turbines  show a  low  risk of 

damage when working in extreme off‐design conditions, the power plant operators would be given 

the possibility  of  increasing  the  flexibility  of  the  system. With  a  better  adjustment  of  the power 

outcome  during  peak  hours,  grid  stability  issues would  be  overcome  and  revenues  would  be 

increased. 

2. Hydropower Plant and System Description 

Two reversible pump‐turbines operate at the power plant studied. Each unit has a maximum 

power of  85 MW. They  are vertical  shaft machines with  three  radial bearings  (upper  and  lower 

generator  and  turbine)  and  one  axial  bearing  (see  Figure  2).  The  runner  has  7  blades  and  the 

distributor 16 vanes. The rotational speed is of 500 rpm. 

Two accelerometers separated 90° in the radial direction were installed on the upper and the 

lower generator bearing  as well  as on  the  turbine bearing.  In addition,  two accelerometers were 

located on the axial bearing. Pressure transducers were  installed  in the draft tube. All sensors are 

represented on Figure 2. The sensitivity of the accelerometers is of 100 mV/mms−1 and of 3092 V/bar 

for the pressure transducers. The operating conditions of the machine (head and guide vane opening 

degree) were acquired from the power plant control system (Scada). 

A OneProd MVX monitoring system was installed in each unit. This system enables acquiring 

the signals from all the installed sensors in real time. The time domain signals were stored in the data 

base, as well as  the overall vibration  levels,  the  spectral bands and  the  spectra, which had  to be 

previously processed. Because vibrations depend on the operating conditions of the machine (head 

and guide vane opening), several data bases were built‐up according to these. The trending of these 

parameters was used to see the evolution of the condition of the machine. In Figure 3, a sketch of the 

monitoring system is shown. The acquisition system is located near the machine and connected via 

Ethernet  cable  to  a  computer  with  the  monitoring  software  installed.  Remote  monitoring  and 

diagnosis from outside the power plant is also possible using a remote access. 

 

Figure 2. Sensors installed in the pump turbine. Accelerometers are displayed in grey and pressure 

transducers in black. 

Figure 2. Sensors installed in the pump turbine. Accelerometers are displayed in grey and pressure
transducers in black.



Energies 2017, 10, 2178 4 of 17
Energies 2017, 10, 2178  4 of 17 

 

 

Figure 3. Monitoring system installed in the pump turbine. 

During operation, the water levels in the reservoirs are changing continually. The head H (see 

Figure 1) increases when pumping because the upper reservoir increases its level of water and the 

lower  reservoir decreases  it;  likewise,  the head decreases  in  turbine operation.  In  the  case under 

study, the head was varying between 300 m and 330 m. In Figure 4, the change in the head with time 

can be observed (in blue for pumping mode and in red for turbine mode). It can be seen that the head 

level has increased by about 25 m in a short time (three days) because the machine has worked longer 

in pumping mode. 

 

Figure 4. Variation of head level in pumping operation (blue marker) and in turbine operation (red 

marker). 

Figure 3. Monitoring system installed in the pump turbine.

During operation, the water levels in the reservoirs are changing continually. The head H
(see Figure 1) increases when pumping because the upper reservoir increases its level of water and the
lower reservoir decreases it; likewise, the head decreases in turbine operation. In the case under study,
the head was varying between 300 m and 330 m. In Figure 4, the change in the head with time can be
observed (in blue for pumping mode and in red for turbine mode). It can be seen that the head level
has increased by about 25 m in a short time (three days) because the machine has worked longer in
pumping mode.

Energies 2017, 10, 2178  4 of 17 

 

 

Figure 3. Monitoring system installed in the pump turbine. 

During operation, the water levels in the reservoirs are changing continually. The head H (see 

Figure 1) increases when pumping because the upper reservoir increases its level of water and the 

lower  reservoir decreases  it;  likewise,  the head decreases  in  turbine operation.  In  the  case under 

study, the head was varying between 300 m and 330 m. In Figure 4, the change in the head with time 

can be observed (in blue for pumping mode and in red for turbine mode). It can be seen that the head 

level has increased by about 25 m in a short time (three days) because the machine has worked longer 

in pumping mode. 

 

Figure 4. Variation of head level in pumping operation (blue marker) and in turbine operation (red 

marker). 

Figure 4. Variation of head level in pumping operation (blue marker) and in turbine operation (red marker).

Another thing to be considered is that these machines are in regulation mode, which means they
are changing their load continually in order to match the demand of electricity. Because generated



Energies 2017, 10, 2178 5 of 17

vibrations depend on the operating conditions, the monitoring is complex. For this reason, the influence
on the vibration levels of both parameters, head and load, has to be analyzed too.

Historically, in this power plant, the power generated during turbine operation was regulated
between 45 MW and 85 MW. To determine the feasibility of increasing the operating range,
the minimum operating load was reduced from 45 MW to 20 MW. Regular inspections of the unit
were carried out to detect possible damage produced by this extension. To determine the effect of this
reduction, data acquired during two years were analyzed.

For each machine, an investigation is made on the following parameters:

• The variation of global vibration levels (overall levels) depending on whether the unit is working
as a turbine or as a pump.

• For turbine operation, the influence of head and load is analyzed. Operation at very low load
(loads less than 30 MW) is especially taken into account.

• For pump operation only the influence of the head is analyzed because only one guide-vane
opening degree is used in this case.

• The characteristics of the vibratory signatures and their variation with head and load conditions.
The main phenomena that generate vibrations are identified in low and high frequency range.

3. Turbine Operation

First, the evolution of vibrations at different loads is presented. In Figure 5a, the evolution of the
overall vibration levels measured in the turbine bearing in mm/s for a period of about five months is
shown. The overall vibration levels in mm/s rms give an indicator of the kinetic energy of the vibration
and therefore of its severity. In Figure 5b, the changes in the guide vane opening degree (%) for the
same period can be observed. At first sight, it can be seen that the vibration levels have important
fluctuations and two zones can be clearly identified: the first corresponding to a normal operating
range between 45% and 100% of guide vane opening degree (green frame in Figure 5) and the second
with the extended operating range from 20 to 100% (red frame in Figure 5). In the normal operation
zone, the overall levels change from 0.5 mm/s to 1 mm/s rms and with the extended operating range,
the levels change from 0.5 mm/s to 2 mm/s rms. It can be seen that operation at deep part load (20%)
substantially increases the vibration levels.

Energies 2017, 10, 2178  5 of 17 

 

Another thing to be considered is that these machines are in regulation mode, which means they 

are changing their load continually in order to match the demand of electricity. Because generated 

vibrations  depend  on  the  operating  conditions,  the monitoring  is  complex.  For  this  reason,  the 

influence on the vibration levels of both parameters, head and load, has to be analyzed too. 

Historically, in this power plant, the power generated during turbine operation was regulated 

between  45 MW and 85 MW. To determine  the  feasibility of  increasing  the operating  range,  the 

minimum operating load was reduced from 45 MW to 20 MW. Regular inspections of the unit were 

carried out  to detect possible damage produced by  this extension. To determine  the effect of  this 

reduction, data acquired during two years were analyzed. 

For each machine, an investigation is made on the following parameters: 

 The variation of global vibration levels (overall levels) depending on whether the unit is working 
as a turbine or as a pump. 

 For turbine operation, the influence of head and load is analyzed. Operation at very low load 
(loads less than 30 MW) is especially taken into account. 

 For pump operation only  the  influence of  the head  is analyzed because only one guide‐vane 
opening degree is used in this case. 

 The characteristics of the vibratory signatures and their variation with head and load conditions. 
The main phenomena that generate vibrations are identified in low and high frequency range. 

3. Turbine Operation 

First, the evolution of vibrations at different loads is presented. In Figure 5a, the evolution of the 

overall vibration levels measured in the turbine bearing in mm/s for a period of about five months is 

shown.  The  overall  vibration  levels  in mm/s  rms  give  an  indicator  of  the  kinetic  energy  of  the 

vibration and therefore of its severity. In Figure 5b, the changes in the guide vane opening degree (%) 

for  the  same period  can be observed. At  first  sight,  it  can be  seen  that  the vibration  levels have 

important fluctuations and two zones can be clearly identified: the first corresponding to a normal 

operating range between 45% and 100% of guide vane opening degree (green frame in Figure 5) and 

the second with the extended operating range from 20 to 100% (red frame in Figure 5). In the normal 

operation  zone,  the  overall  levels  change  from  0.5 mm/s  to  1 mm/s  rms  and with  the  extended 

operating range, the levels change from 0.5 mm/s to 2 mm/s rms. It can be seen that operation at deep 

part load (20%) substantially increases the vibration levels. 

 
(a)

Figure 5. Cont.



Energies 2017, 10, 2178 6 of 17
Energies 2017, 10, 2178  6 of 17 

 

 
(b)

Figure 5. Vibration levels of turbine bearing (a); guide vane opening (b). 

In Figure 6 a zoom  is made  to better observe  the variations of vibrations with  the operating 

conditions. In this figure, it can be seen that overall values depend much on changes in load but there 

is no clear relationship between both parameters. The influence of the other parameter, the head, will 

be analyzed below. 

 
(a)

 
(b)

Figure 6. Zoom of vibration levels of turbine bearing (a) and guide vane opening (b). 

Figure 5. Vibration levels of turbine bearing (a); guide vane opening (b).

In Figure 6 a zoom is made to better observe the variations of vibrations with the operating
conditions. In this figure, it can be seen that overall values depend much on changes in load but there
is no clear relationship between both parameters. The influence of the other parameter, the head,
will be analyzed below.

Energies 2017, 10, 2178  6 of 17 

 

 
(b)

Figure 5. Vibration levels of turbine bearing (a); guide vane opening (b). 

In Figure 6 a zoom  is made  to better observe  the variations of vibrations with  the operating 

conditions. In this figure, it can be seen that overall values depend much on changes in load but there 

is no clear relationship between both parameters. The influence of the other parameter, the head, will 

be analyzed below. 

 
(a)

 
(b)

Figure 6. Zoom of vibration levels of turbine bearing (a) and guide vane opening (b). 
Figure 6. Zoom of vibration levels of turbine bearing (a) and guide vane opening (b).



Energies 2017, 10, 2178 7 of 17

3.1. Analysis of Overall Levels

3.1.1. Effect of the Position

In Figure 7 the overall vibration levels for different values of head and for different guide vane
openings are represented for Unit 1. X-axis represents time (in days and hours) and Y–axis represents
the overall level (mm/s). Comparing vibrations measured with the accelerometers at different locations
(turbine and generator bearings) it can be seen that vibration levels in the turbine bearing are higher
than in the generator bearing. The values fluctuate considerably because both change with the
operating point (head and guide vane opening). This indicates that the main excitation forces are of
hydraulic origin. The other machine of the power plant (Unit 2), has a similar behavior. In Figure 8 the
change in vibration levels (mm/s RMS) in Unit 2 during regulation can be observed.

Energies 2017, 10, 2178  7 of 17 

 

3.1. Analysis of Overall Levels 

3.1.1. Effect of the Position 

In Figure 7 the overall vibration levels for different values of head and for different guide vane 

openings are represented for Unit 1. X‐axis represents time (in days and hours) and Y–axis represents 

the  overall  level  (mm/s).  Comparing  vibrations measured  with  the  accelerometers  at  different 

locations (turbine and generator bearings) it can be seen that vibration levels in the turbine bearing 

are higher than in the generator bearing. The values fluctuate considerably because both change with 

the operating point (head and guide vane opening). This indicates that the main excitation forces are 

of hydraulic origin. The other machine of the power plant (Unit 2), has a similar behavior. In Figure 

8 the change in vibration levels (mm/s RMS) in Unit 2 during regulation can be observed. 

(a)  (b)

Figure 7. (a)Vibration levels of generator and (b) turbine bearing in mm/s RMS. Different heads and 

loads. Unit 1. 

(a)  (b)

Figure 8. (a)Vibration levels of generator and (b) turbine bearing in mm/s RMS. Different heads and 

loads. Unit 2. 

3.1.2. Effect of the Load 

Because  both  head  and  guide  vane  opening  affect  the  vibration  characteristics,  in  order  to 

separate the influence of each parameter, the effect of guide vanes opening for a constant head, is 

discussed in this section. 

In Figure 9a the change of different measured magnitudes versus time (different hours for the 

same day) for the Unit 1 can be seen: 

 In the upper section, the change in the overall vibration levels in mm/s has been represented. It 
can be seen that levels change between 0.5 mm/s and 2 mm/s in a few hours. 

Figure 7. (a)Vibration levels of generator and (b) turbine bearing in mm/s RMS. Different heads and
loads. Unit 1.

Energies 2017, 10, 2178  7 of 17 

 

3.1. Analysis of Overall Levels 

3.1.1. Effect of the Position 

In Figure 7 the overall vibration levels for different values of head and for different guide vane 

openings are represented for Unit 1. X‐axis represents time (in days and hours) and Y–axis represents 

the  overall  level  (mm/s).  Comparing  vibrations measured  with  the  accelerometers  at  different 

locations (turbine and generator bearings) it can be seen that vibration levels in the turbine bearing 

are higher than in the generator bearing. The values fluctuate considerably because both change with 

the operating point (head and guide vane opening). This indicates that the main excitation forces are 

of hydraulic origin. The other machine of the power plant (Unit 2), has a similar behavior. In Figure 

8 the change in vibration levels (mm/s RMS) in Unit 2 during regulation can be observed. 

(a)  (b)

Figure 7. (a)Vibration levels of generator and (b) turbine bearing in mm/s RMS. Different heads and 

loads. Unit 1. 

(a)  (b)

Figure 8. (a)Vibration levels of generator and (b) turbine bearing in mm/s RMS. Different heads and 

loads. Unit 2. 

3.1.2. Effect of the Load 

Because  both  head  and  guide  vane  opening  affect  the  vibration  characteristics,  in  order  to 

separate the influence of each parameter, the effect of guide vanes opening for a constant head, is 

discussed in this section. 

In Figure 9a the change of different measured magnitudes versus time (different hours for the 

same day) for the Unit 1 can be seen: 

 In the upper section, the change in the overall vibration levels in mm/s has been represented. It 
can be seen that levels change between 0.5 mm/s and 2 mm/s in a few hours. 

Figure 8. (a)Vibration levels of generator and (b) turbine bearing in mm/s RMS. Different heads and
loads. Unit 2.

3.1.2. Effect of the Load

Because both head and guide vane opening affect the vibration characteristics, in order to separate
the influence of each parameter, the effect of guide vanes opening for a constant head, is discussed in
this section.

In Figure 9a the change of different measured magnitudes versus time (different hours for the
same day) for the Unit 1 can be seen:



Energies 2017, 10, 2178 8 of 17

• In the upper section, the change in the overall vibration levels in mm/s has been represented.
It can be seen that levels change between 0.5 mm/s and 2 mm/s in a few hours.

• In the middle section, the variation in head (water levels in the reservoirs) is shown. In this case,
there is almost no change in head during the period studied (constant value around 309 m).

• In the lower section, the different positions of the guide vane can also be seen. The lower the
position of guide vanes, the lower the load and vice versa.

When the machine passes from maximum load (guide vane opening of 96% (position C1)) to the
minimum load (guide vane opening of 33.78% (position C3)) (see Figure 9a at the bottom) vibration
levels suffer a change first decreasing and then increasing (see Figure 9a at the top). The minimum
levels occur when the machine operates around the nominal load of 70% (position C2 in Figure 9a
bottom). Vibration levels are higher at maximum load (guide vane opening of 95.5% (position C1),
see Figure 9 at the top) and especially at part load (C3) when the opening is of 33.78%. In general,
high vibrations are related to low loads and low vibrations are related to loads between 60% and 80%
of guide vane opening. Similar behavior occurs in Unit 2 (Figure 9b) where the changes in vibration
levels with opening degree for a constant head of 327 m are shown.

Energies 2017, 10, 2178  8 of 17 

 

 In the middle section, the variation in head (water levels in the reservoirs) is shown. In this case, 
there is almost no change in head during the period studied (constant value around 309 m). 

 In the lower section, the different positions of the guide vane can also be seen. The lower the 
position of guide vanes, the lower the load and vice versa. 

When the machine passes from maximum load (guide vane opening of 96% (position C1)) to the 

minimum load (guide vane opening of 33.78% (position C3)) (see Figure 9a at the bottom) vibration 

levels suffer a change first decreasing and then increasing (see Figure 9a at the top). The minimum 

levels occur when the machine operates around the nominal load of 70% (position C2 in Figure 9a 

bottom). Vibration levels are higher at maximum load (guide vane opening of 95.5% (position C1), 

see Figure 9 at the top) and especially at part load (C3) when the opening is of 33.78%. In general, 

high vibrations are related to low loads and low vibrations are related to loads between 60% and 80% 

of guide vane opening. Similar behavior occurs in Unit 2 (Figure 9b) where the changes in vibration 

levels with opening degree for a constant head of 327 m are shown. 

(a)  (b) 

Figure 9. Variation levels related with operation (similar head, different load) (a) Unit 1; (b): Unit 2. 

The possible reasons for these changes are explained in Section 3.2. 

3.1.3. Effect of the Head 

Another significant parameter affecting the vibration levels is the head. In Figure 10, the change 

in vibration levels with head for a constant guide vane opening (around 30%) when the machine is 

operating at minimum load can be seen. The decrease in head produces a significant increase in the 

Figure 9. Variation levels related with operation (similar head, different load) (a) Unit 1; (b): Unit 2.
The possible reasons for these changes are explained in Section 3.2.

3.1.3. Effect of the Head

Another significant parameter affecting the vibration levels is the head. In Figure 10, the change
in vibration levels with head for a constant guide vane opening (around 30%) when the machine is



Energies 2017, 10, 2178 9 of 17

operating at minimum load can be seen. The decrease in head produces a significant increase in the
vibration levels because there is more turbulence due to the off-design operation. Vibration levels are
at maximum when head is the lowest.

Energies 2017, 10, 2178  9 of 17 

 

vibration levels because there is more turbulence due to the off‐design operation. Vibration levels are 

at maximum when head is the lowest. 

 

Figure 10. Variation in vibration levels related with head (similar load). 

Consequently,  the worst situation  is produced when  the machine operates at minimum  load 

with minimum head. The reason for this variation is discussed in the next section. 

3.2. Analysis of Vibration Signatures 

To identify the causes of the change in the overall vibrations levels and the effects of operating 

the machine at deep part load, the vibration signatures for different loads and heads were analyzed. 

It is known that the main excitations generating vibrations are of: 

 Hydraulic origin; 
 Mechanical origin; 
 Electromagnetic origin. 

Excitations  of mechanical  origin  are  generated  by  the  forces  appearing  in  any  system with 

masses in rotation around an axis (for example, unbalances). Excitations of electromagnetic origin are 

produced by the electromagnetic fields coming from motors or generators. 

Several fluid dynamic mechanisms can generate hydraulic excitations, being the most important 

one  in hydraulic machines  the  interaction between  the  rotating  runner blades and  the  stationary 

guide vanes, what is known as rotor stator interaction (RSI) [26]. The RSI generates periodic pressure 

pulsations and vibrations with frequencies of: 

fb = n ∙ Zb ∙ ff  (1) 

where fb is the blade passing frequency, ff (500 rpm/60 = 8.3 Hz) is the rotating frequency of the runner 

in Hz, Zb the number of rotating blades (7 blades in our case) and n the order of harmonic. In pump‐

Figure 10. Variation in vibration levels related with head (similar load).

Consequently, the worst situation is produced when the machine operates at minimum load with
minimum head. The reason for this variation is discussed in the next section.

3.2. Analysis of Vibration Signatures

To identify the causes of the change in the overall vibrations levels and the effects of operating the
machine at deep part load, the vibration signatures for different loads and heads were analyzed.

It is known that the main excitations generating vibrations are of:

• Hydraulic origin;
• Mechanical origin;
• Electromagnetic origin.

Excitations of mechanical origin are generated by the forces appearing in any system with masses
in rotation around an axis (for example, unbalances). Excitations of electromagnetic origin are produced
by the electromagnetic fields coming from motors or generators.

Several fluid dynamic mechanisms can generate hydraulic excitations, being the most important
one in hydraulic machines the interaction between the rotating runner blades and the stationary
guide vanes, what is known as rotor stator interaction (RSI) [26]. The RSI generates periodic pressure
pulsations and vibrations with frequencies of:

fb = n · Zb · ff (1)



Energies 2017, 10, 2178 10 of 17

where fb is the blade passing frequency, ff (500 rpm/60 = 8.3 Hz) is the rotating frequency of the
runner in Hz, Zb the number of rotating blades (7 blades in our case) and n the order of harmonic.
In pump-turbines this is one of the most important excitations generated that can lead to fatigue
damage in the runner. In this machine, pressure pulsations and vibrations are generated at the blade
passing frequency and harmonics (fb = n·78.33 = n·58.31 Hz). For a combination of 7/16 blades the
predominant frequency is twice the blade passing frequency (116.62 Hz). In Figure 11 the spectra of
turbine vibrations are shown. The peaks of rotor-stator interaction can be seen. The amplitude of this
excitation depends on several parameters being the most important ones the combination of runner
blades and guide vanes, the radial gap between runner blades/guide vanes, the blade load, and the
hydraulic system response.

The dynamic response of the runner is affected by the added mass and by the radial and axial
gaps size [26–31]. Vibrations generated depend on the excitation forces and on the dynamic response
of the runner, thus they are much affected by these gaps. In the pump-turbine under study the
radial gaps do not change significantly with operating hours (only some wear occurs in the labyrinth
seals). This change is not detectable in the vibration behavior signatures during the time of the study,
compared to the effect of other parameters.

Energies 2017, 10, 2178  10 of 17 

 

turbines this is one of the most important excitations generated that can lead to fatigue damage in the 

runner.  In  this machine,  pressure  pulsations  and  vibrations  are  generated  at  the  blade  passing 

frequency and harmonics (fb = n∙78.33 = n∙58.31Hz). For a combination of 7/16 blades the predominant 

frequency  is  twice  the  blade  passing  frequency  (116.62 Hz).  In  Figure  11  the  spectra  of  turbine 

vibrations  are  shown.  The  peaks  of  rotor‐stator  interaction  can  be  seen.  The  amplitude  of  this 

excitation depends on several parameters being the most important ones the combination of runner 

blades and guide vanes, the radial gap between runner blades/guide vanes, the blade load, and the 

hydraulic system response. 

The dynamic response of the runner is affected by the added mass and by the radial and axial 

gaps size [266–31]. Vibrations generated depend on the excitation forces and on the dynamic response 

of the runner, thus they are much affected by these gaps. In the pump‐turbine under study the radial 

gaps do not change significantly with operating hours (only some wear occurs in the labyrinth seals). 

This  change  is not detectable  in  the vibration  behavior  signatures during  the  time  of  the  study, 

compared to the effect of other parameters. 

 

Figure 11. Spectral signatures of the accelerometer located at turbine bearing. 

In Figure 12 the spectral signatures of the vibration for different operating conditions have been 

represented. The frequency range in this case is 0–1000 Hz and the resolution is 0.3125 Hz. Figure 12 

top shows the change in the signatures with head for part load operation and Figure 12 bottom shows 

the same but for high load operation. A predominant peak at 2 fb = 116.62 Hz can be identified in all 

spectra, whose amplitude increases with head and with load. This is normal because the blade load 

depends on these parameters and when load increases blade load increases too. Moreover, the gap 

between the impeller and the distributor decreases. 

Another  characteristic  of  the vibrations  represented  is  that when  load decreases  there  is  an 

increase in the random excitation because when the machine operates at off‐design the flow is more 

turbulent  [32]. One more phenomena  that  can  occur when  extending  the  operating  range  is  the 

appearance  of  hydraulic  instabilities  produced  by  cavitation  (cavitation  vortex  rope).  The 

consequences of this cavitation could lead to serious problems on the stability of the electrical grid. 

The precession of the vortex rope generates low frequency pressure fluctuations at about 30% of 

the rotating speed [Error! Reference source not found.,Error! Reference source not found.]. In Figure 

13 top, the spectral pressure signal at a  load of 45% has been represented. In this case, a pressure 

fluctuation  can be detected  at  2.5 Hz  (30% of  ff). This phenomenon  can be  also  identified  in  the 

accelerometers located at the turbine bearing and at the axial bearing (Figure 13 bottom). The pressure 

fluctuation is not too high in this case. So, instability problems on the electrical grid are not expected 

in this machine. 

 

Figure 11. Spectral signatures of the accelerometer located at turbine bearing.

In Figure 12 the spectral signatures of the vibration for different operating conditions have been
represented. The frequency range in this case is 0–1000 Hz and the resolution is 0.3125 Hz. Figure 12
top shows the change in the signatures with head for part load operation and Figure 12 bottom shows
the same but for high load operation. A predominant peak at 2 fb = 116.62 Hz can be identified in all
spectra, whose amplitude increases with head and with load. This is normal because the blade load
depends on these parameters and when load increases blade load increases too. Moreover, the gap
between the impeller and the distributor decreases.

Another characteristic of the vibrations represented is that when load decreases there is an
increase in the random excitation because when the machine operates at off-design the flow is more
turbulent [32]. One more phenomena that can occur when extending the operating range is the
appearance of hydraulic instabilities produced by cavitation (cavitation vortex rope). The consequences
of this cavitation could lead to serious problems on the stability of the electrical grid.

The precession of the vortex rope generates low frequency pressure fluctuations at about 30%
of the rotating speed [4,5]. In Figure 13 top, the spectral pressure signal at a load of 45% has been
represented. In this case, a pressure fluctuation can be detected at 2.5 Hz (30% of ff). This phenomenon
can be also identified in the accelerometers located at the turbine bearing and at the axial bearing
(Figure 13 bottom). The pressure fluctuation is not too high in this case. So, instability problems on the
electrical grid are not expected in this machine.



Energies 2017, 10, 2178 11 of 17
Energies 2017, 10, 2178  11 of 17 

 

 

Figure 12. Spectral signatures for maximum load (bottom) and minimum load (top) at high (green) 

and low head (red). 

(a)

Figure 12. Spectral signatures for maximum load (bottom) and minimum load (top) at high (green)
and low head (red).

Energies 2017, 10, 2178  11 of 17 

 

 

Figure 12. Spectral signatures for maximum load (bottom) and minimum load (top) at high (green) 

and low head (red). 

(a)

Figure 13. Cont.



Energies 2017, 10, 2178 12 of 17
Energies 2017, 10, 2178  12 of 17 

 

(b)  (c)

Figure 13. (a) Spectral pressure signature in draft tube and (b) spectral vibration signature in turbine 

bearing and (c) axial bearing at part load. 

4. Pump Operation 

In  pump  operation,  the machine  operates with  a  rather  constant  power  (same  guide  vane 

opening). So, in this case the only parameter affecting the vibration behavior is the head. As it can be 

observed in Figure 14 the vibration levels are much influenced by the head. When the head decreases 

(from 340 m to 315 m), the overall vibration levels increase considerably (from 1 mm/s to 3 mm/s). 

 
(a)

 
(b)

Figure 14. (a) Variation of gross head versus time; (b) variation of overall vibration versus time. 

Like in turbine operation, the turbine bearing is the location with the higher level of vibrations 

(see Figure 15). In this figure, the overall levels of the machine for different head levels for a period 

of around two months can be seen. Vibration levels change from 0.24 to 0.72 m/s in generator bearing 

and from 0.6 to 2.4 mm/s in turbine bearing for Unit 1. 

Figure 13. (a) Spectral pressure signature in draft tube and (b) spectral vibration signature in turbine
bearing and (c) axial bearing at part load.

4. Pump Operation

In pump operation, the machine operates with a rather constant power (same guide vane opening).
So, in this case the only parameter affecting the vibration behavior is the head. As it can be observed in
Figure 14 the vibration levels are much influenced by the head. When the head decreases (from 340 m
to 315 m), the overall vibration levels increase considerably (from 1 mm/s to 3 mm/s).

Energies 2017, 10, 2178  12 of 17 

 

(b)  (c)

Figure 13. (a) Spectral pressure signature in draft tube and (b) spectral vibration signature in turbine 

bearing and (c) axial bearing at part load. 

4. Pump Operation 

In  pump  operation,  the machine  operates with  a  rather  constant  power  (same  guide  vane 

opening). So, in this case the only parameter affecting the vibration behavior is the head. As it can be 

observed in Figure 14 the vibration levels are much influenced by the head. When the head decreases 

(from 340 m to 315 m), the overall vibration levels increase considerably (from 1 mm/s to 3 mm/s). 

 
(a)

 
(b)

Figure 14. (a) Variation of gross head versus time; (b) variation of overall vibration versus time. 

Like in turbine operation, the turbine bearing is the location with the higher level of vibrations 

(see Figure 15). In this figure, the overall levels of the machine for different head levels for a period 

of around two months can be seen. Vibration levels change from 0.24 to 0.72 m/s in generator bearing 

and from 0.6 to 2.4 mm/s in turbine bearing for Unit 1. 

Figure 14. (a) Variation of gross head versus time; (b) variation of overall vibration versus time.

Like in turbine operation, the turbine bearing is the location with the higher level of vibrations
(see Figure 15). In this figure, the overall levels of the machine for different head levels for a period of
around two months can be seen. Vibration levels change from 0.24 to 0.72 m/s in generator bearing
and from 0.6 to 2.4 mm/s in turbine bearing for Unit 1.



Energies 2017, 10, 2178 13 of 17

To determine the cause of this change, an analysis of the vibration signal at medium (0–1000 Hz)
and at high frequency (0–20,000 Hz) for high and low head has been made. Both spectra have a number
of lines of 3200.

In Figure 16, the spectral signatures of the vibration for different operating conditions have been
represented; this figure shows the different behavior of the vibration when the head is changing.

Energies 2017, 10, 2178  13 of 17 

 

To determine the cause of this change, an analysis of the vibration signal at medium (0–1000 Hz) 

and at high  frequency  (0–20,000 Hz)  for high and  low head has been made. Both  spectra have a 

number of lines of 3200. 

In Figure 16, the spectral signatures of the vibration for different operating conditions have been 

represented; this figure shows the different behavior of the vibration when the head is changing. 

(a)  (b)

Figure 15. (a) Vibration levels of generator bearing; (b) Vibration levels of turbine bearing. Both in 

pumping mode. Unit 1. 

(a)  (b) 

Figure 16. Spectral vibration signature in turbine bearing at low (a) and high head (b) both in pump 

operation. 

Both spectra show a peak at 58.4 Hz corresponding to the blade passing frequency. This peak 

has more  amplitude  for  the  highest  head  because when  the  head  increases  pressure,  pulsation 

increases too. In addition, a peak at 116 Hz (twice the blade passing frequency) is observed in both 

spectra. In this case, the amplitude for the lowest head is higher due to the influence of the turbulence 

generated. 

For low heads, turbulence is the predominant phenomenon, especially between 116.6 Hz and 

500 Hz. 

In Figure 17 the spectral signatures of the vibration for different operating conditions at high 

frequency have been represented (units in mm/s2). A dramatic difference between them is showed. It 

can be seen that high frequency vibration is generated when the pump operates at the lowest head, 

which is a symptom of cavitation [32]. So, the increase of vibrations showed in Figure 14 is basically 

due to cavitation phenomenon. 

Figure 15. (a) Vibration levels of generator bearing; (b) Vibration levels of turbine bearing. Both in
pumping mode. Unit 1.

Energies 2017, 10, 2178  13 of 17 

 

To determine the cause of this change, an analysis of the vibration signal at medium (0–1000 Hz) 

and at high  frequency  (0–20,000 Hz)  for high and  low head has been made. Both  spectra have a 

number of lines of 3200. 

In Figure 16, the spectral signatures of the vibration for different operating conditions have been 

represented; this figure shows the different behavior of the vibration when the head is changing. 

(a)  (b)

Figure 15. (a) Vibration levels of generator bearing; (b) Vibration levels of turbine bearing. Both in 

pumping mode. Unit 1. 

(a)  (b) 

Figure 16. Spectral vibration signature in turbine bearing at low (a) and high head (b) both in pump 

operation. 

Both spectra show a peak at 58.4 Hz corresponding to the blade passing frequency. This peak 

has more  amplitude  for  the  highest  head  because when  the  head  increases  pressure,  pulsation 

increases too. In addition, a peak at 116 Hz (twice the blade passing frequency) is observed in both 

spectra. In this case, the amplitude for the lowest head is higher due to the influence of the turbulence 

generated. 

For low heads, turbulence is the predominant phenomenon, especially between 116.6 Hz and 

500 Hz. 

In Figure 17 the spectral signatures of the vibration for different operating conditions at high 

frequency have been represented (units in mm/s2). A dramatic difference between them is showed. It 

can be seen that high frequency vibration is generated when the pump operates at the lowest head, 

which is a symptom of cavitation [32]. So, the increase of vibrations showed in Figure 14 is basically 

due to cavitation phenomenon. 

Figure 16. Spectral vibration signature in turbine bearing at low (a) and high head (b) both in
pump operation.

Both spectra show a peak at 58.4 Hz corresponding to the blade passing frequency. This peak has
more amplitude for the highest head because when the head increases pressure, pulsation increases too.
In addition, a peak at 116 Hz (twice the blade passing frequency) is observed in both spectra. In this
case, the amplitude for the lowest head is higher due to the influence of the turbulence generated.

For low heads, turbulence is the predominant phenomenon, especially between 116.6 Hz
and 500 Hz.

In Figure 17 the spectral signatures of the vibration for different operating conditions at high
frequency have been represented (units in mm/s2). A dramatic difference between them is showed.
It can be seen that high frequency vibration is generated when the pump operates at the lowest head,
which is a symptom of cavitation [32]. So, the increase of vibrations showed in Figure 14 is basically
due to cavitation phenomenon.



Energies 2017, 10, 2178 14 of 17
Energies 2017, 10, 2178  14 of 17 

 

 
(a)

 
(b)

Figure 17. Spectral vibration signature in turbine bearing operating (a) at high head and (b) at low 

head during pump operation. 

5. Conclusions 

In this paper, the extension of the operating range in a pumped storage power plant has been 

studied. To determine  the effects of  this extension on  the machine and on  the electrical grid,  the 

analysis of vibration and pressure fluctuation data obtained after two years of monitoring have been 

carried out. 

The machines analyzed are two pump turbines with a maximum power of 85 MW each. The 

machines are reversible and can operate as a turbine and as a pump. The study was carried out first 

in turbine mode and then in pumping mode. 

For turbine operation, the machine extended the range from 45–85 MW to 20–85 MW. Because 

vibration  levels  depend  on  head  and  load,  the  influence  of  both  parameters  has  been  studied 

separately. 

‐ At constant head, the vibration levels have been analyzed at part load, full load, and medium 
load. 

At part load, levels are at maximum and, especially, at very low load a significant increase of 

vibrations occurs, what leads to the overall vibration levels being doubled. Levels reach a minimum 

around the best efficiency point (medium load) and increase again at full load (maximum guide vane 

opening). 

To fully understand the reasons for these variations, the origin of the vibrations has been studied 

in all conditions. It has been seen that the main mechanisms are of hydraulic origin produced by rotor 

stator interaction, turbulence, and cavitation. 

Figure 17. Spectral vibration signature in turbine bearing operating (a) at high head and (b) at low
head during pump operation.

5. Conclusions

In this paper, the extension of the operating range in a pumped storage power plant has been
studied. To determine the effects of this extension on the machine and on the electrical grid, the analysis
of vibration and pressure fluctuation data obtained after two years of monitoring have been carried out.

The machines analyzed are two pump turbines with a maximum power of 85 MW each.
The machines are reversible and can operate as a turbine and as a pump. The study was carried
out first in turbine mode and then in pumping mode.

For turbine operation, the machine extended the range from 45–85 MW to 20–85 MW. Because
vibration levels depend on head and load, the influence of both parameters has been studied separately.

- At constant head, the vibration levels have been analyzed at part load, full load, and medium load.

At part load, levels are at maximum and, especially, at very low load a significant increase of
vibrations occurs, what leads to the overall vibration levels being doubled. Levels reach a minimum
around the best efficiency point (medium load) and increase again at full load (maximum guide
vane opening).

To fully understand the reasons for these variations, the origin of the vibrations has been studied
in all conditions. It has been seen that the main mechanisms are of hydraulic origin produced by rotor
stator interaction, turbulence, and cavitation.



Energies 2017, 10, 2178 15 of 17

At very low load, the increase in vibration amplitudes is due to an increase in turbulence
and cavitation even though the rotor stator interaction (twice the blade passing frequency) is low.
In this case, values of overall levels are more than 2 mm/s RMS in the turbine bearing. At high load,
the increase in vibration amplitudes is due to the high amplitude of rotor stator interaction.

- At constant load (constant guide vane degree) the vibration levels have been analyzed at
maximum, medium, and minimum head. It has been seen that the head has also an
important influence.

In this case, vibrations increase when head is reduced because turbulence and cavitation appears.
This happens because the machine is operating far from its best efficiency point. Hence the worst
condition occurs when both load and head are at minimum.

Regarding a possible power fluctuation that could affect the electrical grid, the possibility of draft
tube instabilities has been explored. A vortex core has been detected at part load (45%) generating
a low frequency pressure fluctuation. Anyway, the amplitude of the pressure fluctuation generated by
the vortex core both in axial and radial direction is not important. Therefore, power swing is negligible.

Considering the effects of the head and load in turbine operation, the operating range could
be extended if operation at minimum heads is avoided. Under these conditions, an increase in
maintenance should be expected.

For pump operation, only the head can affect the behavior of the machine because it works with
the same guide vanes opening. Likewise, a study for maximum, medium, and minimum head has
been carried out.

Turbulence, and most especially cavitation, are detected when pump operates at the lowest head.
Vibration levels are also high (more than 2 mm/s).

For pumping mode, operating the machine in this condition could reduce lifetime and
increase maintenance.

In summary, for turbine operation the regulation range could be increased if operation at the
minimum loads is avoided when the head is at the minimum values. Anyway, some increase in
cavitation erosion is possible. For pump operation, there is no possibility of regulation but the
lifespan of the runner and the intervals between periodic maintenance works could be increased if
pumping at the lowest heads is avoided. This is an estimation based on the vibration levels and
signatures, For better conclusions, the dynamics of the machine and fatigue analysis of the runner
should be performed.

Author Contributions: Eduard Egusquiza and Carme Valero designed the experiments. Alex Presas ,
David Valentin and Mònica Egusquiza performed the experiments. Matias Bossio and Mònica Egusquiza
performed the signal analysis and Eduard Egusquiza reviewed the manuscript. The paper was written by
Carme Valero.

Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

Nomenclature

bep Best efficiency point
ff Rotating frequency
NRE New renewable energies
RSI Rotor Stator Interaction
Zb Number of blades



Energies 2017, 10, 2178 16 of 17

References

1. Söder, L.; Abildgaard, H.; Estanqueiro, A.; Hamon, C.; Holttinen, H.; Lannoye, E.; Gómez-Lázaro, E.;
O’Malley, M.; Zimmermann, U. Experience and challenges with short-term balancing in European systems
with large share of wind power. IEEE Trans. Sustain. Energy 2012, 3, 853–861. [CrossRef]

2. Lowys, P.; Andre, F.; Ferreira da Silva, A.; Duarte, F.; Payre, J.P. Hydro plant operating range extension
transverse. In Proceedings of the Hydrovision 2014, Nashville, TN, USA, 22–25 July 2014.

3. Doerfler, P.; Sick, M.; André, C. Flow-Induced Pulsation and Vibration in Hydroelectric Machinery; Springer:
London, UK, 2013.

4. Nishi, M.; Matsunaga, M.; Okamoto, M.; Takashu, K. Wall Pressure Measurements as a Diagnosis of Draft
Tube Surge. In Proceedings of the 15th IAHR Symposium on Hydraulic Machinery and Cavitation, Belgrade,
Yugoslavia, 11–14 September 1990.

5. Avellan, F. Flow Investigation in a Francis Draft Tube: The Flindt Project. In Proceedings of the 20th IAHR
Symposium on Hydraulic Machinery and Systems, Charlotte, NC, USA, 6–9 August 2000.

6. Manderla, M.; Weber, W.; Koutnik, J. Model measurement based identication of Francis turbine vortex rope
parameters for prototype part load pressure and power pulsation prediction. In Proceedings of the 28th
IAHR Symposium on Hydraulic Machinery and Systems, Grenoble, France, 4–8 July 2016.

7. Arzola, F.; Azuaje, Z.; Zambrano, P.; Gulbrandsen, G. Undesired power oscillations at high load in large
Francis Turbines. Experimental study and solution. In Proceedings of the 23rd Symposium IAHR Section
Hydraulic Machinery, Equipment, and Cavitation, Yokohama, Japan, 17–21 October 2006.

8. Favrel, A.; Gomes, J.; Landry, C.; Müller, A.; Nicolet, C.; Avellan, F. New insight in Francis turbine cavitation
vortex rope: Role of the runner outlet flowswirl number. J. Hydraul. Res. 2017. [CrossRef]

9. Müller, A.; Bullani, A.; Dreyer, M.; Roth, S.; Favrel, A.; Landry, C.; Avellan, F. Interaction of a pulsating vortex
rope with the local velocity field in a Francis turbine draft tube. IOP Conf. Ser. Earth Environ. Sci. 2012, 15.
[CrossRef]

10. Escaler, X.; Egusquiza, E.; Farhat, M.; Avellan, F.; Coussirat, M. Detection of cavitation in hydraulic turbines.
Mech. Syst. Signal Process. 2006, 20, 983–1007. [CrossRef]

11. Favrel, A.; Landry, C.; Müller, A.; Yamamoto, K.; Avellan, F. Hydro-acoustic resonance behavior in presence
of a precessing vortex rope: Observation of a lock-in phenomenon at part load Francis turbine operation.
IOP J. Phys. Conf. Ser. 2017. [CrossRef]

12. Baya, A.; Muntean, S.; Câmpian, V.C.; Cuzmoş, A.; Diaconescu, M.; Bălan, G.H. Experimental investigations
of the unsteady flow in a Francis turbine draft tube. IOP Conf. Ser. Earth Environ. Sci. 2010. [CrossRef]

13. Alligné, S.; Maruzewski, P.; Dinh, T.; Wang, B.; Fedorov, A.; Iosfin, J.; Avellan, F. Prediction of a Francis
turbine prototype full load instability from investigations on the reduced scale model. IOP Conf. Ser. Earth
Environ. Sci. 2010. [CrossRef]

14. Alligné, S.; Nicolet, C.; Tsujimoto, Y.; Avellan, F. Cavitation surge modelling in Francis turbine draft tube.
J. Hydraul. Res. 2014, 52, 399–411. [CrossRef]

15. Nicolet, C.; Arpe, J.; Avellan, F. Identification and modelling of pressure fluctuations of a Francis turbine
scale model at part load operation. In Proceedings of the 22nd IAHR Symposium on Hydraulic Machinery
and Systems, Stockholm, Sweden, 29 June–2 July 2004. No. LMH-CONF-2004-003.

16. Bosioc, A.; Tanasa, C.; Muntean, S.; Susan-Resiga, R. Unsteady pressure measurements and numerical
investigation of the jet control method in a conical diffuser with swirling flow. IOP Conf. Ser. Earth
Environ. Sci. 2010. [CrossRef]

17. Tanasa, C.; Muntean, S.; Bosioc, A.I.; Susan-Resiga, R. 3D numerical simulation versus experimental
assessment of pressure pulsations using a passive method for swirling flow control in conical diffusers of
hydraulic turbines. In Proceedings of the 28th IAHR Symposium on Hydraulic Machinery and Systems,
Grenoble, France, 4–8 July 2014.

18. Ciocan, G.; Kueny, J.L. Experimental Analysis of Rotor Stator Interaction in a Pump-Turbine. In Proceedings
of the XXIII IAHR Symposium on Hydraulic Machinery and Systems, Yokohama, Japan, 17–21 October 2006.

19. Yamamoto, K.; Müller, A.; Favrel, A.; Landry, C.; Avellan, F. Pressure measurements and high speed
visualizations of the cavitation phenomena at deep part load condition in a Francis turbine. IOP Conf. Ser.
Earth Environ. Sci. 2014. [CrossRef]

http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/TSTE.2012.2208483
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00221686.2017.1356758
http://dx.doi.org/10.1088/1755-1315/15/3/032040
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ymssp.2004.08.006
http://dx.doi.org/10.1088/1755-1315/22/3/032035
http://dx.doi.org/10.1088/1755-1315/12/1/012007
http://dx.doi.org/10.1088/1755-1315/12/1/012025
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00221686.2013.854847
http://dx.doi.org/10.1088/1755-1315/12/1/012017
http://dx.doi.org/10.1088/1755-1315/22/2/022011


Energies 2017, 10, 2178 17 of 17

20. Eichhorn, M.; Taruffi, A.; Bauer, C. Expected load spectra of prototype Francis turbines in low-load operation
using numerical simulations and site measurements. IOP Conf. Ser. J. Phys. 2017. [CrossRef]

21. Monette, C.; Monette, C.; Marmont, H.; Chamberland-Lauzon, J.; Skagerstrand, A.; Coutu, A.; Jens, C. Cost of
enlarged operating zone for an existing Francis runner. IOP Conf. Ser. Earth Environ. Sci. 2016. [CrossRef]

22. Coutu, A.; Marier, S.; Chamberland-Lauzon, J.; Monette, C. Designing Francis runners for 0–100 per cent
operation. In Proceedings of the HYDRO 2015, Bordeaux, France, 26–28 October 2015.

23. Egusquiza, E.; Valero, C.; Valentin, D.; Presas, A.; Rodriguez, C.G. Condition monitoring of pump-turbines.
New challenges. Measurement 2015, 67, 151–163. [CrossRef]

24. Egusquiza, E.; Valero, C.; Presas, A.; Huang, X.; Guardo, A.; Seidel, U. Analysis of the dynamic response of
pump-turbine impellers. Influence of the rotor. Mech. Syst. Signal Process. 2016, 68–69, 330–334. [CrossRef]

25. Egusquiza, E.; Valero, C.; Huang, X.; Jou, E.; Guardo, A.; Rodriguez, C.G. Failure investigation of a large
pump-turbine runner. Eng. Failure Anal. 2012, 23, 27–34. [CrossRef]

26. Presas, A.; Valentin, D.; Egusquiza, E.; Valero, C.; Seidel, U. Dynamic response of a rotating disk submerged
and confined. Influence of the axial gap. J. Fluids Struct. 2016, 62, 332–349. [CrossRef]

27. Presas, A.; Valentin, D.; Egusquiza, E.; Valero, C.; Seidel, U. Influence of the rotation on the natural frequencies
of a submerged-confined disk in water. J. Sound Vib. 2015, 337, 161–180. [CrossRef]

28. Presas, A.; Valentin, D.; Egusquiza, E.; Valero, C.; Seidel, U. On the detection of natural frequencies and
mode shapes of submerged rotating disk-like structures from the casing. Mech. Syst. Signal Process. 2015,
60–61, 547–570. [CrossRef]

29. Bossio, M.; Valentín, D.; Presas, A.; Ramos, D.; Egusquiza, E.; Valero, C.; Egusquiza, M. Numerical study on
the influence of acoustic natural frequencies on the dynamic behaviour of submerged and confined disk-like
structures. J. Fluids Struct. 2017, 73, 53–69. [CrossRef]

30. Valentin, D.; Presas, A.; Egusquiza, E.; Valero, C. Experimental study on the added mass and damping of a
disk submerged in a partially fluid-filled tank with small radial confinement. J. Fluids Struct. 2014, 50, 1–17.
[CrossRef]

31. Presas, A.; Egusquiza, E.; Valero, C.; Valentin, D.; Seidel, U. Feasibility to use PZT Actuators to study the
dynamic behavior of a rotating disk due to Rotor-Stator Interaction. Sensors 2014, 14, 11914–11942. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]

32. Tanaka, H. Vibration Behaviour and Dynamic Stress of Runners of Very High Head Reversible
Pump-Turbines. In Proceedings of the 15th IAHR Symposium, Belgrade, Yugoslavia, 11–14 September 1990.

© 2017 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

http://dx.doi.org/10.1088/1742-6596/813/1/012052
http://dx.doi.org/10.1088/1755-1315/49/7/072018
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.measurement.2015.01.004
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ymssp.2015.05.034
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.engfailanal.2012.01.012
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jfluidstructs.2016.02.003
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jsv.2014.10.032
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ymssp.2015.01.013
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jfluidstructs.2017.05.008
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jfluidstructs.2014.06.006
http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/s140711919
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25004151
http://creativecommons.org/
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.

	Introduction 
	Hydropower Plant and System Description 
	Turbine Operation 
	Analysis of Overall Levels 
	Effect of the Position 
	Effect of the Load 
	Effect of the Head 

	Analysis of Vibration Signatures 

	Pump Operation 
	Conclusions 

