






















































Study of the Cooling and Vacuum Systems of a Miniature 12 MeV Race-Track Microtron


STUDY OF THE COOLING AND VACUUM SYSTEMS OF A MINIATURE 
12 MeV RACE-TRACK MICROTRON  *

Yu.A. Kubyshin†, Institut de Tècniques Energètiques, UPC, Barcelona, Spain 
X. Escaler, A. Viladomiu, Departament de Mecànica de Fluids, UPC, Barcelona, Spain 

V.I. Shvedunov, Skobeltsyn Institute of Nuclear Physics, MSU, Moscow, Russia 
 
Abstract 

With the aim of optimization, numerical simulations of 
the cooling and vacuum systems of a compact 12 MeV 
race-track microtron (RTM) which is under construction 
at the Technical University of Catalonia have been carried 
out. The hydraulic and thermal performance of the cool-
ing system for various flow rates has been studied using 
the Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) software. A 
CFD model, previously validated with experimental pres-
sure loss results, has permitted to simulate the cooling 
fluid temperature, inner wall temperatures and heat trans-
fer coefficients at different sections of the RTM accelerat-
ing  structure. Conclusions concerning the current design 
and its possible optimization are discussed. Simulations 
of the RTM high vacuum conditions have been performed 
using the Monte-Carlo simulation package Molflow+. 
The pressure in the vacuum chamber, pumping tube con-
ductance and maximum allowed throughput have been 
calculated. Also results of the vacuum chamber pumping 
out sessions are reported.  

THE 12 MeV RTM AT UPC 
The Technical University of Catalonia in collaboration 

with the Skobeltsyn Institute of Nuclear Physics of the 
Moscow State University and CIEMAT (Madrid) is build-
ing a compact electron accelerator of race-track microtron 
(RTM) type with maximal beam energy of 12 MeV. Cur-
rently, the RTM is at the final phase of its construction [1-
4]. 

The electron beam is produced in a module called ac-
celerator head shown in Fig. 1(a). It is a vacuum chamber 
that houses an electron gun, an accelerating structure 
(linac), two 180º bending dipoles, usually referred to as 
end magnets, a focusing quadrupole and four extraction 
dipoles.  

The linac is composed of four accelerating and three 
coupling cells which have been brazed together to form 
four accelerating sections (labelled from S1 to S4) as 
shown in Fig. 1(b). The total power dissipated in the linac 
is approximately 1 kW. According to calculations of the 
detailed distribution of the RF power losses in the cavity 
walls carried out in Ref. [5] the RF power dissipated in 
the linac sections S1 to S4 is equal to 189.5 W, 273.7 W, 
273.7 W and 263.1 W, respectively. In the magnets the 
magnetic field is created by REPM material, so the power 
dissipation in them is due to beam losses only and is es-
timated to be about 0.1 kW.   

THE COOLING SYSTEM  
In addition to the basic function of the RTM cooling 

system, which is to provide a safe and stable operation of 
all accelerator systems, it must guarantee a homogeneous 
temperature distribution along the linac and end magnets. 
In particular,  the temperature differences between differ-
ent parts of the linac must not exceed about ±1°C. 

The cooling circuit in the accelerator head is a water 
pipeline passing through the end magnets and linac con-
nected to a chiller. The chiller can provide a water mass 
flow rate in the range from 0.042 kg/s up to 0.075 kg/s. 

 
Figure 1: (a) 3D view of the RTM: (1) accelerator head, 
(2) vacuum tube, (3) pressure sensor, (4) ion pump. (b) 
3D view of the linac with the section labels indicated.   

A CFD model of the fluid domain of the RTM cooling 
system has been developed using the ANSYS CFX 
version 14.5 [6]. The part of the cooling channels inside 
the linac is shown in Fig. 2. We have performed simula-
tions of the total pressure losses and compared the result 
to experimental measurements [7]. For example, for the 
mass flow rate 0.05 kg/s the pressure loss in the accelera-
tor head obtained in the simulations is 3.05 bar, whereas 
the measured value is 3.18 bar.  A good agreement be-
tween these results confirms the validity of the CFD 
model.  

COOLING SYSTEM PERFORMANCE 
Using this CFD model we have carried out the thermo-

fluid analysis of the cooling system for the chiller opera-
tion range. Preliminary results of have been reported in 
[7].  

 One of the results obtained in the simulations is the 
distribution of the cooling tube wall temperature inside 
the linac. As it has been already mentioned one of the 
critical issues is the homogeneity of the temperature along 
the linac. A plot of the wall temperature increase with 
respect to the inlet water temperature for a nominal opera-
tion regime corresponding to the mass flow rate of about 

 ___________________________________________  

* Work supported by the 2014 SGR846 of AGAUR (Generalitat de 
Catalunya) 
† iouri.koubychine@upc.edu 

THPVA061 Proceedings of IPAC2017, Copenhagen, Denmark

ISBN 978-3-95450-182-3
4582C

op
yr

ig
ht

©
20

17
C

C
-B

Y-
3.

0
an

d
by

th
e

re
sp

ec
tiv

e
au

th
or

s

07 Accelerator Technology
T31 Subsystems, Technology and Components, Other



0.05 kg/s is given in Fig. 2. As one can see, the maximum 
increase is located in section S1. Results of simulations of 
the water streamlines have shown that the appearance of 
the region with high temperatures in the linac segment S1 
is due to boundary layer detachments of the flow and low 
flow velocities there and, as a consequence, significant 
reduction of the convective heat transfer. These effects are 
caused by the 90º abrupt bending of the conduits in the 
two annular connections in this linac section.  

 

 
Figure 2: Wall temperature increase with respect to the 
inlet temperature in the linac cooling channels at the nom-
inal mass flow rate of 0.05 kg/s. 
 

Also the temperature inhomogeneity within each linac 
section has been studied. For the flow rates that the chiller 
can provide, the maximum differences of the average wall 
temperature between different parts of the same section 
are in S3, whereas the minimum ones are in S1 for any 
flow rate (see the plot in Fig. 3). These temperature dif-
ferences range from approximately 1.8° C at the mini-
mum mass flow rate to 0.8° C at the maximum one. Thus, 
the RTM design requirement, that the temperature differ-
ence between different linac sections does not exceed the 
limit of ±1°C is met for the flow rates close to the maxi-
mal one.  

 

 
Figure 3: Average wall temperature differences relative to 
inlet water temperature in the linac sections as functions 
of mass flow rate. 

THE VACUUM SYSTEM 
The vacuum system of the RTM is shown schematical-

ly in Fig. 4. The vacuum chamber (1) is pumped out 
through the stainless steel tube (2) by a Varian VacIon 
Plus 75 Starcell ion pump (3). Inside the tube (2) a copper 
waveguide WR187 (4) transporting the RF power to the 
linac is placed. It has narrow slots at walls which facilitate 
the gas evacuation from the interior of the linac. The 
waveguide is vacuum tightly brazed to the stainless steel 
flange (5) and is isolated from the atmosphere by the 
vacuum RF window (6). The pressure in the system is 
measured by means of a MKS 979B atmosphere-to-
vacuum transducer (7). The main valve (8) is used for 
disconnecting the turbomolecular pump Varian Mini-Task 
AG81 (9) from the pumping tube. The rest of the ele-
ments are an ISO-CF flange transition (10) and venting 
valves (11) and (12). The pump controllers and the vacu-
um transducer are connected to the RTM control system 
and interlocks [4]. 

 
Figure 4: Schematic of the RTM vacuum system. 

 
The nominal pumping speed of the turbomolecular and 

ion pumps used in the RTM vacuum system is 40 l/s and 
65 l/s, respectively. First the turbomolecular pump pumps 
down the vacuum chamber into 10 	mbar. Once this 
vacuum level is achieved the ion pump is switched on. 
After the RTM commissioning the ion pump will be per-
manently switched on in order to maintain a vacuum of 10 	mbar in the vacuum chamber in accordance with 
the design specifications.  

Several tests of the vacuum system have been carried 
out. Two example of the pressure behaviour with the 
pumping time are shown in Fig.5. During Session 1, a 
vacuum of  0.8	 ∙ 10 	mbar was achieved in about 25.5 
h, and in Session 2 39.3 h were needed to reach a vacuum 
of 1.2	 ∙ 10 	mbar. The reason of this difference is that 
between these sessions the vacuum chamber was open 
and a number of feedthrough connectors were installed 
inside it. 

VACUUM SYSTEM SIMULATIONS 
To study the performance of the RTM vacuum system 

we have carried Monte-Carlo simulations of the pressure 
in the vacuum chamber and pumping tube using the Mol-
flow+ program [8]. For this we developed a model shown 

Proceedings of IPAC2017, Copenhagen, Denmark THPVA061

07 Accelerator Technology
T31 Subsystems, Technology and Components, Other

ISBN 978-3-95450-182-3
4583 C

op
yr

ig
ht

©
20

17
C

C
-B

Y-
3.

0
an

d
by

th
e

re
sp

ec
tiv

e
au

th
or

s



in Fig. 6. The main source of the outgassing was sup-
posed to be the thermal desorption.  

 

Figure 5: Pressure behaviour during the vacuum system 
tests.  

 

  
Figure 6: 3D model of the RTM vacuum system used in 
the simulations.  

We have calculated the pressure in the equilibrium state 
at points critical for the beam, like the gap of the magnets 
and linac central channel, and also at the vacuum trans-
ducer and at the ion pump flange. For example, for the 
outgassing rate 2 ∙ 10 	Pa ∙ m / sec ∙ m  and the 
pumping speed 45	l/s	 we have obtained (for N2) 
that the pressure at the vacuum chamber flange and the 
ion pump flange are equal to 1.04 ∙ 10 mbar and 0.87 ∙ 10 mbar , respectively. 

Using this result one can calculate the conductance of 
the pumping tube, namely the long tube (2) and the short 
tube connecting it to the ion pump (see Fig. 4). Using the 
standard definition (see for example Ref. [9]) it is easy to 
get that the conductance 221	l/s	. For the sake of 
comparison, an estimate of this value can be obtained 
using formulas for round tubes in the case of the molecu-
lar flow regime [9]. One gets that the conductance of long 
tube with the waveguide inside and the one of the short 
tube are 415	l/s and 578	l/s, respectively, so 
that the assembly conductance is approximately 242 l/s.  

Finally, we have estimated the maximal gas throughput 
 for which the ion pump can maintain the vacuum 10 mbar in the vacuum chamber. Using the results of 

the simulations for the pumping speed 45	l/s	we 
have obtained 4.0 ∙ 10 Pa ∙ m /sec. 

CONCLUSIONS 
Results of the performance of the cooling and vacuum 

systems of the 12 MeV RTM, obtained both experimen-
tally and by simulations, have been discussed. It has been 
checked that both systems meet the design requirements 
and guarantee a stable operation of the machine after its 
commissioning.  

In the case of the cooling system we have obtained that 
the requirement that the temperature difference between 
different segments of the linac does not exceed the limit 
of ±1° C is met for the maximal flow rate only. The ge-
ometry of the cooling channels in the linac can be opti-
mized by filleting the surfaces at the transition between 
the circular pipes and the annular arms in order to create a 
rounded smooth transition that would help the flow to 
turn without detaching from the surfaces. 

We have obtained an upper limit on the maximal gas 
throughput in the vacuum chamber with which the in-
stalled ion pump can maintain the required vacuum of 10 mbar. In order to fulfill this requirement a cleaning 
of the internal surfaces and baking of the chamber may be 
required.  

REFERENCES 
[1] A.P. Poseryaev, M.F. Ballester, Yu.A. Kubyshin, V.I. Shve-

dunov, “Design of 12 MeV RTM for Multiple Applica-
tions”, in Proc. EPAC’06, Edinburgh, UK, June 2006, pa-
per WEPCH175, pp. 2340-2342. 

[2] Yu.A. Kubyshin et al., “Current status of the 12 MeV UPC 
race-track microtron”, in: Proc. PAC’09, Vancouver, Cana-
da, May 2009, paper WE6PFP112, pp. 2775--2779.  

[3] I.Y. Vladimirov,N.I.Pakhomov, V.I. Shvedunov, 
Y.A.Kubyshin,  J.P.Rigla and V.V. Zakharov, “End magnets 
with rare earth permanent magnet material for a compact 
race-track microtron”, Eur. Phys. J. Plus, 129: 271, 2014. 

[4] Yu.A. Kubyshin, V. Blasco, J.A.Romero, A. Sanchez, G. 
Montoro, and V. I. Shvedunov, Control system of a minia-
ture 12 MeV race-track microtron”, in: Proc. IPAC’14, 
Dresden, Germany, June 2014, pp. 3165--3167. 

[5] D. Carrillo, “C-band linac for a race-track microtron”, PhD 
thesis, CIEMAT, Universidad Complutense de Madrid, 
Spain, 2010. 

[6] http://www.ansys.com/Products/Fluids/ANSYS-CFX 
[7] X. Escaler, Yu.A. Kubyshin, V. Blasco, J.A. Romero, A. 

Sánchez, M. Prieto, and V.I. Shvedunov, “Thermo-fluid 
study of the UPC race-track microtron cooling system”, 
MEDSI 2016, Barcelona, Spain, 2016. 

[8] http://molflow.web.cern.ch/content/about-molflow 
[9] J.F. O’Hanlon, “A User’s Guide to Vacuum Technology”, 

Wiley-Interscience, 2003.   

THPVA061 Proceedings of IPAC2017, Copenhagen, Denmark

ISBN 978-3-95450-182-3
4584C

op
yr

ig
ht

©
20

17
C

C
-B

Y-
3.

0
an

d
by

th
e

re
sp

ec
tiv

e
au

th
or

s

07 Accelerator Technology
T31 Subsystems, Technology and Components, Other


