



























































Original file was exampleVic.tex


Implicit large eddy simulation of unsteady cloud cavitation 
around a plane-convex hydrofoil 

Victor Hidalgo1, Xianwu Luo1*, Xavier Escaler 2, Bin Ji 3, Alvaro Aguinaga 4 

 
1 State Key Laboratory of Hydroscience and Engineering, Tsinghua University, 

Beijing 100084, China 

2 CDIF, Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya, 

Barcelona, Spain 

3 School of Power and Mechanical Engineering, Wuhan University, 

Hubei 430072, China 

4 Mechanical Engineering Department, Escuela Politecnica Nacional University, 

Quito E11-253, Ecuador 

 

* Correspondence author: luoxw@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn  

 

Abstract 
 The present research, focuses on the erosive cavitation behavior 

around a plane convex hydrofoil. For that, Tthe Zwart-Gerber-Belamri 
cavitation model has been implemented in library form to be used withto 
carry out in OpenFOAM. Implicit Large Eddy Simulation (ILES) has 
been applied to analyze the three dimensional unsteady cavitating flow 
around a plane convexthe hydrofoil. The numerical results corresponding 
to hydrodynamic conditions that have been experimentally tested at the 
high speed cavitation tunnel of the École Polytechnique Fédérale de 
Lausanne (EPFL) show the sheet cavitation development and the 
shedding and collapse of vapor clouds. It is noted that cavitation 
evolution including maximum vapor length, detachment and oscillation 
frequency are fairly well simulated. Furthermore, the pressure pulses due 
to the cavitation development as well as complex vortex structures are 
reasonably predicted. Consequently, these results confirm that the 
present numerical method can be used to investigate unsteady cavitation 
around hydrofoils with satisfactory accuracy.  

Formatat: Color de la lletra:
Automàtic

Formatat: Color de la lletra:
Automàtic

1 



1  Introduction 
Studies of unsteady cloud cavitation around hydrofoils are important to improve the design 
theory of fluid machinery [1, 2] and to understand the mechanisms , due to questions around 
the cavitation dynamic behavior and the collapse of the cloud of bubbles. However, 
experimental studies are expensive and have limitations such as the accuracy of lab 
equipments [3]. Therefore, computational fluid mechanics (CFD) are a complementary option 
to understand the cavity shedding and collapse, the cyclic stresses being generated and the 
resulting cavitation erosion.  

In this way, Kunz et al. [4] proposed a cavitation model based on Merkle's ideas for the 
analysis of unsteady cavitating flow. The model considers the continuity of a mixture volume 
rather than a mixture mass equation. The transfer from liquid to vapor is modeled as being 
proportional to the liquid volume fraction and the pressure below the vapor pressure. For 
instance, Nouri et al. [5] studied unsteady cavitating flow over a disc using OpenFOAM with 
explicit LES based on this cavitation model. Their results showed that the main aspects of 
super cavitation could be captured. However, selecting the correct explicit subgrid model is 
shown to be a problem for different cases. Moreover, the shape of the cluster of bubbles can 
be improved with a cavitation model based on Rayleigh-Plesset’s equation. Based on this 
premise, Roohi et al. [6] studied the cavitating flow over the Clark-Y hydrofoil and they 
compared the Kunz model with Schnerr-Sauer cavitation model [7] which is based on 
Rayleigh-Plesset’s equation and is part of the default OpenFOAM solver packages too. The 
corresponding results showed that the Schnerr-Sauer model predicted a stronger re-entrant jet, 
which was visible in experiment, and the shape of the obtained cavity was improved as well. 
However, it was found that the symmetrical consideration for condensation and vaporization 
processes may induce the high error of the force coefficients for super cavitation regime. 

Consequently, Zwart et al. [8] presented a two phase flow model for predicting cavitation 
dynamics which was implemented in CFX-5 based on Rayleigh-Plesset’s equation. The model 
worked well for condensation but it was unstable for vaporization. So, such unsymmetrical 
consideration was taken into account with empirical constants for calibration. As a result, the 
model shows improvements for non-equilibrium effects, which were not included in previous 
models as Schnerr- Sauer, Gerber [9], Senocak and Shyy [10]. Different researchers have used 
this model to capture the cavitation phenomenon with good results. That is the case of Ji et 
al. [11, 12] who  studied the horse-shoe cloud behavior over a twisted hydrofoil and predicted 
the performances of a marine propeller under cavitation condition with different skew angles. 
Shi et al. [13] also showed the remarkable use of the Zwart-Gerber-Belamri model for the 
study of cavitation in a WP7 automobile centrifugal pump. Zhang et al. [14] used this model 
to study the effects of density ratio on the maximum length of the attached sheet of vapor. 
Some studies have been carried out to improve the model as  the case of Morgut et al. [15] 
who determined the possible values of the calibration constants for numerical simulations. In 
this line, Li et al. [16] studied the influences of the empirical constants and  the nucleation 
volume fraction for the model. From their research, it was concluded that the evaporation 
coefficient controls the cavity length and the high vapor volume fraction, while the 
condensation vapor regulates the cavity length. Unfortunately, the cavitation model of Zwart-
Gerber-Belamri is not part of the OpenFOAM solvers and no references are available of 

Formatat: Color de la lletra:

Formatat: Color de la lletra:

2 



previous works with this solver. Therefore, its proper implementation and validation is a 
challenge, which is the main objective of the current work.  

Due to the high Reynolds numbers of cavitation flows in hydro machinery, the traditional 
RANS and turbulence models must be adapted to predict the cavity sheet and the shedding 
process. Some examples are the cases of Huang and Wang [17] and Ji et al. [18] who used 
Partially-Averaged Navier-Stokes (PANS) equations in the commercial code ANSYS-CFX for 
the cavitation simulation. PANS is a hybrid turbulence model which conducts the simulation 
from RANS to Direct Numerical Simulation (DNS) based on unresolved to total ratios of 
kinetic energy ( ) and dissipation ( ). Nevertheless, those ratios can only be found by a 
subgrid independence analysis and they can not be easily estimated according to Sharath and 
Girimaji [19]. Another solution was proposed by Zuo et al. [20] who added a function to the  

 turbulence model to consider the influence of variations in density on the turbulence 
viscosity for the study of cavitation in a Francis turbine. Looking for a better solution, Bensow 
and Bark [21] and Lu et al. [22] worked with OpenFOAM to use large eddy simulation (LES) 
instead of RANS to simulate the formation of erosive cavitation based on Implicit Large Eddy 
Simulation (ILES). ILES was selected to avoid the explicit coupling between mass transfer 
modeling and subgrid modeling. ILES has been validated by recent studies on aerospace and 
naval engineering for highly turbulent flows such as the flows over a fully three-dimensional 
swept-wing geometry [23] and a marine propeller [24].  

In summary, the main contribution in this paper will be the implementation and validation 
of the Zwart-Gerber-Belamri cavitation model in OpenFOAM using ILES. Therefore, it is 
intended to obtain accurate simulations of the shedding process of partial cavitation, which is 
considered the main mechanism of material erosion. For validation purposes, the experimental 
results obtained by Escaler et al. [25, 26] with a 2D plane-convex hydrofoil at the École 
Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL) high speed cavitation tunnel have been used. 
Previous comparisons with OpenFOAM were focused on NACA series or twisted geometries 
with unsteady cavitation [27, 28, 29] to compare the cavitation hydrodynamic behavior. For 
the present paper, the plane-convex hydrofoil was specifically investigated to reveal the 
unsteady cavitation dynamics.  

2  Description of the numerical method 

2.1  Implicit Large Eddy Simulation 
Continuity and Navier-Stokes equations are the basis of LES, as shown in Eqs. 1 and 2. 

      (1) 
 

,   (2) 
 
where  is the instant velocity,  t is time, i and j are the space axes subscripts. 

In ILES, Eqs. 1 and 2 are filtered to use the approximation  and to exclude some solutions, 
which are not relevant for Eqs. 3 and 4 [30]. 

Formatat: Color de la lletra:
Automàtic
Formatat: Color de la lletra:

3 



      (3) 

     (4) 
Then Eq. 4 is reduced to obtain Eq. 5 by the following considerations:  

1. The product of filtered velocities is .  

2. The subgrid stress tensor, which is the Reynolds stress tensor is 
.  

3. The filtered strain tensor rate is .  

4. The filtered viscous stress tensor is .  

     (5)  
 
The subgrid stress tensor  is a nonlinear term, so it is separated as indicated in Eq. 6. 

      (6) 
 
where, the tensor  according to Bensow-Bark [21] and Lu et al. [22] is modeled by using 
the truncation error of the discretization, which acts as a dissipative action to obtain an 
implicit subgrid scale (SGS) for ILES. Adams et al. [30] gives more details about the 
mathematical implementation of this implicit model.  

2.2  Zwart-Gerber-Belamri cavitation model 
The cavitating flow is considered as a single fluid with  two-phase homogeneous mixture with 
phase changes between vapor and water. Eq. 7 to 9 indicate the vapor volume fraction , the 
density , and the dynamic viscosity  of the vapor-water mixture as flows: 

       (7) 
      (8) 
      (9) 

 
where V is the total volume, l and v are subscripts for liquid and vapor respectively. Thus Eq. 
10 available based on Eq. 3, which considers the phase transfer  called  as the transport 
equation. 

     (10) 
 where  is the inter-phase mass transfer rate per unit volume.     

The Zwart-Gerber-Belamri model considers a variable bubble radius, R, based on Eq. 11, 
in which the second derivative term is neglected to simplify the expression and to get Eq. 12. 

4 



     (11)  

      (12) 
Thus the Zwart-Gerber-Belamri model is expressed with Eq. 13. 

   (13) 
where  and  are the selected calibration constants for vaporization and 
condensation,  is the nucleation site volume fraction and   m 
is the typical bubble size in water [29]. The work of Morgout et al. [15] has been used to 
choose  and  values. Moreover, a preliminary study of  sensitivity was carried out to 
select its value.  

The Zwart-Gerber-Belamri model has been written in C++ based on the OpenFOAM code. 
The code has been saved on the new solver directory and compiled to become an implemented 
OpenFOAM’s cavitation model for the present research.  

2.3  OpenFOAM set up 
The OpenFOAM version 2.2.x was used in the present research because it solves the bugs of 
the previous version [17]. GNU/Linux Mint 6 Petra with kernel Linux 3.11.0-12-generic (x86 
64) and XFCE desktop were also used. This version of OpenFOAM is used especially in the 
CentOS GNU/Linux distribution, which is based on the official GNU/Linux version of 
RedHAT. In fact, the following implementations were carried out: 

1. In the directory OpenFOAM/OpenFOAM-2.2.x/etc the text document bashrc was 
modified. The lines “foamCompiler=system" and “WMCOMPILER=Gcc" were written 
and the line “foamCompiler=ThirdParty" was eliminated in the compiler 
location (#Compiler Location:). These actions had to be made to compile the 
implemented cavitation solver of Zwart-Gerber-Belamri [29].  

2. The library libmpi.so.1 is required in GNU/Linux Mint Petra. Thus, a symbolic link (ln -
s) with libmpi.so was implemented, which is part of Message Passing Interface (MPI) 
GNU/Linux library [31].  

3  Hydrofoil geometry, mesh generation and boundary conditions 

3.1  Hydrofoil geometry and computation domain 
Figure 1 shows a plane-convex hydrofoil used in Escaler's studies [25, 26]. This hydrofoil 
presents a plane upper surface, a convex lower surface. The hydrofoil has a chord length c 
equal to 91.1 mm, a span-length equal to 0.3c, a semicircular leading edge and a tip trailing 
edge.  

5 



    The hydrofoil is positioned in a computation domain with an angle of attack, , as 
shown in Fig. 2. 

3.2  Mesh generation 
Meshing is a challenge for this type of plane-convex hydrofoils due to the fact that the leading 
edge presents a great change from a convex shape to a plane shape with a semicircular leading 
edge. 

Therefore, a structured C mesh generated using Gmsh 2.8.5 and Salome 7.4.0 was 
obtained with scale distribution and hexahedron elements. The resulting mesh has 393980 
hexahedra. The quality of the mesh is guaranteed by the Salome taper analysis as indicated in 
Fig. 3. This analysis shows proportional changes of elements such as 0.021, which is an 
acceptable value according to previous works [28]. 

The Yplus, , is calculated based on Eq. 14 and the mean value for the hydrofoil wall is 
9.2. This mean value is within the range from 1 to 15, which ensures that the mesh matches 
the conditions for ILES based on Lu et al. [22]. 

       (14) 
where  is the friction velocity, y is the distance to the nearest hydrofoil wall and  is the 
kinematic viscosity [29]. 

3.3  Boundary Conditions 
Both, the Reynolds number, , and the cavitation number, , indicated in Eqs. 15 and 16 are  
applied to show the cavitating flow conditions: 

      (15) 
 

            (16) 
 

where  is the free stream velocity [15, 32], c is the chord length, and  and  are the 
reference and saturation pressures, respectively. 

Based on the experimental tests carried out by Escaler [25], five flow conditions 
combining different free stream velocity at domain inlet, angle of attack and the reference 
pressure at domain outlet  have been selected as shown in Tab. 1. The uniform velocity and the 
static pressure were assassinated for the domain inlet and outlet.  

 

Table 1: Simulated flow conditions  

 Cases σ [ ] [m/s]  [kPa] 
 (i) 0.70 2.3 35.0 430.19 
 (ii) 0.70 3.0 25.0 220.60 
 (iii) 0.70 3.0 35.0 430.19 
 (iv) 1.00 3.0 35.0 613.58 
 (v) 1.12 3.0 35.0 680.82 

6 



  

The front and back planes of the domain were considered as symmetry boundaries. 
Besides, the top and bottom of the computation domain,  the hydrofoil surface were treated as 
no-slip wall. 

4  Results and Discussion 
Figure 4 shows several characteristic parameters defined for the cavity attached to the 
hydrofoil such as the cavity length L, the maximum cavity length , the depth , etc. 
The cavitating flow over the plane-convex hydrofoil presents a typical partial cavitation 
development consisting of an attached cavity from the leading edge. Under unsteady 
conditions, the re-entrant jet mechanism provokes the periodic shedding of bubble 
clouds [26].  
   Strouhal number, Str, is a typical dimensionless parameter to show the feature of cavity 
oscillation, as indicated in Eq. 17. 

      (17) 
where f is the cavity oscillation frequency and  is the mean velocity of the free stream. 

The transient numerical results have been post-processed and analyzed along the time to 
identify a single  period of the cavitation oscillation process. Particular attention has been 
given to the vapor volume fraction, the development of the reentrant jet, the shedding of a 
cloud cavity and its final collapse. The cloud cavity like the horse-shoe is visible and there is a 
good similarity between the experiment and simulation, as indicated in Fig. 5.  

For a better comparison, the dimensionless time given by Eq. 18 has been used. 

      (18) 
where t is a time between initial time, , and final time, , in one cycle. In particular six time 
instants corresponding to 0, 1/6, 1/3, 1/2, 2/3 and 5/6  have been selected, and the 
corresponding contour of the vapor volume fraction  are plotted in Fig. 6, for all flow 
conditions. 

Based on Fig. 6 the following information can be obtained: 
1. All the cases show the growth and detachment of leading edge cavity, and the break off 

and collapse of the cavity cloud.   

2. The maximum length of the leading edge attached cavity decreases with the increase of 
the cavitation number.  

3. With , the cavity cloud  is observed more clearly for case (i) and (iii) at  
m/s than that for case (ii) at  m/s. Therefore, the larger velocity enhances the 
probabilities of cloud cavity, which is linked to erosive power of cavitation erosion.  

4. Cavities at the hydrofoil trailing edge were observed along the lower surface of the 
hydrofoil for three cases with . This kind of cavitation is due to the hydrofoil 
convex shape and it is also observed experimentally.  

7 



5. It is noted that results obtained by ILES method has good accuracy as previous studies 
[33] based on explicit subgrid model of LES.  

In order to understand the dimensionless evolution of cavity shedding shown in Fig. 6, the  
pressure coefficient, Cp, calculated based on Eq. 19 and the vapor void fraction, , have been 
plotted in Fig. 7 and Fig. 8, respectively, as a function of  for six points located along the 
upper surface at  in spanwise direction.  

 

     (19) 
 
where  is the static pressure. 
      According to the definition of σ and Cp, there is the following relation: 
 

              (20) 
 
Due to the fact that  is always larger than  Cp must be larger than -σ.  
Because those cases with  σ = 0.7 have larger cavity lengths , the flat Cp lines, whose 

value corresponding to the cavitation number are observed at x/c = 0.2 and 0.4, compared with 
other two cases. On the contrary, the cavity length of case (v) is shortest, and the static 
pressure oscillation violently even at x/c = 0.2. From x/c = 0.6 to 1.0, Cp lines with strong 
pressure oscillations can be observed for all cases. At the downstream of the hydrofoil (x/c = 
1.2) , the average static pressure is basically around the reference pressure level, and some 
pressure pulses can be captured. Those pulses may relates with the collapse of  vapor droplet. 
Based on vapor volume fraction oscillations shown in Fig. 8, the vapor sizes are larger for 
case (i) and (iii), and the vapor size is smallest for case (v) due to its highest reference 
pressure.  

The comparison of cavity length among those five cases is listed at Tab. 2, where both 
experimental and simulation data are included. To show the difference between the experiment 
and calculation, Eq. 21 defines the error evaluation of the relative cavity length. The 
prediction accuracy is fairly good, though the largest error is near 20%. It must be noted that 
due to the transient nature of the shedding process and the high frequencies involved during 
the tests [25], the maximum length could not be determined with sufficient accuracy from the 
experiments so an error of about ±5% can be assumed.Probably the error can decrease  if the 
experiments can be repeated with the goals to measure the cavity length and frequency, which 
were not the main objects of EPFL's researchers in 2003 [25]. 

   

    (21) 

Table 2: Numerical studies and experimental results based on  

  f Str 
 Cases Num. Exp. Error [%] Num. [Hz] Num. 

 (i) 0.47 0.50 6.0 166.67 0.20 

Formatat: Color de la lletra:

Formatat: Color de la lletra:

Formatat: Color de la lletra:
Automàtic

Formatat: Color de la lletra:
Automàtic

8 



 (ii) 0.40 0.50 20.0 163.93 0.24 
 (iii) 0.44 0.45 2.2 151.51 0.18 
 (iv) 0.13 0.16 18.7 588.24 0.20 
 (v) 0.12 0.14 14.3 588.24 0.18 

  

 
For a better understanding of the phenomenon, the Q-criterion based on Eq. 22 is used to 

obtain the 3D vorticity distribution.  

     (22) 
where  is the vorticity rate, S is the strain rate.  

The Q-criterion is plotted in Fig. 9 where iso-contours of  s-2 show similarities 
with vapor volume fraction iso-contours ( ). Results depicted that there were strong 
interaction between the vorticity and cavitation evolution. 

5  Conclusions 
A numerical simulation of unsteady cloud cavitation around a plane convex hydrofoil has 

been carried out with a free OpenFOAM software package using Implicit Large Eddy 
Simulation (ILES) where and a newly implemented Zwart-Gerber-Belamri cavitation model 
were implemented.  The transient results at different operation conditions show the typical 
cavitation dynamic behaviors including the growth of the leading edge cavity, the 
development of the reentrant jet, the shedding of bubble clouds and their collapses. 

The pressure oscillations due to cavitation evolution dynamics as well as the complex 
vortex structures observed with Q-criterion were have been reasonably predicted. Further, a 
strouhal number between 0.18 and 0.24 denotes that the cavitation mechanics can be 
reproducedare well captured. In conclusion, the proposed numerical method are has been 
validated as a reliable tool for numerical studies and it can be used in future research to study 
cavitation-erosion mechanicsmechanisms.  

     

Acknowledgement 
This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China 
(Project Nos. 51306018, 51206087 and 51179091) and State key Laboratory of Hydroscience 
and Engineering, Tsinghua University (Project Nos. 2014-KY-05 and 2015-E-03). 

Conflict of interest 
Victor Hidalgo, Xianwu Luo, Xavier Escaler, Bin Ji and Alvaro Aguinaga declare that they 
have no conflict of interest.  

References and Notes 
[1] FRANC J.. and MICHEL J. Fundamentals of cavitation[M]. Dordrecht, The 
Netherlands:  Springer, 2005, 1993-221. 

Formatat: Color de la lletra:
Automàtic

9 



[2] LUO X., JI B. and XU H. Design and Optimization for Fluid Machinery[B]. 
Tsinghua University Press, 2012. 
[3] ESCALER X., EGUSQUIZA E., FARHAT M., AVELLAN F., and COUSSIRAT M. 
Detection of cavitation in hydraulic turbines[J]. Mechanical systems and signal processing, 
2006, 20(4):983–1007. 
[4] KUNZ R., BOGER D., STINEBRING D., CHYCZEWSKI T., LINDAU J., 
GIBELING H., VENKATESWARAN S. and GOVINDAN T. A preconditioned Navier Stokes 
method for two-phase flows with application to cavitation prediction[J]. Computers & 
Fluids, 2000, 29(8):849–875. 
[5] NOURI N., MOGHIMI M., and MIRSAEEDI S. Numerical simulation of unsteady 
cavitating flow over a disc[J]. Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers, Part 
C: Journal of Mechanical Engineering Science, 2010, 224(6):1245–1253. 
[6] ROOHI E., ZAHIRI A., and ANDIDEH-FARD M. Numerical simulation of cavitation 
around a two-dimensional hydrofoil using VOF method and LES turbulence model[J]. 
Applied Mathematical Modelling, 2013, 37(9):6469–6488. 
[7] SCHNERR G. and SAUER J. Physical and numerical modeling of unsteady cavitation 
dynamics[C]. Proceedings of International Conference on Multiphase Flow ICMF, 
Orleans, USA, 2001. 
[8] ZWART P., GERBER A. and BELAMRI T. A Two-Phase Flow Model for Predicting 
Cavitation Dynamics[C]. Proceedings of International Conference on Multiphase Flow 
ICMF 2004,  Yokohama, Japan, 2004. 
[9] GERBER A. A CFD model for devices operating under extensive cavitation 
conditions[C].  Proceedings of IMECE, New Orleans, Louisina, 2002. 
[10] SENOCAK I. and SHYY W. Evaluation of cavitation models for navier-stokes 
computations[C]. Proceedings of FEDSM, Montreal, Quebec, Canada, 2002. 
[11] JI B., LUO X., WU Y., PENG X. and DUAN Y. Numerical analysis of unsteady 
cavitating turbulent flow and shedding horse-shoe vortex structure around a twisted 
hydrofoil[J]. International Journal of Multiphase Flow, 2013, 51:33–43. 
[12] JI B., LUO X. and WU Y. Unsteady cavitation characteristics and alleviation of 
pressure fluctuations around marine propellers with different skew angles[J]. Journal of 
Mechanical Science and Technology, 2014, 28(4):1339–1348. 
[13] SHI W., WANG C., WANG W., and PEI B. Numerical Calculation on Cavitation 
Pressure Pulsation in Centrifugal Pump[J]. Advances in Mechanical Engineering, 2014, 
6:367631. 
[14] ZHANG G., SHI W., ZHOU L. and ZHANG D. Effect of the Maximun Density Ratio 
Between Liquid and Vapor on Cavitating Simulation[J]. American Journal of Engineering 
and Applied Sciences, 2015, 9(1): 119-126. 
[15] MORGUT M. and NOBILE E. Influence of the mass transfer model on the numerical 
prediction of the cavitating flow around a marine propeller[C]. Proceding of The Second 
International Symposium on Marine Propulsors,  Hamburg, Germany, 2011. 
[16] LIU H., WANG J., WANG Y., ZHANG H. and HUANG H. Influence of the empirical 
coefficients of cavitation model on predicting cavitating flow in the centrifugal pump[J]. 
International Journal of Naval Architecture and Ocean Engineering, 2014, 6:119-131. 

10 



[17] HUANG B. and WANG G. Partially Averaged Navier-Stokes method for time-
dependent turbulent cavitating flows[J]. Journal of Hydrodynamics, Ser. B, 2011, 23(1):26–
33. 
[18] JI B., LUO X., WU Y., PENG X., and XU H. Partially-Averaged Navier Stokes 
method with modified k model for cavitating flow around a marine propeller in a non-uniform 
wake[J]. International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer, 2012, 55(2324):6582–6588. 
[19] GIRIMAJI S. and ABDOL-HAMID K. Partially-Averaged Navier Stokes Model for 
Turbulence: Implementation and Validation[C]. Proceeding of 43rd AIAA Aerospace 
Sciences Meeting and Exhibit, Reno, Nevada, 2005. 
[20] ZUO Z., LIU S., LIU D., QIN D. and WU Y. Numerical Predictions of the Incipient 
and Developed Interblade Vortex Lines of a Model Francis Turbine by Cavitation 
Calculations[J]. Advances in Mechanical Engineering, 2013, 5:397583. 
[21] BENSOW R. and BARK G. Simulating cavitating flows with LES in OpenFoam[C]. 
Proceeding of V European Conference on Computational Fluid Dynamics, Lisbon, 
Portugal,  2010. 
[22] LU N., BENSOW R. and BARK G. LES of unsteady cavitation on the Delft twisted 
foil[J]. Journal of Hydrodynamics, Ser. B, 2010, 22(5, Supplement 1):784–791. 
[23] HAHN M. and DRIKAKIS D. Implicit Large-Eddy Simulation of Swept-Wing Flow 
Using High-Resolution Methods[J]. AIAA Journal, 2009, 47(3):618–630. 
[24] BENSOW R. and LIEFVENDAHL M. Implicit and explicit subgrid modeling in LES 
applied to a marine propeller[C]. Proceeding of 38th Fluid Dynamics Conference and 
Exhibit, Seattle, Washington, 2008. 
[25] ESCALER X., FARHAT M., AVELLAN F. and EGUSQUIZA E. Cavitation erosion 
tests on a 2d hydrofoil using surface-mounted obstacles[J]. Wear, 2003, 254(5):441–449. 
[26] ESCALER X., FARHAT M., EGUSQUIZA E. and AVELLAN F. Dynamics and 
Intensity of Erosive Partial Cavitation[J]. Journal of Fluids Engineering-transactions of 
The ASME, 2007, 129(7). 
[27] HUUVA T., CURE A., BARK G. and NILSSON H. Computations of unsteady 
cavitating flow on wing profiles using a volume fraction method and mass transfer models[C]. 
Proceeding of 2nd IAHR International Meeting of the Workgroup on Cavitation and 
Dynamic Problems in Hydraulic Machinery and Systems, Timisoara, Romania, 2007. 
[28] HIDALGO V., LUO X., JI B., and AGUINAGA A. Numerical study of unsteady 
cavitation on 2D NACA0015 hydrofoil using free/open source software[J]. Chinese Science 
Bulletin, 2014, 59(26):3276–3282. 
[29] HIDALGO V., LUO X., ESCALER X., JI J. and AGUINAGA A. Numerical 
investigation of unsteady cavitation around a NACA 66 hydrofoil using OpenFOAM[J]. IOP 
Conference Series: Earth and Environmental Science, 2014, 22(5):052013. 
[30] ADAMS N., HICKEL S. and FRANZ S. Implicit subgrid-scale modeling by adaptive 
deconvolution[J]. Journal of Computational Physics, 2004, 200(2):412–431. 
[31] HIDALGO V., LUO X., HUANG R.and CANDO E. Numerical simulation of 
cavitating flow over 2D hydrofoil using openFOAM adapted for Debian operating system 
with LXDE based in kernel GNU/Linux[C]. Proceedings of the ASME 2014 4th Joint US-
European Fluids Engineering, Chicago, Illinois, US, 2014. 

11 



[32] VALLIER A., NILSSON H. and REVSTEDT J. Mass transfer cavitation model with 
variable density of nuclei[C]. Proceeding of 7th International Conference on Multiphase 
Flow, Tampa, Florida, 2010. 
[33] JI B., LUO X., PENG X. and WU Y. Three-dimensional large eddy simulation and 
vorticity analysis of unsteady cavitating flow around a twisted hydrofoil[J]. Journal of 
Hydrodynamics, Ser. B, 2013, 25(4):510–519. 
[34] PETKOVSEK M. and DULAR M. Simultaneous observation of cavitation structures 
and cavitation erosion[J]. Wear, 2013, 300(2013):55–64. 
 

12 



  
Figure 1: Plane-convex hydrofoil [25]  

  
Figure 2: Computation Domain  

  
Figure 3: Structured and scale distributed mesh with taper analysis of the mesh around the 
plane-convex hydrofoil  

  

13 



Figure 4: The Characteristic lengths of a sheet cavity  

  
Figure 5: Comparison of the leading edge cavity growth between numerical simulation result 
and the experimental result for case (i) in horizontal plane using iso-contour of   

Figure 6: Dimensionless time evolution of cloud shedding for cases from (i) to (v) in 3D using 
iso-contour of vapor volume fraction   

14 



Figure 7: Local pressure coefficient, , by dimensionless time, , for cases from (i) to (v) at 
different . 

 

15 



Figure 8: Vapor void fraction, , by dimensionless time, , for cases from (i) to (v) at different 
.  

  
Figure 9:  Comparison between  (a) vapor volume fraction isosurface  = 0.5  and   (b) Q 
criterion vorticity  isosurface  at . (c) Vertical plane of the Q 
criterion. 

16 


	1  Introduction
	2  Description of the numerical method
	2.1  Implicit Large Eddy Simulation
	2.2  Zwart-Gerber-Belamri cavitation model
	2.3  OpenFOAM set up

	3  Hydrofoil geometry, mesh generation and boundary conditions
	3.1  Hydrofoil geometry and computation domain
	3.2  Mesh generation
	3.3  Boundary Conditions

	4  Results and Discussion
	5  Conclusions
	Acknowledgement
	Conflict of interest


