














































Proceedings of the 8
th

 International Symposium on Cavitation 
CAV2012 – Submission No. 95 
August 13-16, 2012, Singapore 

 

1 

 

The effect of cavitation on the natural frequencies of a hydrofoil 
 

 

Oscar de la Torre 
UPC-CDIF 

 

Xavier Escaler 
UPC-CDIF 

 
 

 

Eduard Egusquiza 
UPC-CDIF 

 

Matthieu Dreyer 
LMH-EPFL 

 

Mohamed Farhat 
LMH-EPFL 

 
 

 

 

SUMMARY 
The objective of the present paper is to show the effect of 

cavitation on the natural frequencies of a NACA0009 hydrofoil. 

The existence of large portions of the hydrofoil surface covered by 

vapor is expected to reduce the added mass effects of the 

surrounding flowing water. For that, a specific excitation and 

measuring system based on piezoelectric patches has been 

developed and validated. With this experimental setup, the three 

first natural frequencies of an aluminum NACA 0009 truncated 

hydrofoil have been determined in various conditions. The 

hydrofoil has been tested with partial cavitation and with 

supercavitation at 14 m/s and two incidence angles of 1º and 2º. 

Analogous tests have been carried out with the hydrofoil in air and 

surrounded by still water. The comparison of all the results has 

confirmed the significant role that cavitation plays in the modal 

response of the hydrofoil. 

INTRODUCTION 
The natural frequencies of a structure submerged in water 

experience a significant decrease due to the added mass effect [1, 

2]. In the field of hydraulic machinery, the frequency reduction 

affecting runners/impellers should be estimated a priori to foresee 

resonance problems during operation. For instance, recent 

investigations demonstrate that the frequency reduction ratio 

depends on the mode shape [3]. However, no attention has been 

given up to now to the possible influence of large scale vapor/gas 

cavities or pockets surrounding the structure under cavitating 

flows. Only the cases in still fluid of partially submerged bodies 

have been investigated. For instance, Lindholm et al. carried out in 

1965 the modal analysis of submerged beams at various depths [4]. 

Therefore, in the present work the effects of partial cavitation and 

supercavitation on the natural frequencies of a hydrofoil have been 

experimentally investigated in a high speed cavitation tunnel. 

 

EXPERIMENTAL SET UP 
A series of measurements have been carried out with an 

aluminum NACA0009 hydrofoil in different situations at the 

LMH-EPFL High Speed Cavitation Tunnel [5] shown in Figure 1 

in order to determine its first natural frequencies. 

 

 
Figure 1: LMH High speed cavitation tunnel 

 
The profile has a chord of 100 mm and a span of 150 mm. Its 

trailing edge is truncated at 90% of the chord leaving a trailing 

edge thickness of 3.22 mm. The current paper studies the effect on 

the first and second bending natural frequencies (f1 and f3) and on 

the first torsion natural frequency (f2) previously identified and 

determined by Ausoni et al. [6]. Several scenarios have been tested 

to clarify the relative importance of certain variables on the natural 

frequencies of the hydrofoil. In particular, the different 

hydrodynamic conditions considered for the experiments are the 

following ones: 

 Hydrofoil surrounded by air. 

 Hydrofoil lower surface wetted with still water. 

 Hydrofoil completely submerged in still water. 

 Hydrofoil completely submerged in flowing water and 
with attached partial cavitation. 

 Hydrofoil completely submerged in flowing water and 
surrounded by supercavitation mainly on the suction 

side. 

The tests with cavitation conditions have been carried out 

at 14 m/s and for two incidence angles of 1° and 2°. 
A specific set-up and procedure has been developed to carry 

out the experimental modal analysis. In order to excite the profile 



 2  

and measure its response, a new excitation system has been 

designed and proved to be able to excite the hydrofoil when 

mounted on the cavitation tunnel test section full of water and, 

hence, without external access. A preliminary work, which gave 

promising results, was done in laboratory conditions on metallic 

plates to evaluate the suitability of using piezoelectric patches. The 

piezoelectric technology was chosen due to its capability to be 

used onboard either as an excitation system or as a sensing device. 

This previous work permitted to select the adequate piezoelectric 

patch and voltage input capable of generating a large enough 

excitation force that could provoke a significant response. The 

amplitude of the response had to be sufficiently high to be 

measured in such a noisy environment as a cavitation tunnel under 

flow conditions. On the other hand, the patch used as a sensor 

showed a good measuring characteristics and it was proven to be 

as reliably as an accelerometer. Since piezoelectric devices are 

present in a wide variety of configurations, flexible piezoelectric 

patches were selected due to their adaptability to curved surfaces. 

They were integrated on the hydrofoil surface without altering the 

hydrodynamic geometry and therefore the flow field was not 

affected with their use. In particular, two piezoelectric patches 

(61mm x 35mm x 0.5mm) were embedded on the upper surface of 

the hydrofoil (Figure 2). Their mounting required a precise 

mechanization and fixation work. Special attention was given to 

their optimal location which depends on the mode to be excited 

and investigated. In the current work, a compromise had to be 

reached to excite bending and torsion modes. During the tests the 

patch closer to the leading edge was used as an exciter and the 

patch closer to the trailing edge as a sensor. 

 

 
Figure 2: Piezoelectric patches mounted on the NACA0009 profile. 

 

In order to excite the profile a sinusoidal chirp signal was fed 

to the leading edge patch. This chirp was chosen to sweep 

frequency bands containing the expected natural frequencies. 

Then, the detection of the amplified response due to the resonances 

permitted to identify the natural frequencies. In Figure 3 and 

example of the excitation signal (on the top) and of the 

simultaneous response signal (on the bottom) during one of the 

tests are show (the horizontal axis indicates time). It is observed 

how when the frequency of the excitation coincides with a natural 

frequency corresponding to the 1
st
 bending and the torsion modes 

of vibration the amplitudes of the measured signal are significantly 

amplified and can be well identified. 

 

 
Figure 3: Examples of excitation signal and response signal. 

METHODOLOGY 
The previous results shown in Figure 3 correspond to static air 

conditions which are very clear, but under flow conditions the 

induced noise difficults the identification of the resonances. 

Therefore, a specific signal processing method was developed to 

remove other sources of noise and to enhance the correlation 

between the forced excitatio and its reponse. Once the signals are 

obtained, the Cross Power Spectrum (CPS) between segments of 

the input and the response signals is calculated. As the input signal 

(chirp) varies its frequency linearly, sliding filters and windows 

have to be used to limit the frequency band where the CPS is 

applied at a particular time and to reduce noise. Despite of this 

procedure, the partial cavitation cases presented difficulties to find 

a clear frequency with amplitication from the CPS. In such 

conditions, a curve fitting method was used to estimate the 

resonance. Besides, a Joint Time Frequency Analysis (JTFA) was 

also performed to validate the method and analogous results were 

obtained. This JTFA was based on the short time Fourier transform 

(STFT) which is one of the most extended methods to analyze a 

time-varying signal. Basically, whith this method the response 

signal is cutted into overlapped data blocks by means of sliding 

windows and then the fast Fourier transform (FFT) is applied to 

each data block. The results are plotted in a 3D graph with the 

horizontal axis indicating time, the vertical axis indicating 

frequency and the z-axis indicating the amplitude with a color 

scale. An example is shown in Figure 4 for the response of the 1
st
 

bending mode measured in air conditions. 

 

 
Figure 4: Time-frequency spectrogram of the 1

st
 bending mode blade 

response in air. 

 

1st bending 
1st torsion 



 3  

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
As it has been said before, a series of experimental modal 

tests were performed with the hydrofoil under different boundary 

conditions. Visual inspections of such conditions were carried out. 

As an example, two photographs of the flow field observed from a 

transparent lateral window of the tunnel test section are shown in 

figures 5 and 6. In Figure 5 the suction side partial attached cavity 

reaching approximately the 44% of the chord for 1º incidence 

angle is shown. For 2º incidence the length of the cavity reached 

approximately the 53% of the chord. In Figure 6, the supercavity 

generated at a similar flow speed and 2º is shown. In both 1º and 2º 

cases, it has to be mentioned that the supercavitation mainly took 

place on the hydrofoil suction side and only few spots of cavitation 

were present on the pressure side. 
 

 
Figure 5: Partial cavitation at 14 m/s and 1°. 

 
Figure 6: Supercavitation at 14 m/s and 2°. 

 

Tables 1, 2 and 3 summarize the results obtained in terms of 

natural frequencies for the three first mode shapes in all the cases 

which correspond to static conditions (no flow), cavitation 

conditions at 1º and cavitation conditions at 2º incidence angles, 

respectively. In order to compare these results, the values of the 

frequencies measured in air are taken as a reference. So, the 
effect of the added mass on the natural frequencies is quantified by 

the use of the so-called frequency reduction ratio (FRR), which has 

been defined by Equation 1: 

𝐹𝑅𝑅   =
|𝑓   − 𝑓     |

𝑓     
    (1) 

where fi,j is the natural frequency of the hydrofoil for the j mode 

and under i conditions and fair,j is the natural frequency for the j 

mode in air. 

 

 

 

 f1 (Hz) f2 (Hz) f3 (Hz) 

Air 270.2 1018.6 1671.0 

Half Wetted 163.0 755.0 1113.6 

Still Water 130.2 614.8 886.0 

Table 1: Natural frequencies in static conditions (no flow). 

 
1° f1 (Hz) f2 (Hz) f3 (Hz) 

Partial Cavitation  

(l/c = 0,44) 
135.4 677.6 996.8 

Supercavitation 248.7 918.4 1460 

Table 2: Natural frequencies for partial cavitation and supercavitation 

cases at 14 m/s and 1°. 

 
2° f1(Hz) f2 (Hz) f3 (Hz) 

Partial Cavitation 

(l/c=0,53) 
146.2 696.3 989.8 

Supercavitation 235.2 879.9 1402.3 

Table 3: Natural frequencies for partial cavitation and supercavitation 
cases at 14 m/s and 1°. 

 

In figures 7 and 8, the FRR’s calculated with the values of the 

natural frequencies presented in the corresponding tables are 

plotted for 1º and for 2º incidence angles, respectively. For a 

correct interpretation of the results it has to be reminded that the 

higher the FRR value, the higher the added mass effect. 

Consequently, it is confirmed that the maximum added mass effect 

takes place when the hydrofoil is submerged in still water. In this 

case, the natural frequencies are reduced between the 40% and 

52% depending on the mode shape. 

At can be confirmed from Table 1, the natural frequencies 

when the hydrofoil is Half Wetted are not exactly located half way 

between the Air and Still Water cases as could be expected. 

Besides, the frequency shift is mode dependent and the FRR is 

higher for lower order mode shapes as already found by [3]. 

Comparing Partial Cavitation results with Still Water ones 

plotted on figures 7 and 8, it is observed how the order of 

importance of the added mass effect is maintained among the 

different mode shapes. 

From the comparison of Supercavitation results at both 

incidence angles, a difference up to 5% is observed with larger 

effects for the case of 2°. 

Comparing Supercavitation and Partial Cavitation results for 

both incidence angles, it is observed that there is not a linear 

relation between the area of the hydrofoil covered by the vapor 

content of the cavitation and the frequency shift. This fact may 

indicate that several other variables can have a role in this 

phenomenon such as the void fraction, the mode shape 

deformation and others. 

 

 
Figure 7: FRR for different scenarios at 1°. 

 



 4  

 
Figure 8: FRR for different scenarios at 2°. 

 

But in general terms, it is confirmed that the results are 

consistent and that the trends of the FRR values are analogous for 

all the modes at both incidences angles. 

 

CONCLUSION 
An experimental investigation to determine the effects on the 

natural frequencies of a hydrofoil submerged in a cavitating flow 

has been presented. 

A specific system based on piezoelectric patches has been 

developed and used to perform the experimental modal analysis 

under flowing conditions without altering the flow field. 

The three first natural frequencies of the hydrofoil have been 

found under partial cavitation and supercavitation conditions. 

These results have also been compared to the frequencies found in 

static fluid conditions comprising air, water and a mixture of both. 

It has been confirmed that the presence of a large scale 

attached cavitation form on the hydrofoil surface results in a 

significant increase of any of its three first natural frequencies with 

respect to the still water case. Moreover, such increase is mode 

dependent. Therefore, the added mass effect is reduced. 

Moreover, it has been also been found that the area of the 

attached cavity or the static air in contact with the hydrofoil 

surface is not the unique parameter that determines the reduction 

of the added mass effect. Hence, for both static and dynamic cases, 

several more variables migh also play a role in the final added 

mass effect. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The present investigation is part of the work carried out for 

Hydrodyna Phase II research project. The authors would like to 

acknowledge all the partners of the project (ANDRITZ Hydro, 

ALSTOM Hydro, VOITH Hydro, LMH-EPFL and CDIF-UPC) for 

their collaboration. 

NOMENCLATURE 
f1  natural frequency of the 1

st
 bending mode 

f2  natural frequency of the torsion mode 

f3  natural frequency of the 2
nd

 bending mode 

CPS  Cross Power Spectrum 

FFT  Fast Fourier Transform 

FRR Frequency reduction ratio = 
|           |

      
 

JTFA Joint Time Frequency Analysis 

STFT Short Time Fourier Transform 

REFERENCES 
[1]  Brennen, C., 1982, A review of added mass and fluid 

inertial forces. Naval Civil Engineering Laboratory. 

[2]  Blevins, R. D., 1979, Formulas for natural frequency and 

mode shape. Krieger, Malabar.. 

[3]  Yadykin, Y., Tenetov, V., Levin, D., 2003, The added mass 

of a flexible plate oscillating in a fluid. Journal of fluids 

and structures 17, 115-123. 

[4]  Lindholm, U.S., Kana, D.D., Chu, W.-C., Abramson, H.N., 

1965, Elastic vibration characteristics of cantilever plates 

in water. Journal of Ship Research 9, 11-22. 

[5]  Avellan, F., Henry, P., Ryhming,  I.L., 1987, A new high 

speed cavitation tunnel. ASME Winter Annual Meeting, 

Boston 57, 49-60. 

[6] Ausoni, Ph., Farhat, M., Escaler, X., Egusquiza, E., 

Avellan, F., 2007, Cavitation influence on Von Kármán 

vortex shedding and induced hydrofoils vibrations. Journal 

of fluids engineering, Volume 129, Issue 8, 966 (8 pages) 

 

 


