






















































Feasibility of Detecting Natural Frequencies of Hydraulic Turbines While in Operation, Using Strain Gauges


sensors

Article

Feasibility of Detecting Natural Frequencies of
Hydraulic Turbines While in Operation,
Using Strain Gauges

David Valentín * ID , Alexandre Presas, Matias Bossio, Mònica Egusquiza ID , Eduard Egusquiza
and Carme Valero

Center for Industrial Diagnostics and Fluid Dynamics (CDIF), Polytechnic University of Catalonia (UPC),
Av. Diagonal, 647, ETSEIB, 08028 Barcelona, Spain; alexandre.presas@upc.edu (A.P.);
matias.alberto.bossio@upc.edu (M.B.); monica.egusquiza@upc.edu (M.E.); eduard.egusquiza@upc.edu (E.E.);
m.del.carmen.valero@upc.edu (C.V.)
* Correspondence: david.valentin@upc.edu; Tel.: +34-934-017-132

Received: 19 December 2017; Accepted: 9 January 2018; Published: 10 January 2018

Abstract: Nowadays, hydropower plays an essential role in the energy market. Due to their fast
response and regulation capacity, hydraulic turbines operate at off-design conditions with a high
number of starts and stops. In this situation, dynamic loads and stresses over the structure are high,
registering some failures over time, especially in the runner. Therefore, it is important to know
the dynamic response of the runner while in operation, i.e., the natural frequencies, damping and
mode shapes, in order to avoid resonance and fatigue problems. Detecting the natural frequencies of
hydraulic turbine runners while in operation is challenging, because they are inaccessible structures
strongly affected by their confinement in water. Strain gauges are used to measure the stresses of
hydraulic turbine runners in operation during commissioning. However, in this paper, the feasibility
of using them to detect the natural frequencies of hydraulic turbines runners while in operation is
studied. For this purpose, a large Francis turbine runner (444 MW) was instrumented with several
strain gauges at different positions. First, a complete experimental strain modal testing (SMT) of
the runner in air was performed using the strain gauges and accelerometers. Then, the natural
frequencies of the runner were estimated during operation by means of analyzing accurately transient
events or rough operating conditions.

Keywords: natural frequencies; hydraulic turbine; strain gauges; modal analysis

1. Introduction

Hydropower is one of the main electricity generation sources in the world. About 13% of the
electricity generated in 2015 was provided by hydropower [1]. Moreover, with the entrance in the
energy market of new renewable energies in the last 10 years, such as wind or solar power, hydropower
is playing an essential role due to its fast response and regulation capacity. Wind and solar power
strongly depend on the weather conditions, so their generation is not constant. This requires more
regulation and a fast response from other electricity-generation sources, which can only be provided
by hydropower. Hydropower is able to regulate its power in a wide range (from 20% to 100% of
maximum power) with a fast response (start-up, stop and changes in loads in less than one minute).
Moreover, it can store large amounts of energy by using reversible pump-turbine (RPT) power plants
when there is a surplus of energy.

Under these circumstances, hydraulic turbines are increasingly working in off-design conditions,
far from their best efficiency point (BEP). Moreover, they are subjected to transient events (start/stop
and load changes) many more times in a day than some years ago. In terms of the lifetime of the

Sensors 2018, 18, 174; doi:10.3390/s18010174 www.mdpi.com/journal/sensors

http://www.mdpi.com/journal/sensors
http://www.mdpi.com
https://orcid.org/0000-0001-7125-0734
https://orcid.org/0000-0003-1777-1840
http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/s18010174
http://www.mdpi.com/journal/sensors


Sensors 2018, 18, 174 2 of 19

hydraulic turbine components, this is worse than working at the BEP, especially for the runner [2].
The runner is the rotating element that transforms the energy of the water into mechanical energy, so it is
the most critical part of the machine in terms of mechanical stresses. Some failures in hydraulic turbine
runners have been documented in the last few years due to fatigue or mechanical resonance [3–6].
Therefore, the dynamic response of the runner has to be well-known in order to avoid these fatigue
or resonance problems. This means that it is of paramount importance to determine accurately the
natural frequencies, damping ratios and mode-shapes of the runner in operation.

To determine experimentally the dynamic response of hydraulic turbine runners in operation
is challenging, especially in the case of Francis turbines and pump turbines, because the runner of
those types of machines is rotating and confined in water, with small gaps and seals, and is strongly
affected by boundary conditions [7–9]. The natural frequencies of this kind of hydraulic turbine
runner are affected by the added mass of the surrounding water [10,11], the rotation [12,13] and
the distances to the stationary parts [7,14]. Numerical models are commonly used to estimate these
natural frequencies [2,10,14] but they present some uncertainties due to the complexity of the problem,
and usually experimental results are needed to calibrate them.

To estimate the mechanical stress and strain of the runner for different operating conditions,
strain gauges have been used in the past [2,15,16]. These studies confirmed that the worst operating
conditions in terms of mechanical stress are the start-ups, stops and low loads (power less than 50%
of maximum power). However, they have never been used to determine the natural frequencies
of the runner in operation. The method of determining the dynamic response of a structure using
strain gauges is called strain modal testing (SMT) [17,18]. Mucchi [18] compared this method with the
conventional method used to determine the dynamic response of structures by means of displacement,
velocity or acceleration sensors. He presented the difficulties and drawbacks of using strain gauges
for this purpose, as well as a new piezoelectric strain sensor to perform SMT. Nevertheless, SMT was
applied only to a simple structure as in the case of a cantilever plate, but has been never applied in a
complex structure such a hydraulic turbine runner.

In this paper, as a first step, a SMT is performed in a large Francis turbine runner (444 MW of
rated power) in air, and the results are compared with a conventional experimental modal analysis
(EMA) using accelerometers. To do so, the runner was impacted in different positions and the response
was measured with several strain gauges and accelerometers. In this way, the natural frequencies and
mode shapes of the runner were identified and classified using both kinds of sensors. The next step
was to identify the natural frequencies and mode shapes of the runner while in operation. For this
purpose, the response measured with the strain gauges during several transient events, such as
start-ups and stops, as well as during rough operating conditions, has been analyzed in detail. Wavelet
time–frequency methods and frequency-spectrum averaged methods were applied in the analysis of
the strain-gauge signals in order to estimate the natural frequencies of the runner in operation.

2. Dynamics of a Francis Turbine Runner

In this section, the dynamic behavior of Francis turbine runners is discussed. To study the dynamic
behavior of a Francis turbine runner, both dynamic response and excitation of the runner need to
be defined. A general overview of the dynamic response of Francis turbines runners is presented in
Section 2.1, and all possible sources of excitation in Francis turbines are discussed in Section 2.2.

2.1. Modal Behavior of a Francis Turbine Runner

The mode shapes of all kinds of Francis turbine runners are similar, especially those with a similar
specific speed value, since they have common geometrical characteristics [5,19,20]. These mode shapes
are formed by different number of nodal diameters (ND) with different relative amplitude between
the crown, band and blades [8,21]. If the deformation in the crown is bigger than in the band or in the
blades, these mode shapes are called crown-dominant mode shapes (CD) [9]. If the deformation in the
band is the greatest, these mode shapes are called band-dominant mode shapes (BD); and if it is in the



Sensors 2018, 18, 174 3 of 19

blades, they are called blade-dominant modes (BlD) [21]. In the case that the deformation is almost
the same in the different parts of the runner, the mode shapes are called global mode shapes (G) [21].
Normally, the first natural frequencies that appear are global mode shapes (G) and, then, the natural
frequencies appear grouped according to the mode shape type (CD, BD or BlD).

The mode-shapes are generally not modified when submerging the runner in water, but the
natural frequencies decrease in comparison to the situation in air [10,22–24] due to the added mass
effect. Moreover, this added mass effect is stronger for nearby rigid surfaces [8]. The natural frequencies
can decrease about 50% from their value in air when the runner is submerged and confined in water,
but this value is totally dependent on the mode shape. Some studies [10,22–24] have confirmed
that the higher the nodal diameter (ND) of the mode shape, the higher the affect on the natural
frequency of the runner in water in comparison with that in air. Furthermore, the added mass effect
is also stronger for the mode shapes with relative displacement between crown, band or blades (CD,
BD or BlD mode shapes) than for the global mode shapes (G) [11]. Other parameters such as the
temperature and density of the surrounding fluid can also affect the natural frequencies of the runner.
The temperature directly affects the stiffness of the structure: when increasing temperature, stiffness
decreases and, therefore, the natural frequencies also decrease [25]. The density of the surrounding
fluid is an important parameter in the added mass effect: the higher the density of the surrounding
fluid, the smaller the natural frequencies of the submerged structure [7,26]. Nevertheless, in the
hydraulic turbomachinery field, temperature and density changes are usually small.

The order of appearance of the mode shapes in frequency may be different in water than in air
because the affect of the water is different for every mode shape. Hence, mode shapes need to be
identified when the runner is submerged in water, in mounting conditions, and in operation.

2.2. Excitation Phenomena in Francis Turbines

During operation, Francis turbines are subjected to different hydraulic excitation phenomena.
These excitation phenomena may be periodic, transient or random [27] depending on their origin.
Due to the nature of these excitation phenomena, the natural frequencies of the runner may be excited
and detected. Therefore, every excitation phenomena should be studied in detail to know if the runner
natural frequencies can be excited by the hydraulic phenomenon or not, and if it is the case, which can
be excited and which cannot.

2.2.1. Periodic Excitation

In this section, the main kinds of periodic excitation sources in Francis turbines are explained and
their possibility for exciting runner natural frequencies is discussed.

• Rotor-Stator Interaction

The most important periodic excitation in a Francis turbine is given by the rotor-stator interaction
(RSI) [28–30]. The pressure field at the inlet of the runner is affected by the interaction of the runner
blades and the guide vanes. When the rotating blades of the runner pass in front of the static guide
vanes, the pressure field in the gap between blades and vanes can be described as the superposition of
all the combinations m, n [28,29]:

Pm,n(θ, t) = Am,n· cos(mZvθs + Ψm)· cos(nZbθr + Ψn), (1)

In Equation (1), θ is the angular coordinate (index s is for the stationary coordinate and r for the
rotating coordinate); Zv is the number of guide vanes and Zb the number of runner blades; and m, n
are integer numbers (1, 2, . . . , ∞) that represent the order of harmonic. The amplitude of the excitation
Am,n depends on several parameters like the head (difference in altitude between the upper and the
lower reservoir), operating point, design of the machine and order of harmonics (m, n). Therefore,
RSI excitation is a sum of sinusoidal waves at different frequencies with different amplitudes. From the



Sensors 2018, 18, 174 4 of 19

rotating frame or from the runner point of view, these frequencies are calculated as in Equation (2),
where ff is the runner rotating frequency. The shape of the wave (km,n) associated with each fm is a
combination of the n harmonics of Zb and the m harmonics of Zv (Equation (3)).

fm = m·Zv·ff, (2)

km,n = n·Zb − m·Zv (3)

Thus, during operation in a steady condition, the runner is receiving an excitation due to the RSI
at the frequencies fm with the shape km,n. For example, for a combination of Zb = 16 runner blades and
Zv = 20 guide vanes and a rotating speed of ff = 2.14 Hz (128.6 rpm), the main frequencies of excitation
from the rotating frame are: f1 = 42.8 Hz, f2 = 85.6 Hz, f3 = 128.4 Hz and f4 = 171.2 Hz. The shape
corresponding to each of those frequencies is given in Table 1, which is compiled according to Equation
(2). The positive sign of the values in Table 1 means that the wave is rotating in the same direction as
the runner, and the negative sign that it is rotating in the opposite direction. The shape of the excitation
frequency f1 corresponds to the first column of Table 1. In this case, it is a sum of a wave with 4 nodal
diameters rotating in the opposite direction to the runner and waves with 12, 28, 44, 60, . . . nodal
diameters rotating in the same direction as the runner. Only the smaller values of km,n are usually
considered because they are the ones that present higher amplitudes [31,32] (colored in red in Table 1).
Therefore, f1 is mainly a wave with 4 nodal diameters rotating in the opposite direction to the runner.
In that way, f2 is a −8, +8 wave, f3 is a +4 wave and f4 a 0 nodal diameters wave.

Table 1. Excitation shape (km,n) table for a combination of Zb = 16 and Zv = 20 runner blades. The most
important components are colored in red.

mZv/nZb 20 (f1 = 42.8 Hz) 40 (f2 = 85.6 Hz) 60 (f3 = 128.4 Hz) 80 (f4 = 171.2 Hz)

16 −4 −24 −44 −64
32 12 −8 −28 −48
48 28 8 −12 −32
64 44 24 4 −16
80 60 40 20 0

According to Presas et al. [33], resonance only occurs if the excitation frequency matches in value
and in shape with the natural frequency and its mode-shape. Therefore, in steady conditions, where
the rotating speed is constant in Francis turbines, the natural frequencies of the runner will only be
excited by the RSI excitation if they match in value and in shape with the RSI excitation.

However, during a start-up or stop of the Francis turbine, the rotating speed (ff) increases from 0 to
the nominal value in the case of the start-up and vice versa for the stop. This procedure of acceleration
and deceleration of the runner can be of about 30 s of duration. This means that the excitation frequency
of the RSI also changes from 0 to its steady value (fm) or vice versa (see Equation (2)). Therefore,
if the natural frequency of the runner is below the steady value of the excitation frequency (fm) and
the excitation shape coincides with the mode shape of the runner, a resonance is expected to happen.
In this case, this natural frequency may be detected every start-up or stop. For instance, taking the
values of the same example presented before (Zb = 16, Zv = 20 and ff = 2.14 Hz), if the natural frequency
of the runner associated to a 4ND mode-shape is below f1 = 42.8 Hz, this will be excited during the
start-up and stop of the machine. The same applies for the rest of the excitation frequencies (f2, f3,
f4, . . . , f∞) and the rest of the natural frequencies of the runner.

• Draft Tube Cavitation Surge

In Francis turbines at part load (50–80% BEP flow rate) and overload (above BEP flow rate),
a periodic hydraulic phenomenon related to cavitation appears in the runner outlet and draft tube.
This phenomenon is called the vortex rope and it has been studied for many years [34–36]. It is a core



Sensors 2018, 18, 174 5 of 19

formed by a variable volume of vapor rotating in the same direction as the runner for the part-load
operation, and in the opposite direction to the runner for the overload operation. For the part-load
vortex rope, this takes a helical shape and presents a precession rotation at 0.25–0.35 times the runner
rotating speed (ff). In this case, circumferential pressure pulsations are generated at this low frequency,
displacing the runner in the radial direction. For the overload vortex rope, the vortex is axially centered
in the draft tube cone, inducing an axial force over the runner. The frequency of this overload vortex
rope is in the same range as the part-load vortex rope. As this phenomenon occurs at a very low
frequency, normally it does not match any natural frequency of the runner.

However, strong pressure fluctuations may occur if the vortex rope frequency matches one of
the free natural-oscillation frequencies of the draft tube, penstock or the whole hydraulic circuit.
This provokes large bursts of pressure pulses in the draft tube, causing strong vibrations on
the turbine and even on the power-house. These phenomena are called part-load resonance or
overload resonance [36,37]. During them, the runner receives large pressure pulses, which can act
as strong impacts over the structure, exciting all the natural frequencies of the runner. Therefore,
this phenomenon becomes a transient excitation source at the same time as it is periodic (0.25–0.3 ff).

2.2.2. Transient Excitation

One can understand transient excitations as those that excite the structure during very short
periods of time. This is the case of an impact made with an instrumented hammer in an EMA [38].
This kind of excitation is a broadband-type of excitation. In Francis turbines, this type of excitation is
found at the very beginning of every transient event (start-up, stop, change in loads . . . ). When the
guide vanes start to turn, the flow rate passing through the runner changes, and this may act as
an impact over the runner, exciting all its natural frequencies. The faster this process, the stronger
the impact on the runner [39]. This phenomenon was previously analyzed in hydraulic turbines by
Aguila et al. [40] to detect the natural frequencies of the rotor.

Furthermore, as mentioned in the section above, during part-load or overload resonances,
the runner receives strong pressure fluctuations which also act as strong impacts over the runner,
exciting its natural frequencies.

These phenomena occur in a very short time, and therefore the detection of the natural frequencies
of the runner is challenging and joint time–frequency methods with high resolution in time and in
frequency need to be applied in signal processing.

2.2.3. Random Excitation

When Francis turbines work at very low loads (DPL, deep part load), a random hydraulic
phenomenon related to the very turbulent flow appears [41]. The nature of this phenomenon is
completely stochastic and it is very difficult to estimate. Therefore, during the operation at this point,
the runner is excited with a random broadband excitation that is able to excite the different natural
frequencies of the runner. This phenomenon is even more important when the machine is working
at off-design heads [6]. Moreover, similar behavior happens when the machine is at speed no load
(SNL), where the flow rate is very small and the machine turns but without being synchronized with
the electrical grid [42]. This happens for a short time after every start-up.

Another random source of excitation that appears in Francis turbines is the cavitation, especially
the leading edge cavitation or the travelling-bubble cavitation [34]. The first appears for higher heads
than the design head in the inlet of the runner and the second is dependent on the lower reservoir level
and appears at the blades’ outlet. In both cases, the cavitation bubbles collapse randomly, provoking
erosion in the runner. These are very noisy types of cavitation, so they can excite the runner in a wide
range of frequency. Moreover, it should be considered that the cavitation phenomena can affect the
natural frequencies of the runner, since the added mass and stiffness of the water changes with the
appearance of vapor cavities [43].



Sensors 2018, 18, 174 6 of 19

In this case, it is also difficult to detect the natural frequencies of the runner, since the excitation
is always an unknown, so joint time–frequency signal-processing methods or spectrum-averaged
methods are needed.

3. Experimental Tests

3.1. Description of the Selected Turbine

For this study, a large medium-head Francis turbine was selected. This Francis Turbine has a
specific speed (ns) of 46 (further information about hydraulic turbines’ specific speed can be found
in [20]) and a rated power of 444 MW. The study of the dynamic behavior of this Francis Turbine is part
of the collaborative European Project Hyperbole (FP7-ENERGY-2013-1) [44]. The runner has 16 blades
(Zb = 16), whereas the distributor has 20 guide vanes (Zv = 20). The rotating speed of the machine is
128.6 rpm (2.14 Hz). Taking advantage of an overhaul in the power plant, the machine was accessible
enough to install several sensors in the rotating parts and in the stationary parts. The objective of these
tests was to identify all the phenomena that occur in every operating point and how they are detected
with the different sensors.

3.2. Instrumentation

The runner was instrumented with 24 strain gauges distributed in two different blades of the
runner, separated by 180 degrees between them (blades numbers 7 and 15) (see Figure 1). Six strain
gauges were installed in the pressure side of each blade, four in the crown side and two in the band
side, and another six strain gauges were installed in the suction side of the blade, again four in the
crown and two in the band side (see Figure 2). The strain gauges used had a gauge factor of 2, and a
sensitivity of 3.266 mV/(µm/m). After gluing the strain gauges in the runner, they were covered with
a special epoxy resin (Devcon Epoxy 14270) to protect them from the water. A detail of this resin
applied to the gauges is seen in Figure 2c,d.

Sensors 2018, 18, 174  6 of 19 

 

3. Experimental Tests 

3.1. Description of the Selected Turbine 

For this study, a large medium-head Francis turbine was selected. This Francis Turbine has a 
specific speed (ns) of 46 (further information about hydraulic turbines’ specific speed can be  
found in [20]) and a rated power of 444 MW. The study of the dynamic behavior of this Francis 
Turbine is part of the collaborative European Project Hyperbole (FP7-ENERGY-2013-1) [44]. The 
runner has 16 blades (Zb = 16), whereas the distributor has 20 guide vanes (Zv = 20). The rotating speed 
of the machine is 128.6 rpm (2.14 Hz). Taking advantage of an overhaul in the power plant, the 
machine was accessible enough to install several sensors in the rotating parts and in the stationary 
parts. The objective of these tests was to identify all the phenomena that occur in every operating point 
and how they are detected with the different sensors. 

3.2. Instrumentation 

The runner was instrumented with 24 strain gauges distributed in two different blades of the 
runner, separated by 180 degrees between them (blades numbers 7 and 15) (see Figure 1). Six strain 
gauges were installed in the pressure side of each blade, four in the crown side and two in the band 
side, and another six strain gauges were installed in the suction side of the blade, again four in the 
crown and two in the band side (see Figure 2). The strain gauges used had a gauge factor of 2, and a 
sensitivity of 3.266 mV/(μm/m). After gluing the strain gauges in the runner, they were covered with 
a special epoxy resin (Devcon Epoxy 14270) to protect them from the water. A detail of this resin 
applied to the gauges is seen in Figure 2c,d. 

(a) (b) 
Figure 1. Pictures of the Francis turbine runner studied. (a) Picture during the installation of the 
strain gauges in the runner; (b) detail of the runner blades. 

The strain gauges were connected to a telemetry system located in the hub of the  
runner (Figure 3c) using a quarter of a Wheatstone bridge for each one. This telemetry system was 
connected to a rotating antenna located in the tip of the turbine shaft, in the generator side (Figure 3b). 
A stationary antenna was located near the rotating antenna to receive the signals of every strain gauge 
during operation. Then, this stationary antenna was connected to a signal conditioner and to an 
acquisition system (Bruel & Kjaer LAN-XI Type 3053). A sketch of this installation is seen in Figure 3. 
Once everything was connected, every strain gauge was calibrated onsite using the shunt calibration 
technique. 

Figure 1. Pictures of the Francis turbine runner studied. (a) Picture during the installation of the strain
gauges in the runner; (b) detail of the runner blades.

The strain gauges were connected to a telemetry system located in the hub of the runner (Figure 3c)
using a quarter of a Wheatstone bridge for each one. This telemetry system was connected to a rotating
antenna located in the tip of the turbine shaft, in the generator side (Figure 3b). A stationary antenna
was located near the rotating antenna to receive the signals of every strain gauge during operation.
Then, this stationary antenna was connected to a signal conditioner and to an acquisition system (Bruel



Sensors 2018, 18, 174 7 of 19

& Kjaer LAN-XI Type 3053). A sketch of this installation is seen in Figure 3. Once everything was
connected, every strain gauge was calibrated onsite using the shunt calibration technique.Sensors 2018, 18, 174  7 of 19 

 

 
(a) (b)

 
(c) (d)

Figure 2. Detail of the strain gauges installed in the runner. (a) Strain gauges in the pressure side and 
band side; (b) strain gauges in the suction side and crown side; (c,d) detail of the epoxy resin 
covering the strain gauges. 

 
(b) 

 
(a) (c) 

Figure 3. Detail of the telemetry system installed in the rotating train of the Francis turbine. (a) Sketch 
of the telemetry system; (b) picture of the telemetry system installed in the hub of the runner; (c) 
rotating antenna at the tip of the shaft. 

Figure 2. Detail of the strain gauges installed in the runner. (a) Strain gauges in the pressure side and
band side; (b) strain gauges in the suction side and crown side; (c,d) detail of the epoxy resin covering
the strain gauges.

Sensors 2018, 18, 174  7 of 19 

 

 
(a) (b)

 
(c) (d)

Figure 2. Detail of the strain gauges installed in the runner. (a) Strain gauges in the pressure side and 
band side; (b) strain gauges in the suction side and crown side; (c,d) detail of the epoxy resin 
covering the strain gauges. 

 
(b) 

 
(a) (c) 

Figure 3. Detail of the telemetry system installed in the rotating train of the Francis turbine. (a) Sketch 
of the telemetry system; (b) picture of the telemetry system installed in the hub of the runner; (c) 
rotating antenna at the tip of the shaft. 

Figure 3. Detail of the telemetry system installed in the rotating train of the Francis turbine. (a) Sketch of
the telemetry system; (b) picture of the telemetry system installed in the hub of the runner; (c) rotating
antenna at the tip of the shaft.



Sensors 2018, 18, 174 8 of 19

Aside from the strain gauges, three accelerometers were also provisionally installed in the runner
to perform an EMA. The accelerometers (Kistler 8752A, 100 mV/g) were located axially at the inlet of
the runner in the crown and in the band, and radially in the band outlet. A sketch of the accelerometers’
locations is shown in Figure 4. The EMA was carried out using an instrumented hammer Dytran
5802A (Dytran, Chatsworth, CA, USA) (sensitivity 220 µV/N).

Sensors 2018, 18, 174  8 of 19 

 

Aside from the strain gauges, three accelerometers were also provisionally installed in the 
runner to perform an EMA. The accelerometers (Kistler 8752A, 100 mV/g) were located axially at the 
inlet of the runner in the crown and in the band, and radially in the band outlet. A sketch of the 
accelerometers’ locations is shown in Figure 4. The EMA was carried out using an instrumented 
hammer Dytran 5802A (Dytran, Chatsworth, CA, USA) (sensitivity 220 μV/N). 

 
(a) (b) 

Figure 4. Detail of sensors available during the experimental modal analysis (EMA). (a) Sketch of the 
location of the accelerometers; (b) picture of the accelerometer located in the band outlet. 

3.3. Testing Procedure 

First, an EMA was performed impacting the runner in 32 different points. During these tests, 
both strain gauges and accelerometers were installed. In that way, results obtained with strain 
gauges (SMT) could be compared with those obtained with the accelerometers. The runner was 
impacted radially in 16 positions of the band outlet (in the middle of every runner channel) and also 
radially in every blade (another 16 positions). For every point of impact, five different impacts were 
undertaken in order to compute the average of those impacts when analyzing. Accelerometers were 
not moved during the tests, only the impact position was changed. This method is called the roving 
hammer method. 

Once the EMA and the SMT were finished, the machine was prepared for working again. This 
process took two days of isolation of the machine. The experimental tests while in operation 
consisted of testing the different operating conditions of the machine. The net head remained 
constant during the tests, which at that time was 1.06 times the rated net head for that machine. The 
operating conditions tested were the following: 

1. Start-up (duration of 1 min): the machine goes from standstill to the nominal speed (128.6 rpm). 
2. Speed no load (SNL): the machine turns at nominal speed but without generating energy (no 

excitation in the generator). Low periodic excitation due to RSI and important random 
excitation due to turbulence. 

3. Deep part load (DPL): very low flow, so the machine was generating between 5% and 30% the 
rated power. Low periodic excitation due to RSI and important random excitation due to 
turbulence. 

4. Part load (PL): between 30% and 70% of the rated power. Medium periodic excitation of the RSI 
and high periodic excitation due to part-load vortex rope. 

5. Best efficiency point (BEP): for the head during the test, this point was at 90% of the rated 
power. High periodic excitation due to the RSI. 

6. Overload (OL): Between 100% and 108% of the rated power. High periodic excitation due to the 
RSI and due to the overload vortex rope. 

All the strain gauges worked properly during these tests. 
  

Figure 4. Detail of sensors available during the experimental modal analysis (EMA). (a) Sketch of the
location of the accelerometers; (b) picture of the accelerometer located in the band outlet.

3.3. Testing Procedure

First, an EMA was performed impacting the runner in 32 different points. During these tests, both
strain gauges and accelerometers were installed. In that way, results obtained with strain gauges (SMT)
could be compared with those obtained with the accelerometers. The runner was impacted radially in
16 positions of the band outlet (in the middle of every runner channel) and also radially in every blade
(another 16 positions). For every point of impact, five different impacts were undertaken in order to
compute the average of those impacts when analyzing. Accelerometers were not moved during the
tests, only the impact position was changed. This method is called the roving hammer method.

Once the EMA and the SMT were finished, the machine was prepared for working again.
This process took two days of isolation of the machine. The experimental tests while in operation
consisted of testing the different operating conditions of the machine. The net head remained constant
during the tests, which at that time was 1.06 times the rated net head for that machine. The operating
conditions tested were the following:

1. Start-up (duration of 1 min): the machine goes from standstill to the nominal speed (128.6 rpm).
2. Speed no load (SNL): the machine turns at nominal speed but without generating energy

(no excitation in the generator). Low periodic excitation due to RSI and important random
excitation due to turbulence.

3. Deep part load (DPL): very low flow, so the machine was generating between 5% and 30% the rated
power. Low periodic excitation due to RSI and important random excitation due to turbulence.

4. Part load (PL): between 30% and 70% of the rated power. Medium periodic excitation of the RSI
and high periodic excitation due to part-load vortex rope.

5. Best efficiency point (BEP): for the head during the test, this point was at 90% of the rated power.
High periodic excitation due to the RSI.

6. Overload (OL): Between 100% and 108% of the rated power. High periodic excitation due to the
RSI and due to the overload vortex rope.

All the strain gauges worked properly during these tests.



Sensors 2018, 18, 174 9 of 19

4. Signal Processing

In this section, the signal-processing methods used for every analysis of the strain gauges signals
are presented.

4.1. Strain Modal Testing

To analyze every point where the runner was impacted, a frequency response function (FRF)
between the accelerometers or strain gauges and the hammer was computed for each one. The average
in a frequency domain of 5 impacts was used taking 4 s of time signal and a frequency resolution
of 0.25 Hz (1600 Hz maximum frequency analyzed). The coherence function was also computed
between the accelerometers or strain gauges and the hammer in order to ensure the accuracy of the
experimental testing. In that way, one FRF was obtained for every strain gauge (24 in total) and for
every accelerometer (3 in total) for every point impacted (32 in total).

Using the 32 FRFs of one accelerometer, an operational deflection shape (ODS) of the runner can
be obtained. Furthermore, natural frequencies and damping associated with every mode shape can be
extracted using the complex mode indicator function (CMIF) method [38]. Once the mode shapes are
known, the FRFs of the accelerometers and strain gauges can be compared.

4.2. Joint Time–Frequency Analysis

To analyze the start-up and the stop of the machine, a joint time–frequency analysis with accurate
resolution in frequency and in time is necessary. When the guide vanes start to open, the water hits the
runner and excites its natural frequencies. Then, the machine starts to turn and increase its rotating
speed. This process occurs in about 50 s and it is clearly seen in Figure 5. Moreover, to analyze
the initial hit (see Figure 5), a joint time–frequency analysis is also needed. In both cases, a joint
time–frequency analysis using Morlet wavelets has been used [45].

Sensors 2018, 18, 174  9 of 19 

 

4. Signal Processing 

In this section, the signal-processing methods used for every analysis of the strain gauges 
signals are presented. 

4.1. Strain Modal Testing 

To analyze every point where the runner was impacted, a frequency response function (FRF) 
between the accelerometers or strain gauges and the hammer was computed for each one. The 
average in a frequency domain of 5 impacts was used taking 4 s of time signal and a frequency 
resolution of 0.25 Hz (1600 Hz maximum frequency analyzed). The coherence function was also 
computed between the accelerometers or strain gauges and the hammer in order to ensure the 
accuracy of the experimental testing. In that way, one FRF was obtained for every strain gauge (24 in 
total) and for every accelerometer (3 in total) for every point impacted (32 in total). 

Using the 32 FRFs of one accelerometer, an operational deflection shape (ODS) of the runner 
can be obtained. Furthermore, natural frequencies and damping associated with every mode shape 
can be extracted using the complex mode indicator function (CMIF) method [38]. Once the mode 
shapes are known, the FRFs of the accelerometers and strain gauges can be compared. 

4.2. Joint Time–Frequency Analysis 

To analyze the start-up and the stop of the machine, a joint time–frequency analysis with 
accurate resolution in frequency and in time is necessary. When the guide vanes start to open, the 
water hits the runner and excites its natural frequencies. Then, the machine starts to turn and 
increase its rotating speed. This process occurs in about 50 s and it is clearly seen in Figure 5. 
Moreover, to analyze the initial hit (see Figure 5), a joint time–frequency analysis is also needed. In 
both cases, a joint time–frequency analysis using Morlet wavelets has been used [45]. 

 
Figure 5. Time signal of the wicket gate opening, rotating speed and a strain gauge of the runner 
during the start-up of the machine. Figure 5. Time signal of the wicket gate opening, rotating speed and a strain gauge of the runner

during the start-up of the machine.



Sensors 2018, 18, 174 10 of 19

4.3. Averaged–Spectrum Analsysis

The runner is subjected to a random excitation due to turbulence when the machine works at
DPL. This kind of excitation excites the runner’s natural frequencies randomly, so a spectrum-average
analysis is useful to detect them. A spectrum-average method is based on the average of several FFT
(Fast Fourier Transform) along time. Some FFT may detect the runner’s natural frequencies and some
FFT may not, since they are excited randomly along time. The average of all of the computed FFT
permits us to estimate some of those excited natural frequencies. In this case, 100 averages during 170 s
were used with a resolution of 0.25 Hz and maximum analyzed frequency of 400 Hz (see Figure 6).
In comparison with a joint time–frequency method, this methods permits the analysis of more time
signal with less computational resources. For a constant operating condition, this method emphasizes
periodic and random excitations and vanishes transient short-time duration phenomena (see Figure 6).

Sensors 2018, 18, 174  10 of 19 

 

4.3. Averaged–Spectrum Analsysis 

The runner is subjected to a random excitation due to turbulence when the machine works at 
DPL. This kind of excitation excites the runner’s natural frequencies randomly, so a 
spectrum-average analysis is useful to detect them. A spectrum-average method is based on the 
average of several FFT (Fast Fourier Transform) along time. Some FFT may detect the runner’s 
natural frequencies and some FFT may not, since they are excited randomly along time. The average 
of all of the computed FFT permits us to estimate some of those excited natural frequencies. In this 
case, 100 averages during 170 s were used with a resolution of 0.25 Hz and maximum analyzed 
frequency of 400 Hz (see Figure 6). In comparison with a joint time–frequency method, this methods 
permits the analysis of more time signal with less computational resources. For a constant operating 
condition, this method emphasizes periodic and random excitations and vanishes transient 
short-time duration phenomena (see Figure 6). 

 
Figure 6. Comparison of an averaged-spectrum analysis (left) and a joint time–frequency analysis 
using wavelets (right) of a strain gauge signal during deep part load (DPL) operation. 

5. Results 

5.1. Natural Frequencies in Air 

The runner mode shapes, natural frequencies and damping ratios have been identified in air by 
means of the EMA and the ODS. They have been named according to the nomenclature explained in 
Section 2.1. Table 2 shows the first 12 mode-shapes, natural frequencies and damping ratios obtained 
within the frequency range 0–250 Hz with the EMA. Moreover, the ODS of these mode shapes are also 
seen in Figure 7 and in the supplementary videos S1 to S12 (see Supplementary Materials section). This 
picture also shows the FRFs of different points of the runner. It is clearly observed that there is a first 
zone (0 Hz to 150 Hz) where the band outlet deformation and the blades’ deformation is the same, so 
they have been called global modes (G). Then, there is another zone (150 Hz to 220 Hz) where the 

Figure 6. Comparison of an averaged-spectrum analysis (left) and a joint time–frequency analysis
using wavelets (right) of a strain gauge signal during deep part load (DPL) operation.

5. Results

5.1. Natural Frequencies in Air

The runner mode shapes, natural frequencies and damping ratios have been identified in air by
means of the EMA and the ODS. They have been named according to the nomenclature explained in
Section 2.1. Table 2 shows the first 12 mode-shapes, natural frequencies and damping ratios obtained
within the frequency range 0–250 Hz with the EMA. Moreover, the ODS of these mode shapes are also
seen in Figure 7 and in the supplementary videos S1 to S12 (see Supplementary Materials section).
This picture also shows the FRFs of different points of the runner. It is clearly observed that there is a
first zone (0 Hz to 150 Hz) where the band outlet deformation and the blades’ deformation is the same,



Sensors 2018, 18, 174 11 of 19

so they have been called global modes (G). Then, there is another zone (150 Hz to 220 Hz) where the
blade deformation is higher (BlD modes); whereas the last mode shape present higher deformation
in the crown inlet than in the band outlet or the blades. This mode shape has been named the crown
dominant mode shape (CD).

Table 2. First 12 mode shapes, natural frequencies and damping ratios of the runner in air. Results
obtained by means of the EMA.

Mode-Shape Number Mode-Shape Name fn [Hz] Damping Ratio [%]

1 2ND-G-IPh 46.44 1.0272
2 3ND-G-IPh 98.24 0.5498
3 1ND-G-IPh 129.14 2.4669
4 4ND-G-CPh 148.08 0.3094
5 2ND-BlD-IPh 155.58 0.3469
6 5ND-BlD-CPh 181.03 0.2713
7 3ND-BlD-IPh 192.48 0.2394
8 6ND-BlD-CPh 197.89 0.2894
9 0ND-BlD-IPh 206.85 0.2490
10 1ND-BlD-CPh 209.38 0.2413
11 1ND-BlD-IPh 216.99 0.8927
12 4ND-CD-IPh 233.25 0.2550

Sensors 2018, 18, 174  11 of 19 

 

blade deformation is higher (BlD modes); whereas the last mode shape present higher deformation in 
the crown inlet than in the band outlet or the blades. This mode shape has been named the crown 
dominant mode shape (CD). 

Table 2. First 12 mode shapes, natural frequencies and damping ratios of the runner in air. Results 
obtained by means of the EMA. 

Mode-Shape Number Mode-Shape Name fn [Hz] Damping Ratio [%] 
1 2ND-G-IPh 46.44 1.0272 
2 3ND-G-IPh 98.24 0.5498 
3 1ND-G-IPh 129.14 2.4669 
4 4ND-G-CPh 148.08 0.3094 
5 2ND-BlD-IPh 155.58 0.3469 
6 5ND-BlD-CPh 181.03 0.2713 
7 3ND-BlD-IPh 192.48 0.2394 
8 6ND-BlD-CPh 197.89 0.2894 
9 0ND-BlD-IPh 206.85 0.2490 

10 1ND-BlD-CPh 209.38 0.2413 
11 1ND-BlD-IPh 216.99 0.8927 
12 4ND-CD-IPh 233.25 0.2550 

 
Figure 7. Frequency response function (FRF) in different points of the runner (0–250 Hz), as well as 
the operational deflection shape (ODS) of every runner mode shape associated with every natural 
frequency. Maximum displacement is colored red, and minimum displacement is colored blue. 
Videos of the mode shapes are found the Supplementary Materials section (S1 to S12). 

Once the mode shapes and natural frequencies have been identified with the EMA using 
accelerometers, it is necessary to see how these mode shapes are detected with all the different strain 
gauges installed in the runner. Figure 8 shows the FRFs of different strain gauges located in the 
runner when it was impacted in one of the blades, in this case, blade 7. They have been classified 
according to the side of the blade where they are located (pressure side or suction side) and if they 
are near the crown or the band (crown side or band side). It can be seen that, depending on the 
location of the strain gauge, natural frequencies are detected or not, and with different amplitudes. 

Figure 7. Frequency response function (FRF) in different points of the runner (0–250 Hz), as well as the
operational deflection shape (ODS) of every runner mode shape associated with every natural frequency.
Maximum displacement is colored red, and minimum displacement is colored blue. Videos of the
mode shapes are found the Supplementary Materials section (S1 to S12).

Once the mode shapes and natural frequencies have been identified with the EMA using
accelerometers, it is necessary to see how these mode shapes are detected with all the different
strain gauges installed in the runner. Figure 8 shows the FRFs of different strain gauges located in
the runner when it was impacted in one of the blades, in this case, blade 7. They have been classified
according to the side of the blade where they are located (pressure side or suction side) and if they are
near the crown or the band (crown side or band side). It can be seen that, depending on the location of



Sensors 2018, 18, 174 12 of 19

the strain gauge, natural frequencies are detected or not, and with different amplitudes. Only the real
part of the FRF is shown in the picture to see graphically if the strain gauges of blade 7 and blade 15
(separated by 180◦) are in phase or in counter-phase.

Sensors 2018, 18, 174  12 of 19 

 

Only the real part of the FRF is shown in the picture to see graphically if the strain gauges of blade 7 
and blade 15 (separated by 180°) are in phase or in counter-phase. 

 
Figure 8. FRFs (only the real part) of different strain gauges with the hammer as a reference (impact 
in blade 7). 

It can be observed that the natural frequencies are detected better on the pressure side of the 
blade. On the suction side of the blade, they are not detected or they present very low amplitudes. In 
comparison with the accelerometer, with the strain gauges only 8 natural frequencies are detected. 
Mode shapes 1, 3, 5, 7 (see Table 2) are not detected with the strain gauges, possibly because they 
present low local displacement in the location of the strain gauges or because the impact force was 
not enough to excite them. However, the rest of the mode shapes are detected with the 
corresponding phase between the two blades: 0ND, 2ND, 4ND and 6ND modes present in phase 
amplitudes in both blades, and 1ND, 3ND and 5ND modes present in counter-phase amplitudes in 
both blades. This information is essential for detecting every mode shape with the runner in 
operation. 

5.2. Natural Frequencies under Operating Conditions 

According to previous studies [10,22–24], the natural frequencies of Francis turbine runners 
decrease when they are confined in water. Depending on the mode shape and the confining 
distances, they can be of about 50% the natural frequency in air. In this section, the detection of the 
natural frequencies of the Francis turbine runner studied is discussed for different operating 
conditions of the machine. 

5.2.1. Start-Up 

During the start-up, the natural frequencies may be excited first with the initial hit of the water 
to the runner and then with the RSI during the acceleration of the machine (see Figure 5). Figure 9 
shows the results obtained for the joint time–frequency analysis using wavelets of a strain gauge 
located in the crown side and the pressure side of blade 7. It can be seen that many frequencies are 
excited during the first 10 s of the start-up, corresponding to the initial hit of the water on the runner. 
Four different frequencies can be identified at this moment: 25, 35, 70, 100 and 123 Hz. These 

Figure 8. FRFs (only the real part) of different strain gauges with the hammer as a reference (impact in
blade 7).

It can be observed that the natural frequencies are detected better on the pressure side of the
blade. On the suction side of the blade, they are not detected or they present very low amplitudes.
In comparison with the accelerometer, with the strain gauges only 8 natural frequencies are detected.
Mode shapes 1, 3, 5, 7 (see Table 2) are not detected with the strain gauges, possibly because they
present low local displacement in the location of the strain gauges or because the impact force was
not enough to excite them. However, the rest of the mode shapes are detected with the corresponding
phase between the two blades: 0ND, 2ND, 4ND and 6ND modes present in phase amplitudes in
both blades, and 1ND, 3ND and 5ND modes present in counter-phase amplitudes in both blades.
This information is essential for detecting every mode shape with the runner in operation.

5.2. Natural Frequencies under Operating Conditions

According to previous studies [10,22–24], the natural frequencies of Francis turbine runners
decrease when they are confined in water. Depending on the mode shape and the confining distances,
they can be of about 50% the natural frequency in air. In this section, the detection of the natural
frequencies of the Francis turbine runner studied is discussed for different operating conditions of
the machine.

5.2.1. Start-Up

During the start-up, the natural frequencies may be excited first with the initial hit of the water to
the runner and then with the RSI during the acceleration of the machine (see Figure 5). Figure 9 shows
the results obtained for the joint time–frequency analysis using wavelets of a strain gauge located in



Sensors 2018, 18, 174 13 of 19

the crown side and the pressure side of blade 7. It can be seen that many frequencies are excited during
the first 10 s of the start-up, corresponding to the initial hit of the water on the runner. Four different
frequencies can be identified at this moment: 25, 35, 70, 100 and 123 Hz. These frequencies may be the
first natural frequencies of the runner in water and without rotation (at this moment, the runner is
just starting to rotate). After the first 10 s of the start-up, the turbine starts to accelerate and the first
excitation line of the RSI is clearly identified (f1). The second and third excitation lines due to the RSI
are highlighted using a dotted red line (see Figure 9). During this acceleration, a frequency of 27 Hz
is excited with high amplitude with the first excitation line (marked with a circle in the figure) and
another frequency of 75 Hz is also excited with the third excitation line (again marked with a circle
in the figure). These two frequencies seem to correspond, respectively, to those found at 25 Hz and
70 Hz in the beginning of the transient. The slight increase of these natural frequencies could be due to
different amounts of cavitation between the initial hit and the acceleration of the machine, or because
the natural frequencies of the runner are also affected by the rotating speed of the machine, as Presas
et al. found in their experimental study [12].

Sensors 2018, 18, 174  13 of 19 

 

frequencies may be the first natural frequencies of the runner in water and without rotation (at this 
moment, the runner is just starting to rotate). After the first 10 s of the start-up, the turbine starts to 
accelerate and the first excitation line of the RSI is clearly identified (f1). The second and third 
excitation lines due to the RSI are highlighted using a dotted red line (see Figure 9). During this 
acceleration, a frequency of 27 Hz is excited with high amplitude with the first excitation line 
(marked with a circle in the figure) and another frequency of 75 Hz is also excited with the third 
excitation line (again marked with a circle in the figure). These two frequencies seem to correspond, 
respectively, to those found at 25 Hz and 70 Hz in the beginning of the transient. The slight increase 
of these natural frequencies could be due to different amounts of cavitation between the initial hit 
and the acceleration of the machine, or because the natural frequencies of the runner are also affected 
by the rotating speed of the machine, as Presas et al. found in their experimental study [12]. 

 
Figure 9. Joint time–frequency plot of a strain-gauge signal (crown side, pressure side, blade 7) 
during the initial hit. 

To confirm that these excited frequencies are natural frequencies of the runner, other operating 
conditions have been analyzed, as well as detection with the other strain gauges installed. 

5.2.2. Deep Part Load 

During DPL, where the turbine operates with very low flow and power, the turbulence is one of 
the most important excitation phenomena (see Section 2.2.3). In this situation, the runner is excited 
randomly, hence some of its natural frequencies may be detected. Figure 10 shows the joint  
time-frequency (using wavelets) plot of 4 s of a strain gauge signal during DPL operation. A random 
excitation of some frequencies in the range of 120–123 Hz and with less amplitude in the zone of 28 Hz 
can be observed. These frequencies could be natural frequencies of the runner. 

Figure 9. Joint time–frequency plot of a strain-gauge signal (crown side, pressure side, blade 7) during
the initial hit.

To confirm that these excited frequencies are natural frequencies of the runner, other operating
conditions have been analyzed, as well as detection with the other strain gauges installed.

5.2.2. Deep Part Load

During DPL, where the turbine operates with very low flow and power, the turbulence is one
of the most important excitation phenomena (see Section 2.2.3). In this situation, the runner is
excited randomly, hence some of its natural frequencies may be detected. Figure 10 shows the joint
time-frequency (using wavelets) plot of 4 s of a strain gauge signal during DPL operation. A random
excitation of some frequencies in the range of 120–123 Hz and with less amplitude in the zone of 28 Hz
can be observed. These frequencies could be natural frequencies of the runner.



Sensors 2018, 18, 174 14 of 19Sensors 2018, 18, 174  14 of 19 

 

 
Figure 10. Joint time–frequency plot of a strain gauge signal (crown side, pressure side, blade 7) 
during DPL (18% of rated power). 

Further analysis using the averaged-spectrum method were also applied to a larger time signal 
of the same strain gauge (see Figure 11). In this figure, the average of 100 spectra during 170 s was 
plotted for DPL operation and BEP operation. It can be seen that a zone between 120–123 Hz is 
clearly excited in DPL, but not in BEP. Moreover, looking at the different strain gauges installed in 
the runner (Figure 12), it can be clearly observed that this zone (120–123 Hz) is more excited in the 
pressure side than in the suction side (in the suction side it is only detected in the band strain 
gauges). This is the same behavior as obtained for the natural frequencies of the runner in air (Figure 
8), so it can be confirmed that it is a natural frequency of the runner in water. Moreover, this natural 
frequency is rather near the third harmonic excitation of the RSI (f3 = 128.4 Hz), which according to 
Table 1 (column 3) is mainly a kn.m = 4 excitation; so it seems that it is more excited than other 
frequencies because it may be a 4ND mode shape. According to the natural frequencies in air and 
previous knowledge about natural frequencies in water of Francis turbines [10,22–24], this natural 
frequency (120–123 Hz) may correspond to the mode shape called “4ND-CD-IPh” in Table 2. This 
means that this mode shape has a reduction of 52% of the natural frequency in air when in operating 
conditions. 

 
Figure 11. Averaged-spectrum analysis of a strain-gauge signal (crown side, pressure side, blade 7) 
during (a) DPL (18% of rated power); and (b) best efficiency point (BEP) (90% of rated power). 

Figure 10. Joint time–frequency plot of a strain gauge signal (crown side, pressure side, blade 7) during
DPL (18% of rated power).

Further analysis using the averaged-spectrum method were also applied to a larger time signal
of the same strain gauge (see Figure 11). In this figure, the average of 100 spectra during 170 s was
plotted for DPL operation and BEP operation. It can be seen that a zone between 120–123 Hz is clearly
excited in DPL, but not in BEP. Moreover, looking at the different strain gauges installed in the runner
(Figure 12), it can be clearly observed that this zone (120–123 Hz) is more excited in the pressure side
than in the suction side (in the suction side it is only detected in the band strain gauges). This is
the same behavior as obtained for the natural frequencies of the runner in air (Figure 8), so it can
be confirmed that it is a natural frequency of the runner in water. Moreover, this natural frequency
is rather near the third harmonic excitation of the RSI (f3 = 128.4 Hz), which according to Table 1
(column 3) is mainly a kn.m = 4 excitation; so it seems that it is more excited than other frequencies
because it may be a 4ND mode shape. According to the natural frequencies in air and previous
knowledge about natural frequencies in water of Francis turbines [10,22–24], this natural frequency
(120–123 Hz) may correspond to the mode shape called “4ND-CD-IPh” in Table 2. This means that this
mode shape has a reduction of 52% of the natural frequency in air when in operating conditions.

Sensors 2018, 18, 174  14 of 19 

 

 
Figure 10. Joint time–frequency plot of a strain gauge signal (crown side, pressure side, blade 7) 
during DPL (18% of rated power). 

Further analysis using the averaged-spectrum method were also applied to a larger time signal 
of the same strain gauge (see Figure 11). In this figure, the average of 100 spectra during 170 s was 
plotted for DPL operation and BEP operation. It can be seen that a zone between 120–123 Hz is 
clearly excited in DPL, but not in BEP. Moreover, looking at the different strain gauges installed in 
the runner (Figure 12), it can be clearly observed that this zone (120–123 Hz) is more excited in the 
pressure side than in the suction side (in the suction side it is only detected in the band strain 
gauges). This is the same behavior as obtained for the natural frequencies of the runner in air (Figure 
8), so it can be confirmed that it is a natural frequency of the runner in water. Moreover, this natural 
frequency is rather near the third harmonic excitation of the RSI (f3 = 128.4 Hz), which according to 
Table 1 (column 3) is mainly a kn.m = 4 excitation; so it seems that it is more excited than other 
frequencies because it may be a 4ND mode shape. According to the natural frequencies in air and 
previous knowledge about natural frequencies in water of Francis turbines [10,22–24], this natural 
frequency (120–123 Hz) may correspond to the mode shape called “4ND-CD-IPh” in Table 2. This 
means that this mode shape has a reduction of 52% of the natural frequency in air when in operating 
conditions. 

 
Figure 11. Averaged-spectrum analysis of a strain-gauge signal (crown side, pressure side, blade 7) 
during (a) DPL (18% of rated power); and (b) best efficiency point (BEP) (90% of rated power). 

Figure 11. Averaged-spectrum analysis of a strain-gauge signal (crown side, pressure side, blade 7)
during (a) DPL (18% of rated power); and (b) best efficiency point (BEP) (90% of rated power).



Sensors 2018, 18, 174 15 of 19

Sensors 2018, 18, 174  15 of 19 

 

 
Figure 12. Averaged-spectrum analysis of a different strain gauges during DPL (18% of rated power). 

5.2.3. Overload 

During the OL operation, the runner receives large pressure pulses due to the overload vortex 
rope, which can act as strong impacts over the structure exciting all its natural frequencies (see Section 
2.2.1). Figure 13 shows a joint time–frequency analysis of a strain-gauge signal during 4 s. The strong 
periodic (fvortex rope) fluctuations due to the vortex rope can be observed clearly in the time plot. Every 
maximum of these fluctuations correspond to a strong shake of the runner, exciting all its natural 
frequencies. Different frequencies are excited during this moment: 28 Hz, 35 Hz, 75 Hz, 90–100 Hz  
and 120–123 Hz. 

 
Figure 13. Joint time–frequency plot of a strain-gauge signal (crown side, pressure side, blade 7) 
during overload (OL) condition (107% of rated power). 

Figure 12. Averaged-spectrum analysis of a different strain gauges during DPL (18% of rated power).

5.2.3. Overload

During the OL operation, the runner receives large pressure pulses due to the overload vortex rope,
which can act as strong impacts over the structure exciting all its natural frequencies (see Section 2.2.1).
Figure 13 shows a joint time–frequency analysis of a strain-gauge signal during 4 s. The strong
periodic (fvortex rope) fluctuations due to the vortex rope can be observed clearly in the time plot.
Every maximum of these fluctuations correspond to a strong shake of the runner, exciting all its natural
frequencies. Different frequencies are excited during this moment: 28 Hz, 35 Hz, 75 Hz, 90–100 Hz
and 120–123 Hz.

Sensors 2018, 18, 174  15 of 19 

 

 
Figure 12. Averaged-spectrum analysis of a different strain gauges during DPL (18% of rated power). 

5.2.3. Overload 

During the OL operation, the runner receives large pressure pulses due to the overload vortex 
rope, which can act as strong impacts over the structure exciting all its natural frequencies (see Section 
2.2.1). Figure 13 shows a joint time–frequency analysis of a strain-gauge signal during 4 s. The strong 
periodic (fvortex rope) fluctuations due to the vortex rope can be observed clearly in the time plot. Every 
maximum of these fluctuations correspond to a strong shake of the runner, exciting all its natural 
frequencies. Different frequencies are excited during this moment: 28 Hz, 35 Hz, 75 Hz, 90–100 Hz  
and 120–123 Hz. 

 
Figure 13. Joint time–frequency plot of a strain-gauge signal (crown side, pressure side, blade 7) 
during overload (OL) condition (107% of rated power). 

Figure 13. Joint time–frequency plot of a strain-gauge signal (crown side, pressure side, blade 7) during
overload (OL) condition (107% of rated power).



Sensors 2018, 18, 174 16 of 19

All the frequencies excited under the three different operating conditions analyzed are listed in
Table 3. Some of them can be correlated to a mode shape by means of analyzing phases and amplitudes
between all gauges or excitation patterns. However, there are two that can correspond to different
mode shapes, so they have not been classified. The ratio between the natural frequency in water and in
air is also shown in Table 3. The values are of about 50–60% the natural frequency in air, which matches
the expected values according to literature [10,22–24].

Table 3. Natural frequencies of the runner detected while in operation.

Frequency Detected in Operation (Hz) Start-Up DPL OL Mode Shape fair (Hz) fwater/fair

28 Yes Yes Yes 2ND-G-IPh 46.44 0.6029
35 Yes No Yes - -
75 Yes No Yes 4ND-G-CPh 148.08 0.5065

100 Yes No Yes - -
123 Yes Yes Yes 4ND-CD-IPh 233.25 0.5273

6. Conclusions

The feasibility of detecting natural frequencies of hydraulic turbine runners using strain gauges
has been studied. Strain gauges are sometimes used to measure the stresses of hydraulic turbine
runners in operation during commissioning, but they were never used to detect the natural frequencies
of the runner. In this study, this is undertaken in a large hydraulic turbine prototype (444 MW of rated
power). For that purpose, several strain gauges were installed in the runner and their signals were
measured under different operating conditions.

First of all, strain modal testing (SMT) on the runner in air was performed and the results were
compared with an experimental modal analysis (EMA) carried out using accelerometers. The first
12 natural frequencies and mode shapes of the runner in air were determined. After that, three different
operating conditions of the hydraulic turbine were analyzed: the start-up, the overload, and the deep
part load conditions. Different signal analysis methods were applied to every operating condition in
order to detect the runner’s natural frequencies.

During the start-up of the machine, the natural frequencies of the runner were excited by means of
the initial hit of the water on the runner. At this moment, some natural frequencies could be identified
by means of a joint time–frequency analysis. Moreover, during acceleration of the machine, some of
those natural frequencies were also excited by the rotor-stator interaction.

Similar behavior occurs during the overload condition. In this condition, the runner receives large
pressure pulses produced by a cavitating vortex rope. These strong pressure pulses act as impacts,
so all the runner’s natural frequencies are excited. The same natural frequencies as in the start-up were
detected during the overload condition when applying a joint time–frequency analysis.

During the deep part load operation, when the runner is subjected to random excitation due to
flow turbulence, two of the frequencies detected during the start-up and overload conditions were also
excited. One of them (123 Hz) is clearly detected with a spectrum-averaged analysis in the different
strain gauges. Thanks to the information obtained with the strain modal testing in air, this natural
frequency could be identified as a 4ND mode shape.

The natural frequencies detected under operating conditions have been associated with those
detected in air by means of the relative amplitudes and phases between strain gauges and previous
knowledge of Francis turbines’ modal behavior. Analysis of the three operating conditions was
necessary in order to correlate every natural frequency with the type of mode shape. The reduction
of the natural frequencies under operating conditions in comparison with the natural frequencies of
the runner in air is about 50–60% depending on the mode shape, values that match well some results
obtained in literature by numerical simulations.



Sensors 2018, 18, 174 17 of 19

Supplementary Materials: The following videos are available online at http://www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/18/
1/174/s1, Video S1: 2ND-G-IPh, Video S2: 3ND-G-IPh, Video S3: 1ND-G-IPh, Video S4: 4ND-G-IPh, Video S5:
2ND-BlD-IPh, Video S6: 5ND-BlD-CPh, Video S7: 3ND-BlD-IPh, Video S8: 6ND-BlD-CPh, Video S9: 0ND-BlD-IPh,
Video S10: 1ND-BlD-CPh, Video S11: 1ND-BlD-IPh, Video S12: 4ND-CD-IPh.

Acknowledgments: The authors would like to acknowledge HYPERBOLE research project, granted by the
European Commission (ERC/FP7-ENERGY-2013-1-Grant 608532). The authors would also like to thank BC Hydro
for making possible the experimental tests in the prototype, and Johannes Loefflad, Efstathios Sidiropoulos and
Philipp Conrad for the strain gauges and telemetry system installation.

Author Contributions: D.V., A.P. and E.E. performed the experiments; M.B. and M.E. performed the signal
analysis; and E.E. and C.V. designed the experiments and reviewed the manuscript. The paper was written by D.V.

Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest.

References

1. International Energy Agency (IEA). Key World Energy Trends. Excerpt from: World Energy Balances; IEA: Paris,
France, 2016.

2. Huang, X.; Chamberland-Lauzon, J.; Oram, C.; Klopfer, A.; Ruchonnet, N. Fatigue Analyses of the Prototype
Francis Runners Based on Site Measurements and Simulations. IOP Conf. Ser.: Earth Environ. Sci. 2014, 22,
012014. [CrossRef]

3. Ohashi, H. Case Study of Pump Failure Due to Rotor-Stator Interaction. Int. J. Rotat. Mach. 1994, 1, 53–60.
[CrossRef]

4. Egusquiza, E.; Valero, C.; Huang, X.; Jou, E.; Guardo, A.; Rodriguez, C. Failure investigation of a large
pump-turbine runner. Eng. Fail. Anal. 2012, 23, 27–34. [CrossRef]

5. Trivedi, C. A review on fluid structure interaction in hydraulic turbines: A focus on hydrodynamic damping.
Eng. Fail. Anal. 2017, 77, 1–22. [CrossRef]

6. Egusquiza, E.; Valero, C.; Valentin, D.; Presas, A.; Rodriguez, C.G. Condition monitoring of pump-turbines.
New challenges. Measurement 2015, 67, 151–163.

7. Valentín, D.; Presas, A.; Egusquiza, E.; Valero, C. Experimental study on the added mass and damping of a
disk submerged in a partially fluid-filled tank with small radial confinement. J. Fluids Struct. 2014, 50, 1–17.
[CrossRef]

8. Valentín, D.; Ramos, D.; Bossio, M.; Presas, A.; Egusquiza, E.; Valero, C. Influence of the Boundary Conditions
on the Natural Frequencies of a Francis Turbine. IOP Conf. Ser.: Earth Environ. Sci. 2016, 49, 072004.

9. Egusquiza, E.; Valero, C.; Presas, A.; Huang, X.; Guardo, A.; Seidel, U. Analysis of the dynamic response of
pump-turbine impellers. Influence of the rotor. Mech. Syst. Sign. Process. 2016, 68, 330–341. [CrossRef]

10. Liang, Q.W.; Rodríguez, C.G.; Egusquiza, E.; Escaler, X.; Farhat, M.; Avellan, F. Numerical simulation of fluid
added mass effect on a francis turbine runner. Comput. Fluids 2007, 36, 1106–1118. [CrossRef]

11. Egusquiza, E.; Valero, C.; Liang, Q.; Coussirat, M.; Seidel, U. Fluid Added Mass Effect in the Modal Response
of a Pump-Turbine Impeller. In Proceedings of the ASME 2009 International Design Engineering Technical
Conferences and Computers and Information in Engineering Conference, San Diego, CA, USA, 2 September
2009; American Society of Mechanical Engineers: New York, NY, USA, 2009; pp. 715–724.

12. Presas, A.; Valentin, D.; Egusquiza, E.; Valero, C.; Seidel, U. Influence of the rotation on the natural frequencies
of a submerged-confined disk in water. J. Sound Vib. 2015, 337, 161–180. [CrossRef]

13. Presas, A.; Valentin, D.; Egusquiza, E.; Valero, C.; Seidel, U. On the detection of natural frequencies and
mode shapes of submerged rotating disk-like structures from the casing. Mech. Syst. Sign. Process. 2015, 60,
547–570. [CrossRef]

14. Mao, Z.; Wang, Z. Structural Characteristic in Prototype Runner of Francis Turbine Analysis. In Proceedings
of the International Symposium on Transport Phenomena and Dynamics of Rotating Machinery, Honolulu,
HI, USA, 10–15 April 2016.

15. Gagnon, M.; Tahan, S.A.; Bocher, P.; Thibault, D. Impact of startup scheme on Francis runner life expectancy.
IOP Conf. Ser.: Earth Environ. Sci. 2010, 12, 012107. [CrossRef]

16. Nennemann, B.; Morissette, J.F.; Chamberland-Lauzon, J.; Monette, C.; Braun, O.; Melot, M.; Coutu, A.;
Nicolle, J.; Giroux, A.M. Challenges in Dynamic Pressure and Stress Predictions at No-Load Operation in
Hydraulic Turbines. IOP Conf. Ser.: Earth Environ. Sci. 2014, 22, 032055. [CrossRef]

http://www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/18/1/174/s1
http://www.mdpi.com/1424-8220/18/1/174/s1
http://dx.doi.org/10.1088/1755-1315/22/1/012014
http://dx.doi.org/10.1155/S1023621X94000059
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.engfailanal.2012.01.012
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.engfailanal.2017.02.021
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jfluidstructs.2014.06.006
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ymssp.2015.05.034
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compfluid.2006.08.007
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jsv.2014.10.032
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ymssp.2015.01.013
http://dx.doi.org/10.1088/1755-1315/12/1/012107
http://dx.doi.org/10.1088/1755-1315/22/3/032055


Sensors 2018, 18, 174 18 of 19

17. Kranjc, T.; Slavič, J.; Boltežar, M. The mass normalization of the displacement and strain mode shapes in
a strain experimental modal analysis using the mass-change strategy. J. Sound Vib. 2013, 332, 6968–6981.
[CrossRef]

18. Mucchi, E. On the comparison between displacement modal testing and strain modal testing. Proc. Inst.
Mech. Eng. Part C 2016, 230, 3389–3396. [CrossRef]

19. Liu, X.; Luo, Y.; Wang, Z. A review on fatigue damage mechanism in hydro turbines. Renew. Sustain.
Energy Rev. 2016, 54, 1–14. [CrossRef]

20. Trivedi, C.; Cervantes, M.J. Fluid-structure interactions in Francis turbines: A perspective review.
Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2017, 68, 87–101. [CrossRef]

21. Valentín, D.; Presas, A.; Egusquiza, E.; Valero, C.; Bossio, M. Dynamic Response of the MICA Runner.
Experiment and Simulation. J. Phys.: Conf. Ser. 2017, 813, 012036.

22. Rodriguez, C.G.; Egusquiza, E.; Escaler, X.; Liang, Q.W.; Avellan, F. Experimental investigation of added
mass effects on a Francis turbine runner in still water. J. Fluids Struct. 2006, 22, 699–712. [CrossRef]

23. Lais, S.; Liang, Q.; Henggeler, U.; Weiss, T.; Escaler, X.; Egusquiza, E. Dynamic Analysis of Francis
Runners—Experiment and Numerical Simulation. Int. J. Fluids Mach. Syst. 2009, 2, 303–314. [CrossRef]

24. Flores, M.; Urquiza, G.; Rodríguez, J.M. A fatigue analysis of a hydraulic Francis turbine runner. World J. Mech.
2012, 2, 28–34. [CrossRef]

25. Woon, C.; Mitchell, L.D. Second International Conference on Vibration Measurements by Laser Techniques:
Advances and Applications. In Temperature-Induced Variations in Structural Dynamic Characteristicspart II:
Analytical; International Society for Optics and Photonics: Bellingham, WA, USA, 1996; pp. 58–70.

26. Bossio, M.; Valentín, D.; Presas, A.; Martin, D.R.; Egusquiza, E.; Valero, C.; Egusquiza, M. Numerical study
on the influence of acoustic natural frequencies on the dynamic behaviour of submerged and confined
disk-like structures. J. Fluids Struct. 2017, 73, 53–69. [CrossRef]

27. Jazar, R.N. Advanced Vibrations: A Modern Approach; Springer: Berlin, Germany, 2005.
28. Tanaka, H. Vibration behavior and dynamic stress of runners of very high head reversible pump-turbines.

Int. J. Fluid Mach. Syst. 2011, 4, 289–306. [CrossRef]
29. Nicolet, C.; Ruchonnet, N.; Avellan, F. One-Dimensional Modeling of Rotor Stator Interaction in Francis

Turbine. In Proceedings of the 23rd IAHR Symposium, Yokohama, Japan, 17–21 October 2006; IAHR:
Yokohama, Japan, 2016.

30. Dubas, M. Über die Erregung infolge der Periodizität von Turbomaschinen. M. Ing. Arch. 1984, 54, 413–426.
[CrossRef]

31. Rodriguez, C.G.; Mateos-Prieto, B.; Egusquiza, E. Monitoring of Rotor-Stator Interaction in Pump-Turbine
Using Vibrations Measured with On-Board Sensors Rotating with Shaft. Shock Vib. 2014, 2014, 8. [CrossRef]

32. Rodriguez, C.G.; Egusquiza, E.; Santos, I.F. Frequencies in the Vibration Induced by the Rotor Stator
Interaction in a Centrifugal Pump Turbine. J. Fluids Eng. 2007, 129, 1428–1435. [CrossRef]

33. Presas, A.; Egusquiza, E.; Valero, C.; Valentin, D.; Seidel, U. Feasibility of Using PZT Actuators to Study
the Dynamic Behavior of a Rotating Disk due to Rotor-Stator Interaction. Sensors 2014, 14, 11919–11942.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]

34. Escaler, X.; Egusquiza, E.; Farhat, M.; Avellan, F.; Coussirat, M. Detection of cavitation in hydraulic turbines.
Mechan. Syst. Sign. Process. 2006, 20, 983–1007. [CrossRef]

35. Kumar, P.; Saini, R.P. Study of cavitation in hydro turbines—A review. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2010, 14,
374–383. [CrossRef]

36. Valentín, D.; Presas, A.; Egusquiza, E.; Valero, C.; Egusquiza, M.; Bossio, M. Power Swing Generated in
Francis Turbines by Part Load and Overload Instabilities. Energies 2017, 10, 2124. [CrossRef]

37. Presas, A.; Valentin, D.; Egusquiza, E.; Valero, C. Detection and Analysis of Part Load and Full Load
Instabilities in a Real Francis Turbine Prototype. J. Phys.: Conf. Ser. 2017, 813, 012038. [CrossRef]

38. Ewins, D.J. Modal Testing: Theory and Practice; Research Studies Press: Letchworth, UK, 1984; p. 15.
39. Grein, H. Vibration Phenomena in Francis Turbines: Their Causes and Prevention. In Proceedings of the

10th IAHR Symposium in Hydraulic Machinery Equipments and Cavitation, Tokyo, Japan, 28 September–2
October 1980; pp. 527–539.

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jsv.2013.08.015
http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0954406215614599
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2015.09.025
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2016.09.121
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jfluidstructs.2006.04.001
http://dx.doi.org/10.5293/IJFMS.2009.2.4.303
http://dx.doi.org/10.4236/wjm.2012.21004
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jfluidstructs.2017.05.008
http://dx.doi.org/10.5293/IJFMS.2011.4.2.289
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/BF00537373
http://dx.doi.org/10.1155/2014/276796
http://dx.doi.org/10.1115/1.2786489
http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/s140711919
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25004151
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ymssp.2004.08.006
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2009.07.024
http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/en10122124
http://dx.doi.org/10.1088/1742-6596/813/1/012038


Sensors 2018, 18, 174 19 of 19

40. Aguila, H.; Egusquiza, E.; Jou, E.; Estevez, A.; Cabrera, J. Detection of Rotor Natural Frequencies in Hydro
Powerplants. In Proceedings of the 9th International Meeting of the Working Group on the Behaviour of
Hydraulic Machinery under Steady Oscillatory Conditions, Brno, Czech Republic, 7–9 September 1999;
IAHR: Brno, Czech Republic, 1999.

41. Weber, W.; von Locquenghien, F.; Conrad, P.; Koutnik, J. Dynamic Stresses in a Francis Model Turbine at
Deep Part Load. J. Phys.: Conf. Ser. 2017, 813, 012014. [CrossRef]

42. Morissette, J.; Chamberland-Lauzon, J.; Nennemann, B.; Monette, C.; Giroux, A.; Coutu, A.; Nicolle, J.
Stress Predictions in a Francis Turbine at No-Load Operating Regime. IOP Conf. Ser.: Earth Environ. Sci. 2016,
49, 072016. [CrossRef]

43. De La Torre, O.; Escaler, X.; Egusquiza, E.; Farhat, M. Experimental investigation of added mass effects on a
hydrofoil under cavitation conditions. J. Fluids Struct. 2013, 39, 173–187. [CrossRef]

44. I HYdropower Plants PERformance and Flexible Operation towards Lean Integration of New Renewable
Energies. Available online: https://hyperbole.epfl.ch (accessed on 15 September 2017).

45. Newland, D.E. Wavelet Analysis of Vibration: Part 1—Theory. J. Vib. Acoust. 1994, 116, 409–416. [CrossRef]

© 2018 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

http://dx.doi.org/10.1088/1742-6596/813/1/012014
http://dx.doi.org/10.1088/1755-1315/49/7/072016
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jfluidstructs.2013.01.008
https://hyperbole.epfl.ch
http://dx.doi.org/10.1115/1.2930443
http://creativecommons.org/
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.

	Introduction 
	Dynamics of a Francis Turbine Runner 
	Modal Behavior of a Francis Turbine Runner 
	Excitation Phenomena in Francis Turbines 
	Periodic Excitation 
	Transient Excitation 
	Random Excitation 


	Experimental Tests 
	Description of the Selected Turbine 
	Instrumentation 
	Testing Procedure 

	Signal Processing 
	Strain Modal Testing 
	Joint Time–Frequency Analysis 
	Averaged–Spectrum Analsysis 

	Results 
	Natural Frequencies in Air 
	Natural Frequencies under Operating Conditions 
	Start-Up 
	Deep Part Load 
	Overload 


	Conclusions 
	References

