






















































Thermo-Fluid Study of the UPC Race-Track Microtron Cooling System


THERMO-FLUID STUDY OF THE UPC RACE-TRACK MICROTRON 
COOLING SYSTEM* 

X. Escaler†, Departament de Mecànica de Fluids, UPC, Barcelona, Spain  
Yu.A. Kubyshin, V. Blasco, J.A. Romero, A. Sánchez, Institut de Tècniques Energètiques, UPC, 

Barcelona, Spain, 
M. Prieto, ALBA Synchrotron Light Source, Cerdanyola del Vallès, Barcelona, Spain 
V.I. Shvedunov, Skobeltsyn, Institute of Nuclear Physics, Moscow State University,  

Moscow, Russia 
 
Abstract 

The cooling system of the race-track microtron (RTM), 
which is under construction at the Universitat Politècnica 
de Catalunya (UPC), has been simulated by means of a 
computational fluid dynamics (CFD) software. The hy-
draulic and thermal performance of the system for various 
operation conditions has been studied. Firstly, the hydrau-
lic model has been validated by comparison with experi-
mental measurements at different flow rates. Then, the 
cooling fluid temperatures and the pressure losses of the 
system have been determined and the capacity of the 
current design to remove the generated heat at nominal 
power has been confirmed. Finally, the maximum and 
average wall temperatures and heat transfer coefficients 
inside the accelerating structure have been calculated. 
These results have allowed us to localize sections of the 
cooling system with a low convection due to detached 
flows where, therefore, a risk of zones of high tempera-
tures exists. An optimization of the cooling circuit with 
the aim to reduce such high temperature zones has been 
proposed. 

12 MEV RACE-TRACK MICROTRON 
AND ITS COOLING SYSTEM 

The UPC in collaboration with the Skobeltsyn Institute 
of Nuclear Physics of the Moscow State University and 
CIEMAT (Madrid) is building a compact electron accel-
erator of race-track microtron (RTM) type with the max-
imal beam energy 12 MeV. Its main envisaged application 
is Intraoperative Radiation Therapy. Modification of this 
low power consumption machine can be used also for 
cargo inspection and industrial radiography. The design of 
the accelerator is described in [1], the course of its sys-
tems development was reported in a number of papers, 
see for example [2-4]. Currently the RTM is at the final 
phase of its construction. 

The UPC 12 MeV RTM is a pulsed accelerator with the 
output beam energies 6, 8, 10 and 12 MeV, energy gain 
per turn equal to 2 MeV approximately and low average 
current, of the order of 10-100 nA. The electron beam is 
produced in a module called accelerator head, its 3D view 
is given in Fig. 1 where main elements, like 180º bending 
magnets, usually called end magnets, and the accelerating 

structure (linac) are shown. All magnets are permanent 
magnets and therefore do not consume power. These 
elements are fixed on a rigid platform placed inside a 
vacuum chamber. 

The cooling of the RTM is provided by a chiller that 
comprises a positive displacement pump with a discharge 
pressure limited to around 6.8 105 Pa (6.8 bar) that can be 
regulated to reach a maximum flow rate of 2.83 10-4 m3/s 
if necessary. The main function of the RTM cooling sys-
tem is to provide a safe and stable operation of all accel-
erator systems, in particular guarantee a temperature sta-
bility of 1 C in the end magnets and linac. In addition, at 
the stationary regime of RTM operation the temperature 
differences between different parts of the end magnets 
and linac must not exceed the same limit of 1 C. 

 
Figure 1: 3D view of the accelerator head of the 12 MeV 
RTM. The numbered elements are: 1- accelerating struc-
ture (linac), 2 and 3 – end magnets M1 and M2, respec-
tively, 4 – cooling tube, 5 – extraction dipoles. 

In the present paper we study the performance of the 
cooling system of the RTM accelerator head. Chilled 
distilled water is sent through the inlet collector and inlet 
feedthrough to the vacuum box. Firstly, the cooling cir-
cuit, which is a tube of 4 mm internal diameter, passes 
along the rear walls of the two end magnets, M1 and M2, 
as one can see in Fig. 1. The tube is partially covered with 
jackets in order to achieve a good thermal contact with 
the magnet bodies. After the M2 magnet the cooling tube 
is connected to the inlet of the linac which has four 4 mm 
diameter longitudinal cooling channels connected in se-
ries. Finally, the outlet of the linac is connected to the 
output feedthrough and then to the output collector. The 
connecting tubes are made of stainless steel and also have 
the 4 mm internal diameter. The total length of the cool-
ing channels and connecting tubes inside the vacuum 
chamber is about 2 m. 

5 3 2 1 
4 

 ___________________________________________  

* Work supported by the 2014 SGR846 of AGAUR (Generalitat de 
Catalunya) 
† escaler@mf.upc.edu 

Proceedings of MEDSI2016, Barcelona, Spain TUPE09

Calculation, Simulation & FEA Methods
Thermal, Structural Statics and Dynamics

ISBN 978-3-95450-188-5
173 C

op
yr

ig
ht

©
20

16
C

C
-B

Y-
3.

0
an

d
by

th
e

re
sp

ec
tiv

e
au

th
or

s



According to the RTM Technical Design Report [5] the 
maximum total power which must be removed by the 
cooling system from all RTM systems is about 4 kW, in 
particular approximately 1 kW is dissipated in the linac 
and 0.01 kW in the end magnets. The nominal water flow 
rate was fixed at  kg/s. The accelerating struc-
ture is normal conducting, thus the dissipated heat power 
is due to the currents which are induced in its copper 
walls by the magnetic component of the RF electromag-
netic wave. The magnets are permanent and the dissipated 
power is due to beam losses only.  

The accelerating structure consists of four accelerating 
and three coupling resonance cavities. According to cal-
culations of the detailed distribution of the RF power 
losses in the cavity walls carried out in Ref. [6] the RF 
power dissipated in the 1st, 2nd, 3rd and 4th linac segments 
is equal to 189.5 W, 273.7 W, 273.7 W and 263.1 W, re-
spectively. Each segment comprises the corresponding 
resonant cavity, in addition the 1st and 4th segments con-
tain annular passages from one cooling channel to anoth-
er.  

As a part of preliminary tests of RTM systems, meas-
urements of the pressure loss in the cooling system of the 
RTM accelerator head without RF power dissipation in 
the linac were carried out. For this the inlet and outlet 
feedthroughs were connected to the chiller and two pres-
sure sensors (model PT5404 from ifm ) and a flowmeter 
(model PF3W520-F03-1-R from SCM ) between the 
chiller and the vacuum chamber were mounted. During 
the measurements the data from the pressure sensors was 
read and processed with a 10 bits Arduino  Ethernet 
board. The measured values of the pressure loss for dif-
ferent flow rates are given in Fig. 2. 

CFD MODEL AND HYDRAULIC PER-
FORMANCE 

The CFD model of the RTM cooling system that com-
prises the fluid domain (see Fig. 3) has been developed 
using the ANSYS CFX  version 14.5 [7]. The annular 
passages connecting the cooling channels in the 1st and 4th 
segments are clearly seen in Fig. 3. All no slip pipe walls 
were considered as adiabatic with the exception of those 
which are in contact with the end magnets or represent the 
linac cooling channels. In solving the energy transport 
equation the viscous dissipation was not taken into ac-
count because the friction effect is negligible in compari-
son with the temperature increase due to heat transfer 
from the solid surface towards the moving fluid. In the 
simulations the inlet flow condition was set as a function 
of the distilled water flow rate at  and the 
outlet flow condition was set to the average static pressure 

 in relative terms. The Shear Stress Transport 
(SST) turbulence model was used [8]. After a preliminary 
model sensitivity analysis it was decided to limit the size 
of the mesh by about 6.2M elements.  

Using this model we performed simulations of the total 
pressure loss  in the system in the range from a mini-
mal mass flow rate of  until a maximum 

one of . For the considered average flow 
velocities (from V=3.3 m/s to V=6.0 m/s), the Reynolds 
number varies from Re=10137 to Re=18247, so that the 
water flow is always turbulent. 

The obtained results indicate that  increases with the 
flow rate, as it is shown on the plot in Fig. 2, in very good 
accordance with the experimental results. For the maxi-
mal flow rate, the pressure loss is . 
Since the location of the pressure sensors was not exactly 
at the inlet and outlet of the cooling system the measured 
values have been corrected correspondingly. The error 
bars correspond to the  10% interval around the correct-
ed measured values. 

 
Figure 2: Pressure loss in the cooling system as a function 
of the flow rate. The continuous curve fits the simulation 
results indicated with blue dots. Red dots are measured 
values and yellow dots are corrected measured values. 

 
Figure 3: Fluid domain representing the internal diameter 
of the water piping.  

THERMAL PERFORMANCE 
In the thermo-fluid analysis of the cooling system the 

distribution of the heat power transfer specified in above 
was used. We performed numerical simulations of the 
following charcteristics: 

 Flow temperature increase along the cooling cir-
cuit, ΔT=Toutlet – Tinlet. 

 Pipe wall temperature distributions, in particular 
the average and maximum values, Tav and Tmax, at 
each linac segment. 

 Pipe wall heat transfer coefficients, in particular 
the average and maximum values, hav and hmax. 

 Flow velocity distributions. 
 Streamlines of the water flow inside the linac 

channels. 

TUPE09 Proceedings of MEDSI2016, Barcelona, Spain

ISBN 978-3-95450-188-5
174C

op
yr

ig
ht

©
20

16
C

C
-B

Y-
3.

0
an

d
by

th
e

re
sp

ec
tiv

e
au

th
or

s

Calculation, Simulation & FEA Methods
Thermal, Structural Statics and Dynamics



Some of these results are given in Table 1. The maxi-
mum wall temperatures Tmax are always in the 1

st segment, 
in the rest of the segments the temperatures are very close 
between them and are considerably lower than in the 1st 
segment. As far as the average wall temperature Tav is 
concerned, for any flow rate its maximum value is in the 
3rd segment and the minimum value is in the 1st one. The 
interval of values of the average temperatures in the linac 
segments is approximately 1.5  C at the minimum mass 
flow rate  and is about 0.7  C at the max-
imum flow rate . 
Table 1: Flow Temperature Increase , Maximum Wall 
Temperatures Tmax, and Average Heat Transfer Coeffi-
cients hav for Different Water Flow Rates 

 [kg/s] ΔTsim [ C] Tmax [ C] hav [W/(m
2K)] 

0.042 5.78 26.1 5832 
0.050 4.82 22.3 6711 
0.058 4.15 20.1 7556 
0.067 3.64 19.8 8392 
0.075 3.25 18.4 9129 

 
The explanation of the fact that the maximum wall 

temperatures are in the 1st linac segment, even though the 
heat power generated there is considerably lower than in 
the rest of the segments, can be deduced from the plots in 
Fig. 4 where water streamlines through the conduits are 
plotted being colored as a function of the flow velocity in 
Fig. 4a and the flow temperature in Fig. 4b. Due to the 
abrupt change of direction, the flow experiences a bound-
ary layer detachment in the 1st segment entering from the 
circular conduit into the annular passage and making a 
90  turn. Thus, a region with stagnant water and very low 
velocity in the region close to the wall is created and, 
consequently, the local convective heat transfer reduces 
significantly. Such behavior takes place in the two annular 
connections in the 1st segment and also in the connection 
path in the 4th segment. As a result, regions with defective 
flow velocities below 4 m/s appear in these segments. 

 
Figure 4: Streamlines of the water flow inside the linac 
conduits colored as a function of the velocity (a) and the 
temperature (b). 

DISCUSSION OF THE RESULTS AND 
CONCLUSIONS 

We studied the hydraulic and thermal performance of 
the cooling system of the accelerator head of the UPC 12 
MeV RTM. Numerical simulations of the cooling system 
with the CFD code were performed. For this a 3D model 

representing the fluid domain with a mesh with 6.2M 
elements was developed. The accuracy of the model was 
checked for a few values of the mass flow rate by com-
parison of the pressure loss simulation results with the 
measured ones, and quite a good agreement was found.  

The results of the simulations validate the cooling sys-
tem design. We obtained that the difference of the average 
temperatures between the linac segments is below 1º C at 
the maximum flow rate . Thus, the RTM 
design requirement, that the temperature difference be-
tween different segments of the linac does not exceed the 
limit of 1  C, is met for the maximal flow rate only. 

The study of the water streamlines showed that the ap-
pearance of regions with high temperatures in the 1st linac 
segment is due to boundary layer detachments of the flow 
and low flow velocities there. These effects are caused by 
90  abrupt bending of the conduits inside the linac in this 
segment. The temperature in this region can be reduced 
by modifying the cooling channel geometry at the transi-
tion between the circular pipes and the annular arms, in 
particular by filleting the two surfaces at their contact 
edges in order to create a rounded smooth transition that 
would help the flow to turn without detaching from the 
surfaces. This improvement of the cooling pipes geometry 
can be implemented in a future upgrade of the RTM de-
sign. 

REFERENCES 
[1] A.P. Poseryaev, M.F. Ballester, Yu.A. Kubyshin, V.I. Shve-

dunov, “Design of 12 MEV RTM for Multiple Applica-
tions”, in Proc. EPAC’06, Edinburgh, UK, June 2006, paper 
WEPCH175, pp. 2340-2342. 

[2] Yu.A. Kubyshin et al., “Current status of the 12 MeV UPC 
race-track microtron”, in: Proc. PAC’09, Vancouver, Cana-
da, May 2009, paper WE6PFP112, pp. 2775--2779.  

[3] I.Y. Vladimirov,N.I.Pakhomov, V.I. Shvedunov, 
Y.A.Kubyshin,  J.P.Rigla and V.V. Zakharov, “End magnets 
with rare earth permanent magnet material for a compact 
race-track microtron”, Eur. Phys. J. Plus, 129: 271, 2014. 

[4] Yu.A. Kubyshin, V. Blasco, J.A.Romero, A. Sanchez, G. 
Montoro, and V. I. Shvedunov, ·Control system of a minia-
ture 12 MeV race-track microtron”, in: Proc. IPAC’14, 
Dresden, Germany, June 2014, pp. 3165--3167.  

[5] V.I. Shvedunov, Yu.A. Kubyshin, “Intraoperative radiation 
therapy dedicated race-track microtron design”, INTE, UPC, 
Rep. T-07-01, 2007.  

[6] D. Carrillo, “C-band linac for a race-track microtron”, PhD 
thesis, CIEMAT, Universidad Complutense de Madrid, 
Spain, 2010.  

[7] ANSYS, http://www.ansys.com/Products/Fluids/ANSYS-
CFX 

[8] F. R. Menter, “Review of the shear-stress transport turbu-
lence model experience from an industrial perspective”, In-
tern. J. Comp. Fluid Dynamics, Vol 23, Issue 4, 2009, pp. 
305-316. 

Proceedings of MEDSI2016, Barcelona, Spain TUPE09

Calculation, Simulation & FEA Methods
Thermal, Structural Statics and Dynamics

ISBN 978-3-95450-188-5
175 C

op
yr

ig
ht

©
20

16
C

C
-B

Y-
3.

0
an

d
by

th
e

re
sp

ec
tiv

e
au

th
or

s


