












































Microsoft Word - Coupled 2011_Paper__Alfred__04_.docx


IV International Conference on Computational Methods for Coupled Problems in Science and Engineering 
COUPLED PROBLEMS 2011 

M. Papadrakakis, E. Oñate and B. Schrefler (Eds) 
 
 
 

NUMERICAL STUDY OF THE FLUID – STRUCTURE INTERACTION 
IN THE DIFFUSER PASSAGE OF A CENTRIFUGAL PUMP 

ALFRED FONTANALS*, ALFREDO GUARDO†*, MIGUEL COUSSIRAT†† AND 
EDUARD EGUSQUIZA† 

*Escola Universitaria d’Enginyeria Tècnica Industrial de Barcelona.  
C\ Compte d’Urgell, 187. 08036. Barcelona, Spain. 

 

† Centre de Diagnòstic Industrial i Fluidodinàmica (CDIF), Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya  
Av. Diagonal, 647. ETSEIB. – 08028 Barcelona, Spain 

e-mail: alfredo.guardo-zabaleta@upc.edu – Web page: http://www.upc.edu/cdif/ 
 

†† Electromechanic Department. FRM, Universidad Tecnológica Nacional  
Coronel Rodríguez 273 – 5500. Mendoza, Argentina 

Key words: Fluid-structure interaction. 

Abstract. Reliable design of turbomachinery is a complex task. In order to gain overall 
efficiency in the machine performance, designers may have to reduce the gap between the 
impeller and the diffuser, forcing them to be as closely spaced as possible. In these situations, 
there may be a strong interaction between them that influences both the aerodynamics and the 
structural performance of blades and vanes. This phenomenon is called rotor-stator interaction 
(RSI), and it has a strong influence on the machine behavior. These interactions can have a 
significant impact on the vibrational and acoustical characteristics of the machine [1-2]. 
Sometimes, this interaction has led to blade or vane failure [3]. 

Unsteadiness and turbulence play a fundamental role in RSI [4-5], and the use of 
computational fluid dynamics (CFD) is becoming a usual requirement in turbomachinery 
design due to the difficulties and elevated cost of the experimentation required to identify RSI 
phenomena. Nowadays, a CFD analysis based on Reynolds–averaged Navier–Stokes 
equations (RANS) and a coupled eddy viscosity turbulence model (EVM) is commonly 
applied in turbomachinery design. Therefore, the choice of an appropriate turbulence model 
and the boundary layer treatment is far from trivial, and a suitable turbulence modeling plays 
an important role for successful CFD results.  

In this work, an entire stage of a diffuser pump was modeled by means of a commercial 
CFD code in order to study the pressure fluctuations due to the interaction between the 
impeller and the diffuser of the pump. The obtained numerical results were compared against 
the experimental results of Tsukamoto et al., [6]. Full RANS equations coupled with several 
EVM were solved for a diffuser pump stage in order to establish the most accurate modeling 
strategy for a diffuser pump. Boundary layer sensitivity tests were performed, and numerical 
discretization influence on results was also tested and established. Frequencies of the pressure 
fluctuations in the diffuser passage are also obtained with several EVM and compared against 
experimental results.  

 
 



Alfred Fontanals, Alfredo Guardo, Miguel Coussirat and Eduard Egusquiza 

 2

1 INTRODUCTION 

In turbomachinery design, the Rotor-Stator Interaction (RSI) is an important phenomenon, 
with a strong influence on the machine behavior. These interactions can have a significant 
impact on the vibrational and acoustical characteristics of the machine [2, 3]. Unsteadiness 
and turbulence play a fundamental role in complex flow structure [7, 8], and the use of 
Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) is becoming a usual requirement in design in 
turbomachinery due to the difficulties and high cost of the necessary experiments needed to 
identify RSI phenomena.  

The RSI can be divided into two different mechanisms: potential flow interaction and wake 
interaction [1] The nature of the flow due to the wake interaction is unsteady and turbulent 
and, in the case of flow in turbomachines, there also appear three-dimensional boundary-
layer, curvature and system rotation effects.  

Nowadays, a CFD analysis based on Reynolds-Averaged Navier-Stokes equations (RANS) 
and a coupled eddy viscosity turbulence model (EVM) is commonly applied in 
turbomachinery design. Therefore, the choice of an appropriate turbulence model and the 
boundary layer treatment is far from trivial, and a suitable turbulence modeling plays an 
important role for successful CFD results [4] 

In this work, an entire stage of a diffuser pump was modeled, by means of a commercial 
CFD code, in order to study the pressure fluctuations due to the interaction between the 
impeller and the diffuser of the pump, and the obtained numerical results were compared 
against the experimental results of Tsukamoto et al. [6] Full RANS equations coupled with 
several EVM were solved for a diffuser pump stage in order to establish the most accurate 
modeling strategy for a diffuser pump. Boundary layer sensitivity tests were performed, and 
numerical discretization influence on results was also tested and established. 

 

2 NUMERICAL MODELING 

2.1 Geometry and Grid Generation 

The modeled test pump was a single-stage diffuser pump with five impeller blades, Ni=5, 
eight diffuser vanes, Nv=8, and volute casing (Figure 1). A detailed description of the pump is 
given by Tsukamoto et al. [6]. 

 

Table 1: Mesh sensitivity test 
 

Mesh Number of 
cells 

y+ 

1 4,8 x 104 20-200 

2 9,7 x 104 20-200 

3 3,2 x 105 20-200 

4 8,1 x 104 1-10 

5 1,4 x 105 1-10 

6 3,0 x 105 1-10 



Alfred Fontanals, Alfredo Guardo, Miguel Coussirat and Eduard Egusquiza 

 3

A mesh sensitivity test was performed in order to evaluate the independency of the 
numerical results from the mesh density. Also, the effect of the boundary layer treatment on 
the results was performed. For accomplishing the aforementioned, for 3 different mesh 
densities the boundary layer around the blades, vanes and walls was modeled using a wall 
function (WF), with a y+ ranging from 20 to 200, and another three mesh densities were tested 
using a two layer model (TLM), with a y+ ranging from 1 to 10. For further details on the 
meshes used see Table 1. 

 

Figure 1: Geometry and studied point position in the vaned diffuser stage. 
 

 
 
 

2.2 Unsteady Calculations Setup 

Two dimensional, unsteady incompressible Reynolds-averaged Navier-Stokes equations 
were solved by means of the commercial CFD code Ansys Fluent 12.1 [9].  A constant 
pressure value was imposed at the fluid inlet and a constant pressure value was imposed at the 
pump outlet. A non slip boundary condition was imposed at the runner blades, diffuser vanes 
and volute casing wall. A rotational speed of 2066 rpm was imposed to the blade impeller. 

One of the goals of this work was to benchmark the ability of different turbulence models 
in capturing the pressure fluctuations and the characteristic frequencies in the diffuser 
according to the experimental results reported by Tsukamoto et al. [6]. Turbulence models 
employed in its work are listed in Table 2. 

In order to accomplish the proposed turbulence model performance study, pressure 
fluctuations in two points of the vaned diffuser passage, which correspond to the reported 
measurement points for the experimental data set, were recorded for every numerical 
simulation developed. Location of the monitor points r1c3 and r2c3 can be seen in Figure 1. 

The unsteady formulation used was a second-order implicit velocity formulation and a 
pressure-based solver was chosen. The SIMPLE pressure-velocity coupling algorithm was 
used, and second order scheme discretization was selected for the numerical experiments.  

 



Alfred Fontanals, Alfredo Guardo, Miguel Coussirat and Eduard Egusquiza 

 4

Table 2: Turbulence models used 
 

# Turbulence model Reference 

1 Spalart – Allmaras Spalart and Allmaras [10] 

2 Standard k- Launder and Spalding [11] 
3 Realizable k- Shi et al. [12] 
4 RNG k- Yakhot and Orszag [13] 
5 Standard k- Wilcox [14] 
6 Shear Stress Transport 

(SST) k- 
Menter[15] 

7 Reynolds Stress Model 
(RSM) 

Launder et al. [16] 

 
The maximum number of iterations for each time step was set to 40 in order to reduce all 

computed normalized numerical residuals to 1x10-5. The interface between the rotor blade and 
the diffuser vane was set to a sliding mesh, in which the relative position between the rotor 
and the stator was updated every time step. The adopted computational time step was about 
1/360 of the rotor revolution time.  

3 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 

Due to the unsteady nature of the flow, it is required that the whole flow domain is affected 
by the unsteady fluctuations. In order to check the aforementioned situation, a flow rate 
monitoring was made at the domain outlet. Uniform unsteady flow behavior was reached after 
10 revolutions.  

 
3.1 Pressure Fluctuations 

For the two monitored points, r1c3 and r2c3, in the diffuser vane the unsteady static 
pressure was obtained, in order to determine the effect of the RSI in the diffuser vane. The 
results obtained for several turbulence models of the non-dimensional unsteady pressure, ∆Ψ, 
are shown in Figures 2 and 3. 

Results obtained show that the highest pressure value in the diffuser is due to the potential 
effect generated by the movement of the rotor vane in front of the diffuser vane. The wakes at 
the rotor outlet enter the diffuser and interact with the vanes producing high pressure peaks. 

When comparing the numerical results obtained with each one of the turbulence models 
tested, it can be observed that there’s no significant difference in the results of pressure 
fluctuation. Only the Standard k-ω turbulence model diverge from others turbulence models 
results and experimental results. 

When analyzing the effect of the boundary layer treatment on the results, it can be 
observed that WF are able to accurately reproduce the pressure fluctuations due to RSI, while 
a TLM does not lead to an improve of the results, even when using a turbulence model that 
takes into account the boundary layer transition from laminar to turbulent flow, as the 
Standard k-ω or the SST k-ω. 



Alfred Fontanals, Alfredo Guardo, Miguel Coussirat and Eduard Egusquiza 

 5

A detailed analysis of the obtained results allow to notice that using a WF, the Spalart-
Allmaras, Realizable k-ε and SST k-ω turbulence models show the best fitting for the 
experimental pressure fluctuations (Figure 4). 

When a TLM is used as near-wall treatment, the best fitting obtained for pressure 
fluctuation correspond also to Spalart-Allmaras, Realizable k-ε and SST k-ω turbulence 
models. 

Previous studies carried out by our research group [4] showed that the SST k-ω turbulence 
model presented a good performance when determining the velocities in the boundary layer 
and the wake vortex shedding when studying flow around an isolated foil, and also a low 
computational cost if compared with more accurate (but more resource-consuming) 
turbulence models as RSM or Large Eddy Simulation (LES). 

 

Figure 2: Computed non dimensional unsteady pressure, ∆Ψ, at point r1c3. Boundary layer treatment: left, wall 
functions; right, two layer model. 

 
 

Figure 3: Computed non dimensional unsteady pressure, ∆Ψ, at point r2c3. Boundary layer treatment: left, wall 
functions; right, two layer model 

 

 
 
 
 
 



Alfred Fontanals, Alfredo Guardo, Miguel Coussirat and Eduard Egusquiza 

 6

Figure 4: Computed non dimensional unsteady pressure, ∆Ψ. Wall function boundary layer treatment: left, point 
r1c3; right, point r2c3. 

 

 
 

Table 3: Pressure fluctuations in frequency domain  
 

 Frequencies 
Experimental 

1ZiN 
172 

2ZiN 
344 

3ZiN 
517 

4ZiN 
689 

5ZiN 
861 

 Turbulence 
model 

Pressure 
Point 

     

a Spalart-
Allmaras 

r1c3 
r2c3 

171 
171 

343 
343 

518 
518 

689 
689 

861 
861 

b Standard k-ε r1c3 
r2c3 

171 
171 

346 
346 

517 
517 

689 
689 

860 
860 

c Realizable k-ε r1c3 
r2c3 

171 
172 

343 
343 

518 
518 

689 
689 

861 
861 

d RNG  
k-ε 

r1c3 
r2c3 

171 
171 

343 
343 

517 
517 

689 
689 

861 
861 

e-f Standard k-ω r1c3 
r2c3 

- 
171 

345 
- 

516 
516 

688 
- 

862 
861 

g-h SST k-ω r1c3 
r2c3 

171 
171 

343 
- 

- 
515 

689 
689 

862 
862 

i RSM r1c3 
r2c3 

172 
172 

343 
343 

517 
517 

689 
689 

861 
861 

 
3.1 Frequencies 

In order to capture the RSI effects, the relationship between the pressure fluctuations and 
the movement of the rotor vanes in front of the diffuser vanes was determined. Using a 
Fourier transform, the characteristic frequencies of the pressure fluctuations have been 
obtained at points r1c3 and r2c3, resulting that the pressure fluctuates with the impeller blade 
passing frequency ZiN and its higher harmonics. Table 3 shows the obtained frequencies with 
different turbulence models and the experimental results. It can be noticed that the k-ω family 
turbulence models are not able to capture the representative frequencies while all the other 
models benchmarked accurately capture the characteristic frequencies of the phenomena. 

 
 



Alfred Fontanals, Alfredo Guardo, Miguel Coussirat and Eduard Egusquiza 

 7

 Figure 5: Spalart-Almaras model. Left: calculated unsteady pressure at point r1c3; right: frequency domain. 
 

 
  

Figure 6: Realizable k-ε model. Left: calculated unsteady pressure at point r1c3; right: frequency domain. 
 

 
 

Figure 7: SST k-ω model. Left: calculated unsteady pressure at point r1c3; right: frequency domain. 
 

 

 
 



Alfred Fontanals, Alfredo Guardo, Miguel Coussirat and Eduard Egusquiza 

 8

Figures 5, 6 and 7 show in detail the pressure fluctuations at point r1c3 and its 
correspondent ZiN frequencies (after treating the obtained pressure data with a Fourier 
transform) for 3 different turbulence models: Spalart-Allmaras, Realizable k-ε and SST k-ω. 

For the Spalart-Allmaras and Realizable k-ε turbulence model (Figures 5 and 6), it can be 
noticed that for 1 revolution of the rotor, the pressure fluctuation generated by the movement 
of the rotor vanes follows a periodic pattern, and the frequency domain accurately registers 
the data of the impeller blade passing frequency ZiN. 

For the SST k-ω turbulence model (Figure 7), pressure fluctuation show different values 
along 1 revolution of the rotor for each passing of the impeller blade in front of the diffuser 
vanes, showing also a cyclic pattern after each revolution. The presence of all this ‘noise’ in 
the numerical results obtained makes it difficult to determine the impeller blade passing 
frequency ZiN, as it translates into non-physical peaks in the frequency domain. This behavior 
pattern was also noticed for the Standard k-ω turbulence model. 

  

4 CONCLUSIONS 

A 2-D CFD has been applied to the study of RSI in the vaned diffuser of pump. Reynolds-
averaged Navier-Stokes equations with several turbulence models were tested in order to 
check their capability to capture RSI phenomena in the pump. Models tested showed good 
results of pressure fluctuation in the vaned diffuser when comparing against experimental 
results, except the Standard k-ω model.  

A detailed analysis of the obtained results allow to notice that the Spalart-Allmaras, 
Realizable k-ε and SST k-ω turbulence models show the best fitting for the experimental 
pressure fluctuations  

When analyzing the effect of the boundary layer treatment on the results, it can be 
observed that WF are able to accurately reproduce the pressure fluctuations due to RSI, while 
a TLM does not lead to an improve of the results, even when using a turbulence model that 
takes into account the boundary layer transition from laminar to turbulent flow, as the 
Standard k-ω or the SST k-ω. 

The relationship between the pressure fluctuations and the movement of the rotor vanes in 
front of the diffuser vanes was determined. The characteristic frequencies of the pressure 
fluctuations were obtained, resulting that the pressure fluctuates with the impeller blade 
passing frequency ZiN and its higher harmonics. It was noticed that the k-ω family turbulence 
models were not able to capture the representative frequencies while all the other turbulence 
models benchmarked accurately captured the characteristic frequencies of the phenomena. 

All the turbulence models tested shoed a periodic pattern in the pressure fluctuation in 
which each cycle is produced by the movement of a rotor blade in front of a diffuser vane, 
except for the k-ω turbulence models family. For these models, pressure fluctuations value 
was different for each pass of an impeller blade in front of a diffuser blade, but the overall 
behavior for 1 revolution of the impeller followed a regular pattern. 

Spalart-Allmaras and Realizable k-ε turbulence models show the most accurate results of 
the benchmarked models, making them a suitable option for CFD modeling of RSI in 
turbomachinery. It is important to remark that Spalart-Allmaras turbulence model has a 
smaller computational cost, as it is a 1-equation model.  



Alfred Fontanals, Alfredo Guardo, Miguel Coussirat and Eduard Egusquiza 

 9

Previous work of our research group showed that SST k-ω turbulence models was a good 
choice for estimating boundary layer velocities and wake vortex shedding around isolated 
foils, but results obtained in present work show that when RSI potential effect is present, the 
numerical response of the model generates background noise in the results, making it difficult 
to clearly differentiate the characteristic frequencies of the phenomena.. 

In order to obtain a better understanding of the RSI phenomena it would be necessary to 
determine the influence of the discretization schemes, the time step value. These numerical 
studies are to be performed in the near future. 
  

5 NOMENCLATURE 

 ψ = instantaneous pressure coefficient =  2//)( 22UPp s   
Δψ = non-dimensional unsteady pressure =  2//~ 22* Up   
p = instantaneous static pressure = pp ~  
p = time average p 
p~ = unsteady component of p  

p* = relative pressure = p-Ps 
Ps = total pressure at pump suction port 
U2 = peripheral speed of impeller = ND2  
N = rotational speed  
ρ = density 
t* = non-dimensional time = t/Ti 
t = time 
Ti = time required to traverse one pitch of impeller blade = )/(1 iZN  

r = radius 
c = symbol of pressure traverse line 
Z = number of blades 
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS  
Funding from the Spanish Ministry of Science and Innovation (Grant No. DPI 2009 – 12827) 
is appreciated. The authors also appreciate the contribution from EUETIB - UPC in the 
development of this work. 
 

REFERENCES 

[1] Ardnt, Acosta, Brennen and Caughey. Rotor-Stator Interaction in a Diffuser Pump. J. of 
Turbomachinery (1989) 111:213-221. 
[2] Chow, Y., Uzol, O. and Katz, J. Flow nonuniformities and turbulent “hot spots” due to 
wake-blade and wake-wake interaction in a multi-stage turbomachine. J. of Turbomachinery 
(2002) 124:553-563. 



Alfred Fontanals, Alfredo Guardo, Miguel Coussirat and Eduard Egusquiza 

 10

[3] Uzol, O., Chow, Y., Katz, J. and Meneveau, C. Experimental investigation of unsteady 
flow field within a two-stage axial turbomachine using particle image velocimetry. J. of 
Turbomachinery (2002) 124:542-552. 
[4] Coussirat, M., Fontanals, A., Grau, J., Guardo, A. and Egusquiza. E. CFD study of the 
boundary layer influence on the wake for turbulent unsteady flow in rotor-stator interaction. 
IAHR 4th. Symposium on Hydraulic Machinery and Systems. Foz do Iguassu, Brazil (2008). 
[5] Dring, Joslyn, Hardin And Wagner H. Turbine Rotor-Stator Interaction. J. Eng. for Power 
(1982) 104:729-742. 
[6] Tsukamoto, H., Uno, M., Hamafuku, N., And Okamura, T. Pressure fluctuations 
downstream of a diffuser pump impeller. The 2nd  Joint ASME/JSME Fluids Engineering 
Conference, Forum of unsteady flow, FED (1995) 216:133-138. 
[7] Henderson, A., Walker, G. and Hughes, J. The influence of turbulence on wake dispersion 
and blade row interaction in an axial compressor. J. of  Turbomachinery (2006) 128:150-165. 
[8] Soranna, F., Chow, Y., Uzol, O. and Katz, J. The effect of inlet guide vanes wake 
impingement on the flow structure and turbulence around a rotor blade. J. of Turbomachinery 
(2000) 128:82-95. 
[9] Fluent Inc. Fluent 6.3. User’s guide, (2006). 
[10] Spalart, P.R. and Allmaras, S.R. A one equation turbulence model for aerodynamic flow. 
La Recherche Aérospatiale (1994) 1:5-21. 
[11] Launder, B.E. and Spalding, D.B. Lectures in mathematical models of turbulence, 
Academic Press, London (1972). 
[12] Yakhot, V. and Orszag, S. Renormalization group analysis of turbulence: I Basic theory, 
J Sci Comput (1986) 1:3-51. 
[13] Shih, T. Liou, W. Shabbir, A. Yang, Z. and Zhu, J. A new k-ε eddy viscosity model for 
high Re turbulent flow – Model development and validation, Comput Fluids (1995) 24:227-
238. 
[14] Wilcox, D.C. Turbulence model for CFD, DCW Industries Inc., California (1998). 
[15] Menter, F.R., Two equations eddy-viscosity turbulence models for engineering 
applications, AIAA J (1994) 32:1598-1605. 
[16] Launder, B.E. Reece, G.J. and Rodi, W. Progress in the development of a Reynolds 
stress turbulence closure, J Fluid Mech (1975) 68:537-566. 


