










































FOSTERING THE CLASSROOM ATTENTION USING COLLECTIVE 
INTELLIGENCE EDUCATION TOOLS 

O. Ortiz
1
, J. Meza

2
, E. Simó

2
, J. Monguet.

2 

 

1
Universidad de las Fuerzas Armadas - ESPE (ECUADOR) 

2
Universitat Politécnica de Catalunya  (SPAIN)  

 

Abstract.  

Keeping students' attention in class remains a challenge in the teaching-learning process. The 
consumption of time trying to focus the attention of the student on the tasks of the class generates 
fatigue to both teacher and students. Several researchers conclude that using technology in the 
classroom has proven to be a distraction element of care rather than becoming a supportive element. 
From the scenario raised emerges the question: Could the ICT tools be used to improve attention and 
learning in class? 

This research explores the application of a web tool called Flash Learning (FL) using Problem Based 
Learning approach (PBL). Flash Learning allowed implement a strategy with a real-time learning 
activity that helps in the process of concentrating student attention during a class.  

Flash Learning was designed with the aim of integrating classroom management with the attention of 
its students and allowing self-reflective analysis of students in front of their classmates. On the other 
hand, the teacher allows him to obtain real-time clues about the tendencies of understanding and 
learning of the subject matter. 
 
Based on the results, we consider that the use of new forms of teaching and learning based on the 
emerging paradigms is necessary. Therefore, the combination of Flash Learning could become an 
effective way to keeping students' attention in class and fostering the collective intelligence. 
Keywords: collective intelligence, ICT, education, student’s attention, PBL 
 
 

1. INTRODUCTION 
 
The advancement of technology influences educational environments. Rapid technological 
transformation carried out in the late twentieth century and early XXI, especially in the Information 
Technology and Communications (ICT), it sets new challenges for the education system [15] 
 
The Collective Intelligence (CI) is occupying, more and more spaces of action in the educative areas 
[6]. The CI with the use of ICTs, and the application of active teaching methodologies, play a 
fundamental role in the levels of attention of the students. [2] in their research, demonstrated a 
positive interrelation between levels of attention and active teaching methodologies, they found that 
periods of concentration of students increased if the teacher applied active teaching instead of 
lectures. 
 
Attention in class has been considered as a determining factor for the learning of the students in all 
the educative levels. Many studies realize that a misdirected technology can become a distracter that 
attenuates the concentration of students in the classroom. Our question then arises: Can ICTs be 
used to improve attention and thus to learn in the classroom? In this sense, the combination of CI with 
ICT and the use of active learning methods would be a viable option for improving classroom learning, 
and at the same time, understanding the levels of attention of the students in the classroom. 
 
This article explores the evolution of the learning processes of undergraduate students, during the 
development of the classes of design and execution of projects. Three components are combined: 
collective intelligence (CI), a web tool called Flash Learning (FL) and the Problem Based Learning 
(PBL) teaching method. This tripartite combination anticipates progress in student learning, through 
the improvement of their levels of attention in classes. 
 



The details of the application of the tools, the didactic strategy and its results are presented in the 
following sections. 
 
 

2. LITERATURE REVIEW 

According to [17] the attention is "a selective process of the necessary information, the consolidation 
of the programs of action eligible and the maintenance of a permanent control over the course of the 
same ones".   

In the context of the classroom, various factors influence the levels of student attention. [12] indicate 
that the individual variables of the students, the content, the teacher and the environment, influence 
the students' ability to maintain the attention. Some studies inform about of student attendance 
processes in the classroom.[14] notes that the attention of students during a class depends on 
motivation, that is, motivated students, pay more attention in classes that students unmotivated.  
Further indicates that students tend to feel unmotivated after 15 to 20 minutes, therefore the teacher 
should consider a decrease in the attention of their students after 10 minutes. To correct this issue, 
[14] recommends that lectures should be given in segments of 15 to 20 minutes.  [1] states that 
students may not attend a conference during the first five minutes of the start or the last 5 minutes of 
the end when their concentration rises and declines.  [8] adds that student attention will be dispersed 
unless the lecturer applies interactive strategies; In this perspective, lectures should be interspersed 
with periods of time that include interactive activities. 

In relation with the active learning, [13] states that the learning process is not a longer an internal and 
individual activity, but has become an activity that is done collectively and online, therefore, implies 
that learning strategies need to be redefined to impact on student learning The active learning has a 
dual purpose, one the one hand is to avoid that the student become to passive subject in their 
learning, by the other hand achieve that the student to learn to conceptualize, understand principles, 
and apply knowledge [12]. There are several active learning methods used in classrooms. Problem-
based learning (PBL) is one of them; this method originated as didactics of medicine in 1970 and is 
currently applicable in all disciplinary fields. For the context of PBL higher education, it stands as an 
active and innovative learning method, in order to provide solutions to the demands of the new 
knowledge societies. [9]. 
 
The studies conducted by [7] [5] report a systematization of the evolution of the PBL. Moreover [3] 
points out that  currently PBL is not only used in more than 60 medical-related schools but is also used 
in middle schools and rural and urban primary schools.  PBL focuses its learning on the student and 
not on the teacher or the content, and also stimulates the collaborative work. For instance, when 
students are motivated and understand the importance of a topic for their own lives, the teacher can 
introduce a carefully crafted problem that gains their full attention. [3] 
 
PBL is an active learning method, since captures the attention of the student, the teacher participates 
in the process as a tutor that supports a small group of students who are predisposed to solve a 
specific problem related to a topic of study. In this process, students are empowered by the process, 
since they choose the teaching materials, define the order of their learning and participate in the 
evaluation processes. The focus of this methodology is the student, who enriches his knowledge 
through collective work and individual study [16]. In PBL, the role of the tutor is to pose questions to 
the students that help them to ask themselves and find for themselves the best route of understanding 
and managing the problem, which induces students to assume this role. 
 
Finally, it is important to highlight the success of the Real Time Evaluation Systems (RTES), which 
have presented satisfactory results in education as a way to focus the attention of students. [4] 
present the results of the application of Clicker technology, in addition they conclude that the use of 
Clicker technology generates a more effective commitment and learning of the students, if it is 
supported by the development of its inputs by the teachers and Their subsequent formative use during 
the teaching process. 
 

3. METHODOLOGY AND DIDACTIC STRATEGY. 
 
The work consisted of an exploratory study, in which the levels of learning of the undergraduate 
students of the race of physical activity sciences in subjects inherent to the planning and management 



of projects were analyzed. In order to obtain improvements in learning, and to focus the attention of 
students, a didactic strategy was designed and implemented, which was supported by ICT tools for CI, 
and the PBL methodology. 
 
Flash Learning (FL), which is shown in Fig. 1, is a tool that is used in real time, helps to keep the 
attention of the students in the classroom and therefore produces improvements in learning. It is 
designed with the aim of integrating the teaching management and the levels of attention of the 
students in the classroom, it also allows the self-reflection of the students in front of their peers. FL 
encourages active student participation through interactive communication and real-time analysis of 
results. FL fosters the collective intelligence through the collective evaluation and self-reflection of 
result presented in real time to the students. 

The next section explains the use of the tool in a learning activity from planning to validating results. 

Planning.- These are activities prior to the use of the activity in the class, in which the teacher in the 
development of his curriculum or syllabus in the class should: 
 

 Establishing a bank of questions to be used or in the planned theme for a class, the questions 
should not focus on memorization but on the critical analysis of a scenario on the subject under 
discussion. 

 Preparing the class material in such a way that in each key concept of the academic explanation, 
a question is inserted to validate either the concept or the understanding of the advanced in the 
subject. 

 Establishing the frequency of occurrence of each question, to achieve concentration of learning 
and not become a distracter, it is recommended that the intervals are in the range of 10 to 15 
minutes [2]. 

 Setting the maximum time allowed to answer a question, the time will be set according to the type 
of question; the default value is one minute. This value cannot be general value, since it depends 
on the difficulty of the topic in which that the teacher wish focusing the attention. 

 Defining whether the same questionnaire will be sent to the whole class to a group, or to a specific 
student. 

 
Execution.- The execution of the class is developed through an academic presentation by the teacher. 
The Fig. 1 details the activities to be accomplished by the teacher (s), and the activities that the 
students develop during the lecture. 

 

Fig 1. Flash Learning execution process  

4. EMPIRICAL EXPERIENCE AND RESULTS 
 

The didactic strategy was applied to a group of students of the physical activity sciences career at the 
University of Armed Forces - Ecuador (ESPE), the group consisted of 24 students (6 women and 18 
men), who counted The date with an average age of 22 to 25 years. At the head of the process was 

Teacher presents a lecture session

Student follow in real time the lecture

Teacher assign a key question

Student choose one option from informatics 
platform

Each student can compare their selection with the correct and trend of the class 
and follow their particular evolution in the classroom.



the teacher of the subject of design and execution of projects. The challenge of the didactic strategy 
used was that the students improve their learning about subjects related with Design and Execution of 
Social Projects using Logical Frame Matrix approach. 
 
The didactic strategy used includes learning objectives, topics, contents, activities carried out by the 
students and by the teacher, the resources and methodology used and the evaluation strategy.   The 
contents were treated in three sessions; the first: central problem definition and stakeholder analysis, 
the second: problem and goal trees and the third session: strategy matrix, and logical frame matrix, 
with this, the topic was covered to the management cycle of the logical framework. The Table 1 shows 
the didactic strategy used, whose objective was to improve the teaching-learning processes of 
undergraduate students in the subject of Design and Execution of Social Projects. 

Table 1. Didactic strategy 

Name Description 

Objectives  Analyzes, contextualizes and recognizes a central problem 

 Properly identifies those involved in a project. 

 Correctly poses problem and objective trees 

 Knows the systemic relationship of sustainability 

 Can differentiate levels of objectives, indicators, ways of verification 
and Logical Frame Matrix (MML) assumptions. 

Topic and Contents  Logical Framework Management Cycle 

 Definition of the central problem 

 Stakeholders Analysis 

 Problem and object tree 

 Strategy Matrix 

 Logical Frame Matrix 

Students activities 

 

 Reading study material. 

 Enter to informatics platform called FABRICIUS
1
 

 Pay attention to the subject that through a master conference 

 Observing the flash question posed by the teacher every 10 minutes, 
approximately 

 When the question is shown, the student has 90 seconds to answer 
the question in FABRICIUS using FL. 

 Select one of the options proposed in the question. 

Teacher activities 

 

 Publishing material of study on the raised contents (videos, readings, 
guides, etc). 

 Preparing presentation, the presentation will have the key questions 
and register it in FABRICIUS. 

 Every 10 minutes, present a slide with a question and answer 
options. 

 Discovering the correct answer and discuss it with the class. 

 Repeating the last two steps to complete the topic of the day 

Resources/ 
methodology 

 

 Fabricius 

 Flash learning 

 PBL 

 Survey  and Presentation  

 Laboratory and internet access 

                                                      
1
 FABRICIUS is a collaborative learning informatics platform (http://movil.eciem.org/DCIIMOVIL/WebLogin.aspx) 



Name Description 

Strategies 
Evaluation  

 Compare your answer with the correct answers presented by the 
teacher. 

 Analyzing the information of the master talk and builds its own 
conceptualizations from case studies and multiple-choice questions. 

 Observing and registering the students behaviours in relation to 
levels of attention 

 
 
The Fig. 2, shows a summary of the results of real-time responses in the classroom. It's established 
that 82,6% of the answers are answered correctly, which would prove that FL is effective for learning 
achievements and improvements in the levels of attention in class in the classroom. 
 

 
 

Fig 2. Ratio questions & responses 

FL allowed getting some patterns of student's behaviors in each class Fig. 3. As we can see in the Fig. 
3 each topic used different number of questions. The number of question by class had influence in the 
ratio between correct & incorrect responses. When the number of questions was short the 
understanding index

2
 was bigger that in the last topic. According to the Fig. 3, the understanding index   

in the session of class with the topic "Strategy matrix and logical framework", the average of 
increasing of understanding index was 2%, however in the others 20%. 

 

Fig 3. Ratios behaviors 

 

                                                      
2
 The understanding index is the average of index of correct responses by question. Where correct response index are the ratio 

of total correct response with total responses. 

86% 87%

75%

14% 13%

25%

0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%

100%

Problem central definition and 
stakeholders

Problem and object tree Strategy matrix and logical 
framework

Ratio questions & responses

Correct responses Incorred responses

1%
5%

3%

9%
11%

19%

26% 27%

6%

12%

16%

28%

39%

6%

20%

32%

42%

0%

5%

10%

15%

20%

25%

30%

35%

40%

45%

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8

Ratios behaviours

Strategy matrix and logical framework
Problem and object tree
Problem central definition and stakeholders



5. CONCLUSIONS 
The evaluation strategy used by a teacher varies according to their regulations, customs, and 
methods. At the moment there is no consensus about the best way for to assess individual 
knowledge, and the measure of knowledge catching is given as a result of correct or incorrect 
answers to a specific test. According to the results of FL, which presupposes that the individual is 
learning the concepts presented, FL was effective for improve the students understanding. 

 
The numbers of question have presented influence in learning levels. The learning levels were 
measured through the ratio between correct & incorrect question, therefore for each question in 
real time the teacher should redefine the strategy according with the trend of the last question, he 
could reinforce in the feedback or proposing new questions. 
 
Improving the anxiety levels that could by generated by the use of ICT tools, should be consider 
by  the teacher, he must balance the opposing restrictions when applies FL during the execution 
of the class. In this sense, the teacher should develop some complementary tasks: 
 

 Develop previously the action plan for relaxing the class 

 Include every certain time span, interactive activities. 

 Preparing challenges of interest to the student through PBL. 

 Giving constant support in the use of ICT tools. 
 
The combination of three components: Collective Intelligence (CI), a web tool called Flash 
Learning (FL) and the Problem Based Learning (PBL) pedagogical method, produces progress in 
student learning and maintains attention levels in classes. 
 
In line with the results, we believe that innovative teaching-learning strategies based on emerging 
paradigms can be implemented. We argue that FL could become a supportive tool for the teacher 
in order to maintain attention in the classroom, foster collective intelligence and improve learning. 
 
The use of ICT tools such as Flash Learning, coupled with an adequate didactic strategy, and the 
use of active learning methods, is an open field of exploration with great potential for Higher 
Education. 

 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS  

We thank the Department of Human and Social Sciences of the University of the Armed Forces ESPE. 

 

REFERENCES 
 
[1] D. A. Bligh, “What's the use of lectures?”Jossey-Bass: San Francisco, CA, 2000. 
 
[2] D. Bunce, E. Flens  and K. Neiles, “How Long Can Students Pay Attention in Class? A Study 

of Student Attention Decline Using Clickers,” Journal of Chemical Education, vol. 87 no. 12, 
2010 

 
[3] R. Delisle, “How to Use Problem-based Learning in the Classroom,” ASCD,1997. 
 
[4] H. Hoon, A. Finkelstein, “Understanding the effects of professors’ pedagogical development 

with Clicker Assessment and Feedback technologies and the impact on students’ engagement 
and learning in higher education”. Computers & Education, vol. 65, pp. 64–76, 2013. 

 
[5] F. Martínez, G. Sánchez, de C. Fuertes, F. Redondo, and G. Arias, “El aprendizaje basado en 

problemas de estudios empíricos internacionales,” Revista de Educación, vol. 341, pp. 397-
418, 2006. 

 
[6] T. W. Malone, R. Laubacher, and C. Dellarocas, “The Collective Intelligence Genome THE 

LEADING,” MIT Sloan Manag. Rev., vol. 51, no. 51303, pp. 21–31, 2010.  



[7] V. Menéndez, G. Giralt, and A. Gallego, “Análisis biométrico sobre el aprendizaje basado en 
problemas (ABP) en la Educación Superior a partir de la base de datos ERIC”. Observar, vol. 
4, pp. 142- 80, 2010. 

 
[8] W. Mckeachie, “The Last Word: Interview With Wilbert J. McKeachie. The Teacher of 

Teachers’ Teaching Tips and Strategies”. Journal of Advanced Academic, vol. 21, no. 3, 2010. 
 
[9] M. Ortiz, J. A. García, A. Gonzáles, M. Pedraza, and A. Nardiz, “Aprendizaje basado en 

problemas: una alternativa al método tradicional”. Revista de la Red Estatal de Docencia 
Universitaria vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 79-85, 2005. 

 
[10] F. Rodrigues and P. Oliveira, “A system for formative assessment and monitoring of students’ 

progress”. Computers and Education, vol. 76, pp. 30–41. (2014). 
http://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2014.03.001. 

 
[11] Wilson, K. and Korn, J. H, “Attention during lectures: Beyond ten minutes”. Teaching of 

Psychology, vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 85–89, 2007. 
 
[12] Rusell. A, R. Comello and D. Wright, “Teaching Strategies Promoting Active, ” 2007. 
 
[13] G. Siemens, “Connectives: A learning theory for the digital age,” International journal of 

instructional technology and distance learning, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 3–10, 2005. 
[14] D. A. Sousa, “How the Brain Learns”, 3rd ed. Corwin Press: Thousand Oaks, CA, 2006. 
 
[15] UNESCO. Declaración Mundial sobre la Educación Superior para el Siglo XXI: Visión y 

Acción. Conferencia Mundial de la Educación Superior. Retrieved from http://www.unesco.org/ 
education/educprog/wche/declaration_spa.htm 

 
[16] B. J. Zimmerman, “El Aprendizaje Basado en Problemas (ABP). Una propuesta metodológica 

en Educación Superior,” 2da ed. Madrid, España, Narcea, S.A, 2015. 
 
[17] A.R. Luria, “Atención y memoria”. Barcelona: Martínez-Roca, 1975. 
 

http://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2014.03.001

