



























































LNCS 8022 - Architectural Geo-E-Learning


 

R. Shumaker (Ed.): VAMR/HCII 2013, Part II, LNCS 8022, pp. 188–197, 2013. 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013 

Architectural Geo-E-Learning 

Geolocated Teaching in Urban Environments 
with Mobile Devices: A Case Study and Work in Progress 

Ernest Redondo1, Albert Sánchez Riera1, David Fonseca2, and Alberto Peredo3 

1 Universidad Politécnica de Cataluña-Barcelona Tech. Barcelona, Spain 
{ernesto.redondo,albert.sanchez.riera}@upc.edu 

2 Architecture School - La Salle, Universitat Ramon Llull. Barcelona, Spain 
fonsi@salle.url.edu 

3 CUAAD, Universidad de Guadalajara, Jalisco, México 
oderep@gmail.com 

Abstract. This work addresses the implementation of a mobile Augmented  
Reality (AR) browser on educational environments. We seek to analyze new 
educational tools and methodologies, non-traditional, to improve students’  
academic performance, commitment and motivation. The basis of our claim lies 
in the skills improvement that students can achieve thanks to their innate  
affinity to digital media features of new Smartphones. We worked under the 
Layar platform for mobile devices to create virtual information channels 
through a database associated to 3D virtual models and any other type of media 
content. The teaching experience was carried out with Master Architecture  
students, and developed in two subjects focused on the use of ICT and Urban 
Design. We call it Geo-elearning because of the use of new eLearning strategies 
and methodologies that incorporate geolocation, allowing receiving, sharing, 
and evaluate own-generated student’s proposals, on site. 

Keywords: Augmented reality, E-Learning, Geo-Elearning, Urban Planning, 
Educational research. 

1 Introduction 

Augmented Reality (AR) technology is based on overlapping virtual information in 
real space. A framework where technology could be potentially more interesting is the 
representation and management of the territory, because real scenes could be "com-
pleted" with virtual information, which would facilitate a greater awareness and better 
understanding of the environment. In the field of architecture, for instance, AR allows 
new buildings proposals visualization, and their impact assessment, on its planned 
site. To do that, a Geographic Information System (GIS) is needed to provide and 
manage and filter public queries with different levels of accurate and upgradeable 
information. In short, we need to link a 3D model to a database which contains all  
the necessary information associated with it. This process has been the first target of 
this work. 



 Architectural Geo-E-Learning 189 

 

Furthermore, the introduction of new learning methods 3.0 and new collaborative 
technologies, besides the new ways of information access via 3G phones or tablets, 
offer new opportunities to provide educational multimedia content. New representa-
tion systems and management tools are getting closer and easier to use. As part of the 
architectural or urban planning, these systems provide new tools for the representation 
of architectural forms and related content. In adition to this capabilities, cloud compu-
ting thechnology which allows sharing applications and services via Internet at any 
time, generates a workflow where teaching experience becomes a new paradigm of 
training processes and contextual learning. The evaluation of a methodology focused 
on the training of architects and planners is the second objective of this investigation. 

Our proposal involves methodological changes which include information man-
agement through GIS technologies, visualization using RA, and all types of mobile 
devices interaction. A free application that support all this features is Layar© by 
SPRXmobile©, initially designed for tourist information. In our case, we used this 
platform because of its compatibility with all mobile operating systems. Registration 
of virtual information is based on the use of GPS, which is accurate enough for  
outdoor environments.  

The teaching experience, that was performed to validate the previous premises, 
arises at Master level subjects. They involve the use of ICTs applied to the analysis 
and territorial representation, where 3D GIS systems, 3D modeling, and Urban Virtual 
Reality are combined. The proposed approach is based on the use of smartphones to 
incorporate virtual models generated by the students in an existing AR platform to 
view them on site, through their own mobile devices. We tried to promote new  
learning strategies for sharing, collaborating and transmitting information to other 
participants. To address the process scientifically, we developed a case focused on 
large-scale urban projects, in particular on the campus BKC (Barcelona Knowledge 
Campus), University of Barcelona (UB) and Polytechnic University of Catalonia 
(UPC). 

2 Framework. ICT 3.0. Geo-Elearning 

Currently, ICT technologies related to Web 2.0 environments, such as RA or Geo-
location, besides mobile devices popularity and their recent advances, open new pros-
pects in Mobile Learning (ML) [1], a specific field of E-Learning (EL). Thanks to this 
new approach, it is now possible to design teaching activities where student’s queries 
about a particular site are facilitated to share information, experiences, and content, 
most of the time, own generated. It is known as Web 3.0. These methods can generate 
extra student’s motivation because of the use of their own devices in real environ-
ments [2]. Smartphones GPS integration in education [3], and 3D data visualization in 
outdoor environments [4] has been already tested. In the case of urban planning [5] 
[6] as well as historical heritage, we can find systems that link graphical information 
systems with databases, as assitance tools for interpretation and information compila-
tion. Other studies discuss the proper integration of spatial data from different sources  
 



190 E. Redondo et al. 

 

[8], they mostly rely on information mapping and the use of conventional GIS [9]. 
But, those systems do not usually use AR techniques to geolocate information, and 
they merely generate a model from photographs or by the use of laser scanner tech-
niques. These projects neither deal with database maintenance and queries filtering, in 
real time, nor by the implementation of AR in teaching environments. 

On the other hand, the emergence of web-based 3D globe viewers with elevations, 
satellite and aerial images, maps and 3D features, such as Google Earth© or Virtual 
Earth©, has promoted the exchange and visualization of geo-referenced 3D models in 
a natural way. Despite its shortcomings, success of these visualization tools is greater 
than traditional 3D globe viewers based on VRML and X3D [10]. Moreover, the use 
of an RA urban planning systems to allow consultation through mobile devices, as 
intended in our trial, has been reported recently [11], [12], [13]. Other authors [14] 
investigated the use of smartphones as a tool for public participation in urban plan-
ning projects. But research addressing these issues is still poorly documented. The 
introduction of more user-friendly technologies (such as mobile phones, tablet, social 
networks, etc.), in the learning process, is an educational strategy that removes the 
traditional and bored lectures. In this case, it helps to address the problem of urban 3d 
models design, its georeferencing, its consultation and its assessment on site through 
mobile devices dynamically. 

3 Teaching Context 

The experiment was carried out by 11 students of Architecture and Planning, in an 
elective course called "ICT applied to Spatial Analysis", which is tough in the Re-
search Master in Land Management and Valuation of UPC, Barcelona-Tech. We 
worked within the scope of BKC, during the academic year 2011-2012. Total course 
duration was 60 hours. This method is currently being replicated (during 2012-2013), 
in the Master in Processes and Graphical Expression in Architectural Urban Projec-
tion, in the Center of Arts, Architecture and Design (CUAAD, Universidad de Guada-
lajara, Mexico). 

4 Methodology 

4.1 Modelling, Geolocation and Virtual Models Visualization 

We have started from BKC contents, in particular, documents and planimetric images 
provided by the authors of the project. Each student should have a mobile device 
equipped with camera, GPS and 3G connection, and was required to download the 
free browser Layar Viewer©. The process aims to incorporate virtual models generat-
ed by students in a mobile application and view them on its planned site. To do this 
we used a Geolocation-based AR application which uses GPS, compass, and other 
sensors in the student’s mobile phone to provide a “heads-up” display of various  
 



 Architectural Geo-E-Learning 191 

 

geolocated points-of-interest (POI’s). In this case, student’s Architectural proposals 
placed on the campus. Students worked with Sketchup© and 3dsMax©, to perform 
volumetric models and textures design, using real building materials. Secondly,  
they were divided into different groups A, B, and C. Each group modeled three  
proposals with the information provided, according to the preset numbers, and set 
coordinates origin at point 0,0,0 of the modeling program. Then models were  
exported to *.Obj format, and they were imported from the LayerModelConverter© 
(LMC, easy installation and free) program, which generates a specific file to be 
readed by Layar viewer. In addition, UTM coordinates should be recorded to be  
associated to the model in the database. In order to avoid problems, in this point,  
students should control the export path, check the units, activate the texture maps and 
change all YZ coordinates.  

Previously an information channel was generated as a developer in the layar plat-
form. The channel was published using BKC basic information and was configured to 
allow the use of filters. Comprehensive filter settings helped users to find POIs that 
were interesting easily, and to separate proposals by groups. Database and PHP file 
was hosted in a public server with PHP, MySQL, Java, support.   

Meanwhile, students have installed Layar© RA browser, in their mobile devices. 
Once installed students were required to locate the particular channel created. In this 
case, it was located within the category of geo-layers of architecture and buildings, 
named "Tesis_Albert_app". Students proceed to filter by groups the architectural 
proposals. In our experiment a group of students evaluated the models of the other 
groups. The query is sent to the server host, which returns the selected POI. They are 
shown in the screen superimposed to the real image captured by the camera. As we 
approach or focus on one in particular, at the bottom of the screen appears a label with 
the model reference information and distance from the user. Clicking that label,  
students can acces to questionnaire "iweb" to respond and make comments about 
appearance, impact and scale of the building. 

4.2 On Line and Contextual Questionnaires Design 

The next step to complete the “on site” learning process is the contextual question-
naires design, which ought to be answered by students once they had located all  
proposals generated by different groups. The questionnaire is accessible through a 
descriptive label in the device display or by pressing on virtual buildings models. We 
have proposed two different questionnaires: in the case of existing buildings, students 
can access to questionnaries about the use of technology and system usability assess-
ment, according to a standardized methodology for these experiments; for new build-
ings, students evaluated and reviewed all information linked to them (Fig 1), as 
project plans, memory, or project rendered views, which provided aditional insights. 
In addition, students should choose the best viewpoint to appreciate the integration of 
the new project with the existing building.Personal responses were sent directly to the 
teacher who received and analized the information. 



192 E. Redondo et al. 

 

Fig. 1. Design and implemen
experience. Source: The authors.

4.3 Case Study  

The students have differe
different disciplines anded
most of them were arch
computer training is not inc
 

 

Fig. 2. BKC projects on Layar
gy for 3G mobile devices. BKC

They were divided into t
buildings, according to pla
each group wich were code
on their computer skills stu
projects assigned in three s
geo-referenced, and teache
tion to the database that f
guided tour through the ca
cated, tested, and evaluated
to make the experience, eve

ntation process of on-line contextual questionnaires used in 
. 

ent profiles (they came from 5 different countries, 
ducational areas): from Latin America, to Saudi Arab
hitects from countries where planning and compuls
cluded. 

 

r platform. Feasibility Study of “on site” visualization method
C projects on Layar platform. 

three groups: A for existing buildings, and B and C for n
anned campus project. They modeled three buildings 
ed as folows: B1, B2 and B3, C1, C2, and C3. Depend
udents worked in pairs or individually. They developed 
essions of four hours each. Once modeled, proposals w

ers proceeded to export and upload all generated inform
feeds the channel. In the last session, all groups mad
ampus, where Student’s Architectural proposals were 
d. Since not all students had 3G phones, they were poo
en with the phone of another partner. 

 

n the 

and  
bia, 
sory  

dolo-

new 
for 

ding 
the 

were 
ma-

de a 
lo-

oled 



 

 

Fig. 3. Sample im

5 Results 

5.1 Results in the Case 

The experience was innova
so they could visualized o
geo-locate information, the
GPS accuracy was poor, as
and the object visualizatio
enough to score the propo
in their planned site, wer
heigh, etc… 

Questionnaire responses 
in the exercise. Results sh
the activity, and the cours
usefulness of the technolgo
achieved. 

6 Evaluation 

To validate the experiment,
in the same way we did in 
is divided in three parts: Pe
Teaching content and cou
software used.  

In relation to students 
technology, should be note
Computer Aided Design (
office applications. The mo
ledge resulted in LINUX a
 

Architectural Geo-E-Learning 

mages of projects from BKC visualization “on site” 

Study on BKC 

ative: 100% students were able to complete the exerc
on site their proposals. Using their mobile devices 
y evaluated all buildings from differents groups. Althou

s expected, both the application of semitransparent textu
on at a distance, allowed the recreation of a scene t
osals and assess their visual impact. Buildings, displa
re assessed using issues such the scale, color, locati

were used as a mechanism to verify student’s participat
howed student’s high degree of satisfaction in relation
se contents. The self-assessments about the interest 
y were useful to get an idea of the high level of accepta

, we conducted a usability questionnaire as detailed abo
other experiments of this R&D project. The questionn

ersonal training and prior knowledge about the technolo
urse material opinion; and finally, AR technology 

personal training and the prior knowledge level of 
ed that the most often used applications were "Email" 
CAD) applications, followed by "Internet browsers" 

ost used operating system was Windows and the less kno
and AR systems. (Scale: 0 = none, 5= advanced). Sim

193 

 

cise,  
and  
ugh 
ures 
true 

ayed  
ion,  

tion 
n to  
and  

ance 

ove; 
aire 

ogy; 
and  

the  
and 
and 
ow-

milar  



194 E. Redondo et al. 

 

data was obtained from ot
CAD applications, possibly
as architects. Global opinio
the prior ignorance of AR te
 
 

Fig. 4. Average results abou

Related to the opinion, te
noted that it was very high 
cises in accordance with th
more than 4.00 out of 5 po
possibility of learning such
probably due to the registra

And related to augmente
dents found them useful in 
having no prior knowledge 

In a correlation analysis 
a high correlation (0.69) w
and the quality of the prese
teaching experience. Not b
exercises independently or 
relation (0.86), however, w
the most important variabl
knowledge of technology 
were not significantly corre

 

ther ICT courses evaluated. Note the high punctuation
y because students are on their final phase of their train
on was rated very positively at the end of the course desp
echnology.  

 

ut personal trainingthe and prior knowledge of AR Technology

eaching content, and material of the course, there should
rated. Material representativeness and the number of ex
he objectives were optimal. The final average rating w

oints (Fig. 5). The worst rated question was referred to 
h content independently. Software used was also low ra
ation inaccuracy based on GPS. 
ed reality technology and software used, 100% of the 
the field of architecture and building construction, desp
of it. Final assessment was 4,27 points out of 5.  
between the course global opinion and the other variab

was detected with: the representativeness of the exerci
ntation. So these variables are crucial to the success of 
eing so correlated with the fact of being able to solve 
with the number of exercises proposed. The strongest c

was in the use of appropriate software, and this is, therefo
le to consider in future work. Variables related to p
and the use of different software and operating syste

elated with the overall opinion of the course. 

n in 
ning 
pite 

y 

d be 
xer-
was 
the 

ated, 

stu-
pite 

bles, 
ises 
this 
the 

cor-
fore, 
prior 
ems 



 

 

Fig. 5. Top: Rating table ab
Botton: Rating table about tech

7 Conclusions 

We’ve tested the use of new
tecture as a complement to
second cycle courses of gra
this case, the experience wa
Thus we’ve completed an 
planners.  

The ability of spatial rep
of different complexity and
models have been also op
Moreover we evaluated the
integrated on mobile device

Geo-location, RA, and 
improve student’s academic
times by the student. The t
at any time. However, a

Architectural Geo-E-Learning 

 

out global opinion, content, and material of the course La
hnology and software used. 

w mobile AR technologies in a master's program in arc
o other experiments. They had been carried out in first 
aduates in the European Higher Education Area (EHEA)
as performed within a larger framework of a R&D proj
initial assessment in all training levels of architects 

presentation of AR technology has been assessed in mod
d level of realism. The processes to generate and visua
ptimized to suit the capabilities of 3G mobile phon

e ability of spatial location of the Geo-location technolo
es. 

mobile technologies, used in the teaching proces
c performance. They allow reducing learning and respo
teacher, in turn, can extend the learning process anywh
architectural models generation with AR is sometim

195 

ayar.  

chi-
and 
). In 
ect. 
and 

dels 
alize 
nes.  
ogy 

ses,  
onse 
here  
mes  



196 E. Redondo et al. 

 

complicated and of poor quality in most application. Probably, due to the geometry 
simplification to reduce the number of triangles to be processed. To counter this effect 
and to achieve realism in the AR scene is necessary to use lighting simulation  
techniques to be applied in textures.  

This difficulty is lower for higher level students, master's or postgraduate, as they 
have better computer background of 2D drawings, 3D rendering, and image 
processing required in these processes. On the contrary if they have no previous expe-
rience is better to use high usability programs like SketchUp with special plugins for 
them. Geo-location of architectural models using 3G phones based on GPS is poor, 
and only feasible to be seen at a distance of over 25 meters. Therefore we can con-
clude that these technologies are becoming accessible and easy to use. They increase 
student satisfaction and interest in the course content as they feel very motivated and 
are regular users of mobile devices. 

In reltaion to the second experiment that is being replicated in the CCU of the 
UDG, Mexico, we are currently awaiting final presentations of student work to be 
evaluated. For now, we can say that the number of students who participated in the 
experiment was 26 and only 41% were able to develop all practices. 

 

 

Fig. 6. Visualization process on site, of various projects of the CCU Convention Hotel, UDG. 
Source: The authors and Masters students. 

Acknowledgements. Project funded by the VI National Plan for Scientific Research, 
Development and Technological Innovation, 2008-2011, Government of Spain. No 
EDU-2012-37247/EDUC. 

References 

1. Tsvetozar, G., Evgenia, G., Angel, S.: M-Learning - a New Stage of E-Learning. In: Int. 
Conference on Computer Systems and Technologies. CompSysTech. (2004) 

2. Sharples, M.: The Design of Personal Mobile Technologies for Lifelong. Learning  
Computers and Education 34, 177–193 (2000) 

3. Zhang, B., Looi, C.-K., Seow, P., Chia, G., Wong, L.-H., Chen, W., So, H.-J., Soloway, E., 
Norris, C.: Deconstructing and reconstructing: Transforming primary science learning via 
a mobilized curriculum. Computers & Education 55, 1504–1523 (2010) 

4. Bioret, N., Moreau, G., Servieres, M.: Towards Outdoor Localization from GIS Data  
and 3D Content Extracted from Videos. In: IEEE International Symposium on Industrial 
Electronics (ISIE 2010), pp. 3613–3618 (2010) 



 Architectural Geo-E-Learning 197 

 

5. Huang, B., Jiang, B., Li, H.: An integration of GIS, virtual reality and the Internet for visu-
alization, analysis and exploration of spatial data. International Journal of Geographical  
Information Science 15(5), 439–456 (2001) 

6. Kwan, M.-P.: Interactive geovisualization of activity-travel patterns using three-
dimensional geographical information systems: a methodological exploration with a large 
data set. Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies 8(1-6), 185–203 (2000) 

7. Droj, G.: Cultural Heritage Conservation by GIS. Nyugat-Magyarországi Egyetem,  
Geoinformatikai Kar, Székesfehérvár. University of Oradea 1-10 (2010) 

8. Belussi, A., Migliorini, S.: A framework for integrating multi-accuracy spatial data in geo-
graphical applications. GeoInformatica 16(3), 523–561 (2011) 

9. Hosse, K., Schilcher, M.: Temporal Gis For Analysis And Visualisation of Cultural  
Heritage. In: Proceedings of CIPA XIX International Symposium, Commission V, WG5, 
Antalya, Munich, pp. 1–6 (consultado January 24, 2013), 
http://cipa.icomos.org/index.php?id=61 

10. Breunig, M., Zlatanova, S.: 3D geo-database research: Retrospective and future directions. 
Computers & Geosciences 37(7), 791–803 (2011) 

11. Anagnostou, K., Vlamos, P.: Square AR: Using Augmented Reality for Urban Planning. 
In: 2011 Third International Conference on Games and Virtual Worlds for Serious  
Applications, pp. 128–131. IEEE (2011) 

12. Lonsing, W.: Architectural models in urban landscapes: Synthesis of markers and virtual 
structures. In: IEEE International Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality - Arts, 
Media, and Humanities, pp. 109–110. IEEE (2011) 

13. Anagnostou, K., Vlamos, P.: Square AR: Using Augmented Reality for Urban Planning. 
In: 2011 Third International Conference on Games and Virtual Worlds for Serious  
Applications, pp. 128–131. IEEE (2011) 

14. Allen, M., Regenbrecht, H., Abbott, M.: Smart-phone augmented reality for public  
participation in urban planning. In: Proceedings of the 23rd Australian Computer-Human 
Interaction Conference on - OzCHI  2011, pp. 11–20. ACM Press, New York (2011) 
 


	Architectural Geo-E-Learning
	Geolocated Teaching in Urban Environments with Mobile Devices: A Case Study and Work in Progress
	1 Introduction
	2 Framework. ICT 3.0. Geo-Elearning
	3 Teaching Context
	4 Methodology
	4.1 Modelling, Geolocation and Virtual Models Visualization
	4.2 On Line and Contextual Questionnaires Design
	4.3 Case Study

	5 Results
	5.1 Results in the Case Study on BKC

	6 Evaluation
	7 Conclusions
	Acknowledgements.

	References




