












































USPDF189646_Jornadas Santander.pdf


 

 

 

FROM BARCELONA TO VANCOUVER:  
THE USE OF THE GREEN AREAS ALONG SPACE/TIME 

 

Giuseppe Massimo Puglisi 
ETSAB - Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya 

giuseppe.massimo.puglisi@upc.edu 

Directores de la tesis doctoral: 
Antonio Millán Gómez, ETSAV – Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya 
Ester Pujadas Gispert, ETSAV – Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya 

 

 

Palabras clave: Barcelona,  áreas verdes, paisaje, Digital Turn, luz natural, luz artificial, 
paisajes nocturnos  

Resumen:  
El enfoque de esta reflexión es sobre el paisaje: en su relación con los jardines, la 
arquitectura y el medio ambiente, y el uso de las áreas a lo largo del espacio y el tiempo. A 
lo largo de la historia, las áreas verdes se conciben como resultado de una necesidad para 
las ciudades, un espacio añadido a las áreas construidas, volviéndose un impedimento 
para los Servicios del Eco Sistema Ecológico. Recientemente nos empezamos a dar cuenta 
de los nuevos factores que dan una nueva perspectiva a los "pulmones de la ciudad”. El 
ritmo de la ciudad en sí ha cambiado, el tiempo de uso de los espacios verdes debe 
cambiar junto con él: la hipótesis es que necesitamos extender el uso de estas áreas 
durante las 24 horas también. 

________________________________________________________________________________________________________ 

Keywords: Barcelona, Green Areas, Landscape, Digital Turn, biothings, natural light, 
artificial light, nocturnal landscapes. 

Abstract:  
The focus of this reflection is about the landscape: in its relation with gardens, architecture 
and environment, and the use of the areas along space and time. Along history the green 
areas are conceived as a result of a necessity for the cities, a space acquired for the build 
up areas, becoming an impediment for the Eco System Services.” Recently, we become 
aware of the new factors that give a new perspective to the “lungs of the city”. The rhythm 
of the city itself has changed, the time of use of green spaces needs to change along with it: 
the hypothesis is that we need to extend the use of the areas during a 24 hour day as well. 

211



Giuseppe Massimo Puglisi  

 

1. INTRODUCTION: UNDERSTANDING THE MOMENT TO CREATE THE FUTURE 
The concept of green spaces for urban environment has changed along history 

Recreational areas for the nobility and for rich people at the beginning, they changed 
to be areas for citizens becoming part of the planning process of the city itself. The location 
and the popularity of each area are differentiated depending also from the use for what 
they are destined for. Recently, the most dominant feature of walking and enjoying the 
green areas within the suburban space, we become aware of the new factors that give a 
new perspective to the «lungs of the city». The raise of internet, wifi, apps1, electric cars2 
versus recreational, ecological necessities, are accompanying the modern smart city into a 
new recognition of its own heritage, including the green areas. We are now conscious that 
the present planning must be done for a future possible: and this use must be extended in 
space and time as well. 

Cities are undergoing a profound transformation: the convergence of digital 
information (bits) and physical environment (bricks)3. So, because the rhythm of the 
city itself has changed, the time of use of green spaces needs to change along with it: 
the hypothesis is that we need to extend the use of the areas during a 24 hour day as well. 
The reason is that the necessity of green spaces is also a necessity adapted to a new 
reality in relation to certain accomplishments: what the energy of the city is, and about 
what it is related with. It’s in this sphere that we can recognize the heritage of the city 
itself, its geographical importance related to the use made of the space during the various 
hours of the day. 

A possible starting point is, in fact, that we face an organization of the city 
continuing adding green to the urbanized areas, and in which the buildings are 
conceived as an impediment for the Eco System Services. 

2. DEFINING A CONCEPT OF LANDSCAPE 

Our objective is to focus on landscape in its relation with  gardens,  architecture 
and environment: to identify alternatives ways to use the green areas along space/time. 
We want for explaining this, to trace a red line that join the various points. 

The environmental aspect talks about the research of Augustin Berque, related with 
the country, the territory. So, giving an order to define a starting point, we will say that 
everything starts with René-Louis de Girardin, Marquis of Vauvray, Jean-Jacques 
Rousseau's last pupil. In his book De la composition des paysages (1777) he actually 

                                                           
1 https://www.transportxtra.com/publications/parking-review/news/55878/delivery-to-vehicle-
appto-be-trialled-in-barcelona-car-parks. Last Access 15/11/2018. 
2 The MIT Senseable City Lab developed a research related with this point, and one interesting 
question is about the necessity to adapt the city to the new trends of the modern life: it’s probably 
needed to adapt the street lights to the new electric cars.   
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4CZc3erc_l4&feature=youtu.be  Last Access 14/11/2018 
3 In April 22 2016 the MIT Senseable City Lab presented the 2016 Forum on Future Cities — Bits 
and Bricks. They convened major stakeholders in the development of cities: leaders of industry 
research metropolitan governance and citizens at large. Between the various participants were 
Joan Clos, Executive Director of UN-Habitat, mayor of the city of Barcelona between 1994 and 2006. 
http://senseable.mit.edu/bitsbricks/ Last Access 14/11/2018 

212



From Barcelona to Vancouver: the use of the green areas along space/time 

 

said: «The composition of landscapes, can open the way to the renewal of the moral 
principles of the nation». He wrote in the last chapter: 

 «...If you want to achieve true happiness, you must always seek the simplest 
means and the arrangements closest to those of nature, because only those are 
true and will have a long-lasting effect.” He affirmed also that “along the big path and 
in the painting of the mediocre painters you can see just country, meanwhile the 
landscape is the joining of taste and sentiment».  

The country, the territory, that can be around us like in the painting of the less 
talented painters are different from the landscape: this last one it’s always the 
creation of taste. And it’s about exploring this thought that in the last 25 years in France 
they are employing effort and investigations. 

To explain better this concept, let’s start with this word: Country. We identify in this 
concept a territory with defined boundaries. Another signification send us to a less 
geological, physical meaning: a concept that creates a spacial set that, following the 
cataloging of Yves Lacoste,4 we will call of the fifth order. He differentiates 8 orders, 
starting from the bigger one (the continent) till the smaller one, measurable in metres: the 
rocks, the isolated trees, the houses. More poetically but close the concept we are going to 
explore, Duchamp defined the category of the «regarder» (the observer): the spectator 
that seeing the painting create the emotion of what is seeing. Not all the civilisations had 
the concept of «Landscape», like the old Greece, or there were even been anti-landscape, 
like the Christians before Saint Francis of Assisi. To be «landscaping» a society had to have 
something like literature, iconography or just a word used to describe this situation. And 
Berque said that the Chinese civilisation of 2000 B.C. had the landscape sensibility because 
was disposing of words like rocks and water. After centuries, in Europe, with the invention 
of the perspective and with the movement of the culture we arrive to have landscape 
sensibility. In this way Riegl creates the concept of Kunstwollen (Panofsky 1981) that 
means «artistic will». So, it’s in this interaction between observer and object of the 
observation that we define what we need to create the landscape.5 

3. OVER THE DUALITY GREEN - SPACE 

In our research we also remarked that the contemplation of the night landscape 
is a concept that finds its origins with the very birth of mankind. The concept of 
«night» has always been associated to something imaginative, the moment where the 
perception of the visible decreases and the reverberation of the other senses increases: in 
other words, things look different after dark.6 To explore better this concept the 
comparison will be given between two cities, Barcelona and Vancouver, that have 
developed their own way to use the green in the city: but where we also find a duality 
between green and city. This because, as we said, along history the green areas are 

                                                           
4 De la géopolitique aux paysages, 2003. 
5 «When you design landscapes, remember that it’s a journey. Nothing is fixed. Everything is going 
to evolve over time» (Kathryn Gustafson). 
6 The perception of the night is so different to that which has been recently explored in there 
different aspects by a proper exhibition called «After Dark», at the Museum The Exploratorium, in 
San Francisco.https://www.exploratorium.edu/visit/calendar/after-dark Last Access 17/11/2018. 

213



Giuseppe Massimo Puglisi  

 

conceived as a result of a necessity for the cities, a space acquired for the build up areas. 
In this sense, Gianni Celestini declares: 

«Il parco pur nella sua evoluzione resta comunque un’idea ed una struttura 
vincolata alla città consolidata. Le nuove forme dello sviluppo urbano 
contemporaneo richiedono una nuova formulazione dello spazio libero» 
 (Celestini 2002) 

More recently, in their article Can spatial form support Urban Eco System Services, 
Meta Bergahuser Pont and Lars Marcus declared that: 

«This type of research concerns the understanding of the resilience of urban 
systems in which urban systems are seen as integrated social-ecological 
systems, bridging the ancient dichotomy between human and ecological systems. 
Research shows that green spaces and its fragmentation are crucial for biodiversity 
and other ecosystem services» (Marcus et al. 2013). 

There are cases where the landscape architect is the one that takes control of the 
whole project. Others cases, where the benefit coming from the use of the green areas 
increase till the point that generate organizations developed to take care of most the city 
itself.7 

4. WORKING PLAN 

Following a planning and development scheme, I clearly define materials and 
methods as well. I am focused on searching for materials that starts from the historic 
sources till the actuality, to compare the works that has been done between the parks of 
Barcelona, Paris, and Vancouver. 

For this I am researching about: 

Material for parks (how they have been designed, for what they were/are used). 
The actuality of the city in relation with its own heritage and the necessity of each 
space. 
How the new social structure is evolving and how it will be integrated into the 
green space. 
A cross-disciplinary exploration of current work on visual design. 
Focus on the movement of people inside the city: study of flows. 
What creates the recognisability of a space: general and particular concepts. 
The ways in which the use of the space can affect our lives. 
The use of the areas extends in space/time: the space matrix method. 

 
5. WORKING PLAN 

Following the research, we realize that the necessity of green spaces is also a 
necessity adapted to a new reality in relation to certain accomplishments: what the 
energy of the city is, and about what it is related with. It’s in this sphere that we can 

                                                           
7 https://vancouver.ca/your-government/vancouver-board-of-parks-and-recreation.aspx 
Last Access 18/11/2018 

214



From Barcelona to Vancouver: the use of the green areas along space/time 

 

recognize the heritage of the city itself, its geographical importance related to the use 
made of the space during the various hours of the day. Today nocturnal urban model 
explode the traditional model of concentric cities. They are reconstituted around axes 
of mobility trough this multiplicity of networks that have to function 24hours a day: 
and for who it seems that the night doesn't exist. 

The very important element that we identify with the same concept of night and 
that mediate the passage between day and night is the artificial light, with its basic tool: 
the lamp.  

The power of the lamps,8 the rated luminous flux,9 the luminous efficiency,10 the 
average life of a lamp, its ability to be colored and finally the cost, represent the 
characteristics that come into play when choosing a particular light source: all related to 
the perception of colors, the return of a particular effect and the desired effect of 
landscaping that, accentuating the passages and emphasizing otherwise unobtainable 
contrasts, allow us to have in hand the tools suitable for a project of night fruiting of a 
natural place. 

Related with it, we will quote Mark Major that says: 

«The movement of light is a linear process where time and space meet. Any moment 
reveals frozen movement in time. […] Trough the passage of light we track the change 
of the day into night as well as form and surface moving into light». 

So, as we see, lighting is a Spatio - Temporal design field.  

It’s important to identify which are the elements with who we are working with, the 
tools, the plants and the final result that we want to obtain. So we have to take in 
considerations many important factors, and between them some specific element must 
be mentioned like the air, the water, the geographical area where the work needs to 
be developed. A very important factor that deserves to be underlined is that during the 
night, with the increase of the other senses and the push down of the vision, the help on 
the walk can be given by an acoustic support: an example can be showed by the walk on 
the gravel. 

The landscape, so defined, can be natural including forestal, pluvial and so on, or 
artificial: cities, industries, can be part of the landscape talk. All of this enters in the 
widest view of the territory, as a space that unites all the previous definitions, and that 
can be also marked and recognized during the night by the definition of its own lights. In 
this way we can identify the infrastructural nature of the «nightscape», and the night can 
reveal the large-scale of the networked territory. 

                                                           
8 Luminance quantifies the visual impression perceived by the eye from a bright or illuminated 
surface. It is an essential photometric measure of the entire lighting project because it allows to 
measure and compare different visual impressions. It is absolutely dependent on the materials, 
colors, and texture of the surface of the object being viewed, unlike the surface illumination of a 
surface, which is absolutely independent of these data. Therefore, in the analysis and creation of a 
night landscape, the brightness of the bright spots and illuminated surfaces will be taken into 
account. 
9 The power consumed by a lamp; is expressed in watts (symbol: W). 
10 The amount of energy irradiated by the source per second; it is expressed in Lumen (symbol lm). 

215



Giuseppe Massimo Puglisi  

 

 

Figure 1. Light+Time+Space illustrated diagram.  
(Source: Original image elaborated from “A Graphical Investigation of Light, Space, and Time in 

Lighting Design” by Antonia Peon Veiga, &Nathalie Rozot). 
 
 

 

 
Figure 2. Night Aerial Shot of Barcelona by Vincent Laforet as example of the infrastructural nature 

of the nightscape. Night as revealing of the large-scale, of the networked territory.  

216



From Barcelona to Vancouver: the use of the green areas along space/time 

 

So we remark that the idea that we formulate by looking at these spaces changes 
with the movement of the sun: with the coming of the evening the definitions change, 
not least the perceptions. We have at this point clarify also that, into this field, it 
doesn't exist a real normative to observe. As support to this affirmation I will quote 
Franco Zagari that, in his intervention in Barcelona COAC the past 31st of January 2018, 
in occasion of the conference «Paesaggio: a Che punto e’ la Notte?» expressed once again 
this necessity saying that: 

«[…] many signals let us thinking that landscaping is animated by a new mentality 
of reaction, with tools and methods more adequate to affirm new developing 
models: able to give back continuity between history, tradition and projection of 
future. So, it’s important to act now, to put quality in the Landscape, seeing as a 
necessary tool a necessary politic priority». 

And this politic priority has been manifested continuously in Barcelona: with the 
use of control system, the apps and the various technology always used, it has been till 
now at the cutting edge of the internet of things. This vision of the future defined by 
the use of apps during 24h is something that has been also developed by Vancouver: that 
want to reach the title of greenest city of the world in the 2020. To reach this aim, 
a strong programme developed by the Vancouver Park Board11 relate the agency with 
the project that has been developed in collaboration  with the Urbanarium Society and 
the UBC SA.L.A. 

 
Figure 3. Functional Matrix + Urban Transitional spaces illustrated diagram: space typologies and 

test design strategies that can be applied on a variety of urban transitional spaces.  (Source: 
“Groundbreaking: Alternative Ways of Greening the Urban Matrix” by “Sara Rickenbacher"). 

                                                           
11 The Vancouver Park Board, is an elected board that has possession, jurisdiction and control over 
public parks in Vancouver, and it's the only elected body of its kind in Canada. The board provides, 
preserve and advocate for the benefit of people, communities and the environment. 

217



Giuseppe Massimo Puglisi  

 

The world is moving towards a clean energy future. Architecture offers the 
opportunity to explore how a sustainable city could be created through understanding 
how a city works by its design. So, the actuality must show alternative ways of greening 
the Urban Matrix expanding its use period as well. 

6. THE ACTUAL POINT 

The use of the areas inside and around the city it must be promoted along the entire 
cycle of the day, closer to the necessity of the contemporary world. Its general possible 
use must be related with the simple question: in the future, do we think we will still use 
this space? And, if the answer is yes, what can we do to make that happen sooner? How? 
Whatever it will be that must be done, it probably will need to be related with the work 
of the phone and the apps.12 About these last one we recognize them as important tools 
that we use ordinarily in our normal daily life. With a research developed in Boston13 
they demonstrate that the 90% of adults use cells phones: going towards this idea, in 
Vancouver it has been developed one app that helps the citizens to interact with the 
municipality. Between the programs and strategies to reach the goal of greenest city of 
the world, they want to have green areas reachable by citizens in just 5 minutes walk 
from their home. To do this the municipality is acquiring areas to create green, or it’s 
just closing street to realize parks. The increasing of the green canopy supports the Eco 
System Services on which the city depends. 

 
Figure 4. Percent of the use of the phone technology between adults have increased over the years. 

The use of the app to search info or contact service regarding the city is the natural step. 
 (Source: Original Image elaborated from 

 https://www.boston.gov/departments/innovation-and-technology/apps). 
 

Related with this concept, we shall quote religiously MVRDV that says: 

«In a time of the “instant city” and fast - paced communication in the 
contemporary world, the buffer space for contemplation and return to nature 
becomes an essential feature for urban environment» - 24 hours a day as well we 
will add. 

                                                           
12 https://www.austintexas.gov/sites/default/files/files/Austin_Smart_City_proposal_2-4-16.pdf 
13 As final result they developed the BOS3 

218



From Barcelona to Vancouver: the use of the green areas along space/time 

 

 
Figure 5. Example of highlighted night life. (Source: http://www.futureoflight.philips.com/home/ 

environment/ ambitious-sustainability-goals-part-2). 

 
7. INITIAL HYPOTHESIS 

To talk about green areas in modern times, let us enter into a field that moves 
between achievement and wishes. Nowadays, the new vision of reality is strongly defined 
by the idea that «the new» evolves billion times faster than just 40 years ago (Carpo 
2017): and this new vision involves also the landscape field.14 But meanwhile this does 
move toward a direction where Artificial Intelligence (aka A.I.) takes a controlling 
position on the construction field (glorified by digital shapes and forms), it remains yet 
not reliable in the area of the proper conception of the project: in which the human 
instinct remains, still and luckily, indispensable.  

Starting from this, the fundamental idea that the contemporary bit is going to 
take over everything it seems both: an imminent and, at the same time, an indispensable 
tool. Although we easily recognize that the human brain is not capable to compete with 
the A.I.’s calculations, it’s this one that is able to give a billion of different solutions in 
the blink of an eye: and this last consideration shakes the market. We arrived to the 
point that the constructive algorithms of the new architecture are taking over so 
fast that their clear reference became now the work made by Mother Nature. 
Instinctively we look to what has been created. And the compositional randomness of 
the algorithm formed in nature, that shapes the forms of actual object, it’s a 
synonym once again, which refers to the most profoundly ancient thing of the 
universe: the concept of a generating matrix.15 It is this one that, combined with an 
instinctive compositional randomness, it manages to give a sequence of algorithms that 
keeps under control, not exactly strict we have to add, what has been done in the 
architectural technological field. Recently this one has been linked, more than other 
things, to the use of technology. Hence the deduction that the natural model, to which 
the sequence refers, has not yet found the right development in the main field of 
reference: the external landscape. 

                                                           
14 https://pld-m.com/de/forschungspavillon-20142015-in-stuttgartd/. Last view: 22/07/2018  
15 About this concept earlier Mitchell, between the 1987 and the 1991, wrote three influential 
books talking about computational and landscape. The Poetics of Gardens, instead, it has been 
written in collaboration with Charles Moore, and we expect to show that should not be seen as a 
detour from Mitchell´s path on computational design, but rather as a very key piece for 
understanding the relationship between meaning and logic in his coherent body. 

219



Giuseppe Massimo Puglisi  

 

So, new quantum technologies, geometries and weighted adaptation sequences 
now have a clearer reference into nature. And nature itself, which rewards the 
perfection of the very development of fractal models, now has a clear emulator in the 
generator of extreme spaces built into the «Biothing» model.16 The attempt is to create a 
sequence that starts from the machine and immediately becomes revisited in external 
self-supporting shapes. But the concept of nature is definitely a hardly predictable 
concept in terms of the final result of the image to be obtained: the ideal product should 
have the capacity to constantly adapt itself to the growth that spreads around the 
implementation. An instinctive model to follow, for example, could be the life cycle of a 
tree: this model is determined by concentric circles that declare, once the trunk is cut, its 
age. Adopting this concept, taking its inspiration, it might means to aggregate, from time 
to time, a new constructed element that connecting directly with the previous one, it’s 
ideally creating a work in progress model continuously new in its constant expansion’s 
process. A strong intuition will suggest, then, that a piece inside the nature  should  
grow  with  the  same  rhythm  of  the  trees  and  the  other  plants  that  are surrounding 
it. 

We are assuming in this way that the new man, when he can choose, he wants to 
live more in contact with nature: combining his intuitions with spaces marked by modern 
trends. However,  where  is  not  a  decision  determined  by  a  choice  it  comes  the  
concept  of necessity.17 

We need to reconfigure our eye, our vision towards the things with the tools that 
the technology can give to us. The cyborg self of the ocean of data and the reconfigured 
city will structure new spaces that will be destined to a new use, prolongated along space 
and time. 

These starting points with a metamorphosis of contemporary physics addressed to 
the production  of  an  artificial  super  partes  intelligence,  combine  knowledge  
with  the contemporary necessity to calculate and unify what man can not really emulate: 
the nature. 

It is this concept that does need to be revisited with the strategy of a new super 
human intuition, going beyond the already known super-human calculation: that residing 
in the high resolution of the computational field, it seeks its way to resume the 
complex possibilities inherent in nature. Assuming this, the necessary conjunction 
between art, architecture and philosophy should therefore be revisited in conjunction 
with the technological development: trusting the fact that the ocean of data at our 
disposal will finally allow us to find the right path. Complex information is distributed 
into the systems, and this one combined with a superhuman intuition would allow us 
to give smarter solutions than the most we could possibly produce. 

Already at the beginning of the new millennium, in 2003, with the exhibition of the 
Non- Standard Architectures18 at the Centre Pompidou in Paris, this concept has been 

                                                           
16 https://scriptedbypurpose.wordpress.com/participants/biothing/. Last access 4/11/2018. 
17 https://www.technologyreview.com/s/601928/smart-city-living-transforms-the-urban-
landscape/ Last Access 06/11/2018. 
18 https://www.centrepompidou.fr/cpv/resource/cpBeKA/rRREoKn. Last Access 17/11/2018. 

220



From Barcelona to Vancouver: the use of the green areas along space/time 

 

resumed: diving deeply into the conception of modern architectures and spaces. And it’s 
about spaces that, once again, the nature comes to help us with its example. 

In Africa, when a storm arrives, millions of insects begin to fly around with an 
intuitive way of finding the right path: by the conjunction of «bug» and «tornado», the 
forms generated have been defined as «bugnado». Due to the form that emulate the 
storm generated by a sequence of algorithms, we therefore see how important it is not 
only to explore the mathematical path, but to dive ourselves deeply within the field of 
design: and the shapes naturally generated by certain movements, can become the 
matrix of a new design concept within the design field. The work done in this sense by 
Capability Brown, becomes a way to go in the direction of strengthening the generative 
flows of space.19 

8. THE AREA 

The flows generated by the movements of many people (river of people) that pass 
through a given area every day determine constraints: and the comparison with the river 
determines a profound understanding of the possibilities of the form. This concept helped 
us to identify the perfect area to experiment our ideas. It’s in this area since 2009 that 
there has been developed as an interactive work between the municipality and the 
people: to express the idea that the area can valorise moments of joining of people and 
growing of culture. 

This area is related to the processes of transnational migration, with a strong 
presence of a big Chinese community. And it’s in this area, where it has been made 
already a lot of effort from part of the municipality to give value to the ancient limit of 
the city, that we identify the perfect place to study the process of its use during the 24 
hours. 

The actual park is a great location that is important for the area and for the 
whole of Barcelona. Easy to reach by private and public transport, the interaction 
between this border of Barcelona and the area of Sant Andria del Besos is highlighted 
by economic relations, and by the transformation of a territory which previously based 
its activity on production. The night time, following the hypothesis, should increase the 
quality of life of the area. 

We must therefore not only understand the energy of the place, but sometimes 
generate it and then strengthen it and strengthen it by giving it a shape. The 
internet of things helps in this sense. And not just architecture, but an extensive plan at 
the beginning can be conceived, starting from the conception of a prototype. A first 
attempt has been reached with the use of a 3D printer that use plastic to create 

                                                           
19 Lancelot Brown, was called "Capability", a name with which he is universally recognized, for his 
vision of the possibilities of the places in which he intervened. He worked by determining spaces 
that had as a reference model the romantic ideal of beauty, and which reduced the elements of the 
site to a minimum. His will was to create spaces that would suggest calm, peace, and a paradisiacal 
and simple return of beauty. The Poetics of Gardens - Charles Willard Moore, William J. Mitchell, 
William Turnbull MIT Press, 1993. 

221



Giuseppe Massimo Puglisi  

 

high resolution fabric of Architecture.20 The exploration of the concept preview a 
project that use closed elements mixed with the opened areas. The intention is to 
valorize the essences determining a way to interact between observer and landscape 
during the 24 hours. Privileged point of view, closed space with light that define the 
area, the design is a model-based reasoning activity. Applications of the new 
technologies in the design process should impact the connectivity with the urban 
space. 

The illumination of open spaces, therefore, can and must be, as has been said, 
the priority of a night identity. We are dealing with the same essences, with the same 
elements, visible during the day, but they will assume, as we said so far, a different 
character. The place, even at night, it characterizes the project. 

Figure 6. Experimental pavilion in Stuttgart by Achim Menges. Example of a possible model of 
pavilions.  (Source: http://www.achimmenges.net/?p=5561).

The safe use of these green areas, inside the city and on its borders, must 
guarantee the use in total security for the entire citizens: including the people with 
disability. Besides, the path and the logical connection between areas, they must be 
related to safe spaces where it’s possible to circulate using wheelchairs. The 
circulation must be guaranteed for the bicycle also, including some resting point and 
some little parking areas as well. Everything, differentiated between the various paths, 
needs to guarantee the circulation in total security. 
                                                           
20 Producing noise is incredibly demanding and the Xeno Cells developed by the Wonderlab 
research had as goal to reach to enter in harmony with the nature with the help of the A.I. 
The intention has in this case passed from being a simulation of the nature to get in tune with the 
nature. 

222



From Barcelona to Vancouver: the use of the green areas along space/time 

 

Understanding that this research is an exploration in progress, we will finally say 
that the plan should include an environmental education, including a biodiversity 
strategy: this last one to establish targets and actions in support, protection, 
restoration and enhancement of the habitat. 

9. LISTA DE REFERENCIAS

AA.VV. 1996. Barcelona, espai public. Barcelona: Adjuntament de Barcelona. 

Armengaud, M. et al. 2009. Nightscape: Nocturnal Landscapes. Barcelona: Gustavo Gili. 

Beauchard, J. 1999. La bataille du territoire. Paris: L’Harmattan. 

Carpo, M. 2017. The Second Digital Turn: Design Beyond Intelligence. London, England: The MITT 
Press, Cambridge, Massachussets. 

Celestini, G. 2002. L’architettura dei parchi a Barcellona. Gangemi Editore. 

Cole, K.C. 1980. Facets of lights: colors, images and things that glow in the dark. San Francisco: The 
Exploratium. 

Cooper, P.  2001. Il giardino new tech. Edizioni l’archivolto. 

Cortesi, I. 2000. Il parco pubblico, paesaggi 1985-2000. Federico Motta editore S.p.A. 

De Carlo, G. 1988. Nelle citta’ del mondo. Marsilio /Saggi. 

Goethe. J.W.  1983. Traité de coulours. Triades. 

Holland, P. et al. 2016. The impact of technology on work in the twenty-first century: exploring the 
smart and dark side. The International Journal of Human Resource Management 27:21, 2579-2581. 

L’Aube/Datar. 2000. L’aménagement en 50 tendances. Paris: Bibliothèque des territoires. 

Lee, K. F. 2011. The role of outdoor recreation in promoting human health. Illuminare 9 (1): 47–58. 

Marcus, L., Berghauser Pont, M., & Gren, Å. 2013. “Can spatial form support urban ecosystem 
services: representing patches and connectivity zones for bees using space syntax methodology”. 
In 9th International Space Syntax Symposium. Sejong University Press. 

Mc Dowell. 1999. Mente e mondo. Edizioni Einaudi. 

Ouvrage Collectif. 2000. Nuits et Lumiere. Les annales de la recherche urbane n.87, Paris la Defense, 
ministere de L’Equipemente/PUCA. 

Panofsky, E.  1981. The Concept of Artistic Volition. Critical Inquire Vol 8, N 1. 

Rozot N. et al. 2010. Drawing Light: a Graphical Investigation of Light, Space and Time in Lighting 
Design. Parsons Journal for Information Mapping. 

Tanizaki. 1989. Eloge de l’ombre. Publications Orientalistes de France. 

Tiberghien, G. 1993. Land Art. Paris: Edicion Carré. 

Turrell, J. 1980. Light and space. New York: Whitney museum of American art. 

223


