





















































09_Track_EducationalInnovation


Augmented reality uses in educational research projects: 
The “Falcones Project”, a case study applying technology 

in the Humanities framework at high school level 
Isidro Navarro 

ETSAB, Universitat Politècnica de 
Catalunya Barcelona Tech 

Avda. Diagonal, 649 
08028, Barcelona, Spain 

+34 649111461 
Isidro.navarro@upc.edu 

Antonio Galindo 
La Salle Virgen del Mar 

Avda Federico García Lorca, 60 
04005, Almería, Spain 

+34 600 418 470 
a04galindo@gmail.com 

David Fonseca 
Arquitectura La Salle, Universitat 

Ramon Llull 
C/ Quatre Camins 2 

08022, Barcelona, Spain 
+34-932902472 

fonsi@salle.url.edu 
 

ABSTRACT 
In the present paper, we describe the methodology for the 
implementation of Augmented Reality (AR) on a project with 
high-school students, in order to display content related to the 
book La reina descalza (Ildefonso Falcones), which was 
presented at the official launch of the bestseller. The project was 
developed by a group of students in the Humanities and 
Technology specialties of the school La Salle Virgen del Mar, 
Almeria, Spain. The method proposed is based on the recognition 
of the cover picture of the book, which acts as a mark of AR, 
allowing for the viewing of a series of digital images that are 
linked to multimedia content developed by the students. The 
proposed method is intended as a technologically advanced and 
entertaining system for use in educational environments that 
enables the display of information to students in addition to the 
printed documentation with which they are provided. The main 
objective of this work is a qualitative assessment of the use and 
adaptation of RA content in research projects at high school levels 
for displaying multimedia content. 

Categories and Subject Descriptors 
H.5.1 [Information interfaces and presentation (e.g., hci)]: 
Multimedia Information Systems-Artificial, augmented, and 
virtual realities.  

K.3.1 [Computers and education]: Computer Uses in Education-
Collaborative learning 

General Terms 
Performance, Design, Experimentation, Human Factors 

Keywords 
Augmented reality, educational research, human-computer 
interaction, mobile learning. 

1. INTRODUCTION 
One visualization technology that is gaining attention and being 
incorporated into every field of society is Augmented Reality 
(AR). Its creators [1] define AR as a version of virtual reality in 
which the user can see the real world with virtual objects mixed or 

superimposed on it. Unlike virtual reality, AR does not replace the 
real environment; rather, AR uses the real environment as a 
background. The final result is a file with data, static images, or a 
dynamic 3D virtual model superimposed onto a real-time video of 
the environment [2]. This scene is shown to the user via a 
computer screen or other device, such as a projector, digital board, 
special glasses, smartphone, or tablet. This concrete superposition 
capability between virtual models and reality makes this 
technology an interesting resource in any type of teaching that 
aims to improve students’ spatial comprehension [3]. The primary 
questions currently relating to this field of research are how to 
incorporate AR in the classroom and how to evaluate the 
experience, in order to increase the motivation, satisfaction, and 
the curriculum.   
The case study presented in this paper was carried out with first-
year students of the high school La Salle Virgen del Mar, in 
Almeria, Spain. The students of this educational center 
collaborated with the La Salle Campus Barcelona (Ramon Llull 
University) to create the ‘Falcones project,’ which involved 
generating AR content AR with the photo on the cover of La reina 
descalza, the latest bestseller by writer Ildefonso Falcones. A 
study of this was carried out to assess the experience (user 
experience evaluation of the project using a qualitative method) 
and the feasibility of incorporating AR in an active way in new 
educational processes at high school levels. 
2. THEORETICAL, PEDAGOGICAL 
AND DIDACTIC FOUNDATIONS 
There are extensive amounts of studies of the relationship 
between student motivation, degree of satisfaction, and the user 
experience or student perception in the interaction with and 
teaching of applied collaborative works, with recent contributions 
having helped to design new e-learning experiences or dislocated 
teaching using IT (Information Technologies) [4,5]. This is not 
however the case when the focus is the use of mobile technology 
and AR applications, which are more extensively studied from a 
technological perspective or from the perspective of sociological 
and communication impacts instead of its educational capacity or 
ability to transform teaching, which is the focus of the present and 
previous studies implemented by our team [3, 6-7]. 
Recent uses of AR in the areas of entertainment and education 
demonstrate the potential of this technology [8-11]. In education, 
however, AR might be considered a new tool, and further studies 
are necessary, particularly in order to devote attention to the user 
experience, learning process, and its entertainment capability, 
which can increase interest in less interesting classes, including 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not 
made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear 
this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components 
of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with 
credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to 
redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request 
permissions from Permissions@acm.org.  

TEEM '13, November  14 - 15 2013, Salamanca, Spain 
Copyright 2013 ACM 978-1-4503-2345-1/13/11… $15.00  
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2536536.2536599  



First International Conference on Technological Ecosystems for Enhancing Multiculturality (TEEM’13) 

 412 

classes in which the content is presented with no interaction with 
the student. 
The implementation and the use of IT in classrooms, schools, 
colleges and universities is a fait accompli, having become 
especially extensive during the last decade. We can find examples 
ranging from early childhood education (with the use of digital 
whiteboards), through secondary education (the widespread use of 
computers in almost every subject), to higher education, with 
specific and advanced uses of all types of media, highlighting the 
internet and all kinds of intranets and digital solutions [12]. 
Parallel to this process, new technologies such as the e-book have 
revolutionized the publishing industry. Publication in digital 
format has eliminated the barrier of the requirement for the 
physical support of the book or magazine to make content 
accessible through all kinds of devices. The resulting extension of 
the ability to acquire, read and store publications has enabled an 
innovation in content management, and users now have the ability 
to customize their experience of reading and to adapt the format to 
their desires. 
The first initiatives similar to the use of RA for the adding of 
multimedia content in printed documents were the intermediate 
use of QR codes (Quick Response codes). One of the first 
examples of this use was Ubimark’s adaptation of Jules Verne’s 
classic Around the World in 80 Days, which was enhanced with 
QR codes that incorporate additional information such as videos 
or images the user is able to see from the mobile device (Fig. 1).  

 
Fig. 1 http://2d-code.co.uk/around-the-world-with-qr-codes/  

However, RA is currently most widely used in advertising and 
marketing before that in editorial content, being in this way an 
innovative project in the scope of application, as well as in the 
fields of development and education. At the basis of the 
educational project is a use of IT elements capable of providing 
better representation and formulation of the concepts dealt with in 
the subject, overcoming the difficulties of the learning process 
without forgetting the students’ prior knowledge, and, perhaps 
most significantly, allowing for a flexible, collaborative 
environment, which marks a radical departure from the notion of a 
simple repository of information. Achieving these principles, we 
will improve not only the expected skills of self-learning and 
resource management of the student, but also, in an intrinsic way, 
will be providing capacities related to research and reflection [13], 
training the student in understanding and deepening of the 
knowledge presented [12].  

3. METHOD 
The project was developed during the second half of the 2012-
2013 academic year as a research activity in the subject CMC 
("Ciencias para el Mundo Contemporáneo" – Science for the 
Contemporary World) among first-year students of the high 
school La Salle Virgen del Mar, Almeria, Spain. The 
implementation of this was achieved by way of the following: 
• Five students were commissioned to develop the technology 

platform for using AR. They were responsible for the 
preparation of the picture on the cover as a generic mark as 
well as the virtual images that linked with the multimedia 
content.  

• Eight students developed both the multimedia content and 
the documentation associated with it. In addition to 
generating a presentation using AR, they also generated a 
Prezi explanation.  

• Two members of staff coordinated both groups: the lecturer 
in charge of CMC and a consultant of the La Salle Campus 
Barcelona specializing in AR. 

 
The students worked in two groups separated in the areas of 
technology and documentation to generate the audiovisual and 
digital content designed for the cover of the book (published by 
the publisher Random House Mondadori-Grijalbo and currently 
for sale). 
3.1 Phases of the project (Chronology) 
This initiative arose from a contest for research projects called 
LSdreams (http://lsdreams.lasalleuniversities.net/), directed to all 
La Salle schools of the RELEM region (Région Lasallienne 
Européenne-Mediterranéenne). In the third edition of this contest 
the winning group in the category of Engineering was formed by 
five students of La Salle Virgen del Mar, which co-operated with 
La Salle Campus Barcelona for this initiative. 
The project started at the beginning of April 2013, and proceeded 
via the following steps: 
• Explanation of the protocols for working with RA from 

different applications and selection of that to be used in 
the experience, Aurasma. This process was done in a 
compacted schedule of about six hours of work over two 
days. 

• Selection of physical work on which to deploy the 
experience. Given that the visit of Ildefonso Falcones to 
the college to present his latest book was scheduled in 
early May, it was decided to use the cover of the book to 
develop multimedia content related to the storyline of it. 
The contents selected for development were: 
o Biography of the writer Ildefonso Falcones. 
o History of the gypsies in Spain, affecting the Great 

Raid of 1751.  
o Slavery in Spain during the 18th century.  
o Tobacco in the 18th century.  
o The city of Seville in 1750.  
o The Coliseum of the Prince in the 18th century, 

explaining the situation and the typology of the 
spectator of the time.  

• The presentation of the content described above was done 
by way of:  
o Enlargement of the book used as support to 

display the content using Prezi. 
o Video recording, for some of which professional 

dancers were hired. 
o Re-formatted videos for AR visualization. 



Augmented reality uses in educational research projects: The “Falcones Project”, a case study applying technology in the 
Humanities framework at high school level 

 413 

3.2 Technological implementation description 
As we have stated previously, the process began by distributing 
the work (Fig. 2) into two parts:  

• The training of students in the creation of content with 
RA. This process was carried out in three sessions for a 
total of six hours, during which the work with QR 
codes, the technique to relate content with recognition 
of image (image-tracking), and the deployment of AR 
content using Aurasma platform were explained.  

• The other group developed the necessary documentation 
for the submission. These students were responsible for 
describing the subjects selected using the online PREZI 
software, which in a later iteration will be transformed 
into video format to fit into the Aurasma platform.  

 

 
Fig. 2 Presentation of the groups of the project with students 

and teachers 
The next phase of work focused on the creation of the sequence of 
digital images that will show on the cover of a book with AR 
when it is captured with a mobile device with a camera and with 
the selected application. (In order to be able to view the 
multimedia content generated, it is necessary to download the 
application ‘La Salle AR,’ available for the Android systems in 
Google Play (http://goo.gl/agdYV), and IOS in iTunes 
(http://goo.gl/lcCWH).) This can be seen in Figure 3: 

 
Fig. 3 Example of interactive menu visualized with AR on the 
cover of the book La reina descalza, Ildefonso Falcones, 2013. 
The process of content generation is distributed over four steps to 
define the final interaction with AR. The first step is the design of 
the images, called ‘Triggers,’ which will be tracked to start the 
RA experience. These images will be placed in the cover of the 
book in digital format (Fig. 4). The second step is the definition of 
the ‘Overlays’: these are the videos about the themes related to the 
book made by the students of the second group. These files are 
optimized to a maximum of 100 Mb in order to make the 
experience rapid and useful. The third step is the definition of the 
relationship between the Trigger image and the Overlays.  
In this step, the AURASMA platform allows for both to be 
combined in a desktop where students place each Overlay over the 
Trigger image (Fig. 4). They must configure the actions between 
the Overlays to play correctly with the application. This 
configuration is probably the most difficult step in the process. 
The support by the teachers was increased at this point. The fourth 
point consists in creating and sharing the Channel for publishing. 
This is the final process, and is very easy for the students to do. 

  

 
Fig 4. Cover (Trigger image) and configuration with 

AURASMA. 

4. RESULTS 
Qualitative methods are commonly employed in usability studies 
and, inspired by experimental psychology and the hypothetical-
deductive paradigm, employ samples of users who are relatively 
limited. Nevertheless, the Socratic paradigm from postmodern 
psychology is also applicable and useful in these studies of 
usability because it targets details related to the UX with high 
reliability and uncovers subtle information about the product or 
technology studied [14].  
This migration from the hypothetical-deductive paradigm to the 
Socratic paradigm was inspired by the paradigm shift in clinical 
psychology away from constructivism and toward other post-
modern schools of psychotherapy. This psychological model 
defends the subjective treatment of the user, unlike the objective 
hypothetical-deductive model [15]. 

Starting from Socratic paradigm basis, the BLA system 
(Bipolar Laddering) has been designed. BLA method could be 
defined as a psychological exploration technique, which points 
out the key factors of user experience.  

The main goal of this system is to ascertain which concrete 
characteristic of the product entails users’ frustration, confidence 
or gratitude (between many others). BLA method works on 
positive and negative poles to define the strengths and weaknesses 
of the product. Once the element is obtained the laddering 



First International Conference on Technological Ecosystems for Enhancing Multiculturality (TEEM’13) 

 414 

technique is going to be applied to define the relevant details of 
the product.  

The object of a laddering interview is to uncover how product 
attributes, usage consequences, and personal values are linked in a 
person’s mind. The characteristics obtained through laddering 
application will define what specific factors make consider an 
element as strength or as a weakness. BLA performing consists in 
three steps: 
1. Elicitation of the elements: The implementation of the test 

starts from a blank template for the positive elements 
(strengths) and another exactly the same for the negative 
elements (weaknesses). The interviewer (in this case an 
academic tutor) will ask the users (the student) to mention 
what aspects of the subject and experiment they like best or 
which help them in their tasks.  
The elements mentioned need to be summarized in one word 
or short sentence. This first step may be open or limited, i.e., 
positing a number of aspects without limits or reducing them 
to a specific number, as in our case where every student was 
asked to indicate three positive aspects and three negative 
ones. 

2. Marking of elements: Once the list of positive and negative 
elements is done, the interviewer will ask the user to mark 
each one from 0 (lowest possible level of satisfaction) to 10 
(maximum level of satisfaction). 

3. Elements definition: Once the elements have been assessed, 
the qualitative phase starts. The interviewer reads out the 
elements of both lists to the user and asks for a justification 
of each one of the elements performing laddering technique. 
Why is it a positive element? Why this mark? The answer 
must be a specific explanation of the exact characteristics 
that make the mentioned element a strength or weakness of 
the product. 

 
Once the element has been defined, the interviewer asks to the 

user for a solution of the problem he just describes in the case of 
negative elements or an improvement in the case of positive 
elements. (Fig. 5) shows an example of the BLA test used: 

 
Fig.5 BLA Sample Test. 

From the results obtained, the next step was to polarize the 
elements based on two criteria: 
1. Positive (Px) / Negative (Nx): The student must differentiate 

the elements perceived as strong points of the experience that 
helped them to improve the type of work proposed as are 
useful, satisfactory, or simply functional aesthetic, in front of 
the negative aspects that did not facilitate work or simply 
need to be modified to be satisfactory or useful. 

2. Common Elements (xC) / Particular (xP): Finally, we 
separated the positive and negative elements that were 
repeated in the students' answers (common elements) and the 
responses that were only given by one of the students 
(particular elements). 
 

 The common positive elements (PC) were the use and 
explanation of the AR technology (Mention Index: 100%, 
Average score: 9.67), and the help/support of the faculty (MI: 
100%, Av: 9.00). The common negative elements (NC) we can 
highlight were the lack of time to practice with this technology 
(MI: 100%, Av: 3.67), and insufficient publicity given to the 
project (MI: 66.5%, Av: 3.50). 

If we analyze the solutions and improvements for both the 
strengths and the weaknesses identified, the majority focuses on 
two fundamental aspects: the need for more time in the 
explanation of the AR technology, including more details, other 
programs and applications, etc.; and improving the timing of the 
experiment, because on this occasion more extensive attention 
was paid to the assistance of the famous author and the 
presentation of his work, to the detriment of the work with the AR 
technology. Another factor in this respect was that the project did 
not have the expected media impact, which is an issue to improve 
in possible future initiatives. 
5. CONCLUSIONS 
The main conclusion that we can extract from the initiative is the 
high degree of involvement, motivation and satisfaction of 
students in the use and development of content for viewing 
through the RA. The additional fact of working on a high profile 
piece of literature and having the support of the author in the 
official presentation of the book on the one hand led to an increase 
in students' motivation to develop the experience, but also, on the 
other, may have led to too many resources and time being devoted 
to institutional contacts that have detracted from the technological 
development, the key aspect from the academic point of view. 
Similarly, interviews conducted with students demonstrated that 
there was a general perception of a lack of a greater impact of the 
exercise, associated directly with the impact of the work. In this 
line, and waiting for effective implementation, the editorial 
Grijalbo confirmed that both the news and the content that has 
been developed will be published on its webpage, due to the 
quality of the generated elements.  
This experience makes possible replication in future courses, 
exploring new content for literary works or those related to the 
world of the arts. This will enable these students to study the 
contents of these subjects from a technological point of view, 
which has been found to be highly satisfactory and motivating. 
6. REFERENCES 
[1] Milgram, P., and Takemura, H., 1994. Augmented Reality: A 

Class of Displays on the Reality-Virtuality Continuum. 
Telemanipulator and Telepresence Technologies, 2351, 282-
292. 



Augmented reality uses in educational research projects: The “Falcones Project”, a case study applying technology in the 
Humanities framework at high school level 

 415 

[2] Billinghurst, M., Kato, H., and Poupyrev, I., 2011. The 
MagicBook – moving seamlessly between reality and 
virtuality, Computer Graphics and Applications, IEEE, 21, 3, 
6-8. 

[3] Fonseca, D., Martí, N., Redondo, E., Navarro, I., and 
Sánchez, A., 2013. Relationship between student profile, tool 
use, participation, and academic performance with the use of 
Augmented Reality technology for visualized architecture 
models. Computers in Human Behavior. 
doi:10.1016/j.chb.2013.03.006. 

[4] Sun, J., and Hsu, Y., 2013. Effect of interactivity on learner 
perceptions in Web-based instruction. Computers in Human 
Behavior, 29, 1, 171-184, doi: 10.1016/j.chb.2012.08.002. 

[5] Giesbers, B., Rienties, B., Tempelaar, D., and Gijselaers, W., 
2013. Investigating the relations between motivation, tool 
use, participation, and performance in an e-learning course 
using web-videoconferencing. Computers in Human 
Behavior, 29, 1, 285-292. doi: 10.1016/j.chb.2012.09.005. 

[6] Redondo, E, Sánchez, A., Perede, A., and Fonseca, D., 2013. 
Geo-Elearning: Geolocated Teaching in urban environments 
through mobile devices. A case study and work in process. In 
Schumaker, R. (Ed.), 15th International Conference on 
Human-Computer Interaction, Part II, Lecture Notes in 
Computer Science - 8022-, Springer, Heidelberg, 188-197. 

[7] Navarro, I., Fonseca, D., Redondo, E., Sánchez, A., Martí, 
N., and Simón, D., 2012. Teaching Evaluation Using 
Augmented Reality in Architecture, Methodological 
Proposal. In Actas de la Conferencia 7º Conferencia Ibérica 
de Sistemas y Tecnologías de Información. Madrid, Spain, 
685-690. 

[8]  Galantay, R., Torpus, J., Engeli, M., 2004. “Living-room” 
Interactive, Space-Oriented Augmented Reality. In 
Proceedings of the 12th annual ACM international 
conference on Multimedia ’04. ACM Press, New York, New 
York, USA, 64–71.  

[9] Brederode, B., Markopoulos, P., Gielen, M., Vermeeren, A., 
and de Ridder, H., 2005. pOwerball, the design of a novel 

mixed-reality game for children with mixed abilities. In 
Proceedings of the 2005 conference on Interaction design 
and children - IDC’05. ACM Press, New York, New York, 
USA. 32-39. 

[10] Alvarez, C., Alarcon, R., and Nussbaum, M., 2011. 
Implementing collaborative learning activities in the 
classroom supported by one-to-one mobile computing: A 
design-based process. Journal of Systems and Software, 84, 
1961-1976. 

[11] Di Serio, Á., Ibáñez, M.B., and Kloos, C.D., 2012. Impact of 
an Augmented Reality System on students’ motivation for a 
visual art course. Computers & Education, 68, 586-596. 

[12] Martí, N., and Fonseca, D., 2013, Active Learning Units 
Interralated using TIC's Tools in Archit.  Construction. 
Teoria de la Educación - Educación y Cultura en la 
Sociedad de la Información (TESI), 14, 2, 371-397.  

[13] Prieto, C., Rodríguez, C., Hernández, A., and Queiruga, A., 
2011. Experiencias docentes de trabajo colaborativo en 
distintas áreas de ciencias. Teoría de la Educación. 
Educación y Cultura en la Sociedad de la Información, 12, 4, 
133-146.  

[14] Pifarré, M., and Tomico, O., 2007. Bipolar laddering (BLA): 
a participatory subjective exploration method on user 
experience. In Proceedings of the 2007 conference on 
Designing for User eXperiences (DUX '07). ACM, New 
York, NY, USA. 

[15] Guidano, V.F., 1989. Constructivist psychotherapy: A 
theoretical framework. In Neimeyer, R. A., and Mahoney, M. 
J. (Eds.), Constructivism in Psychotherapy. Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge.∫ 

[16] Fonseca, D. Pifarré, M., Redondo, E., Alitany, A., and 
Sánchez, A., 2013. Combinación de técnicas cuantitativas y 
cualitativas (BLA), en el análisis de implantación de nuevas 
tecnologías en el ámbito docente. Uso de la Realidad 
Aumentada en la visualización del proyecto arquitectónico. 
In Actas de la Conferencia 8º Conferencia Ibérica de 
Sistemas y Tecnologías de Información. 205-211.


