












































Microsoft Word - METRIC SURVEY OF THE MONUMENT OF QUEEN ELISENDA'S TOMB IN THE MONASTERY OF PEDRALBES, BARCELONA.doc


METRIC SURVEY OF THE MONUMENT OF QUEEN ELISENDA'S TOMB IN THE 
MONASTERY OF PEDRALBES, BARCELONA 

 
Mª. A. Núñeza, *, F. Buill a, J. Regot b, A. Mesa b 

 
a Dept. Ingeniería del Terreno, Cartográfica y Geofísica, UPC, Dr. Marañón 44-50, 08028 Barcelona (Spain) - 

m.amparo.nunez@upc.edu, felipe.buil@upc.edu 
b
 Dept. Expresión Gráfica Arquitectónica I. UPC, Diagonal 649, 08028 Barcelona (Spain) - joaquim.regot@upc.edu, 

andres.de.mesa@upc.edu 
 
 

Commission V, WG 4 
 

 
KEY WORDS:  Cultural Heritage, Digital Photogrammetry, Laser Scanning, Modelling. 
 
 
ABSTRACT: 
 
When an urban development is planned the cartography of this territory is necessary, in the same way before starting a project to 
rehabilitate a monument the graphic information about it has to be available. 
At present, different techniques are available which allow to obtain three-dimensional models with a different accuracy level and 
runtimes.  
This paper shows the work carried out to obtain the graphic information and three-dimensional models that are necessary for the 
rehabilitation project of the tomb of Queen Elisenda in the Monastery of Pedralbes, Barcelona (Spain). This monument has the 
peculiarity of being symmetrical about the wall separating monastery church and the cloister. To do this, different techniques have 
been used that allow us to obtain an accurate model and as complete as possible, for the analysis of the construction process of the 
monument.  
In order to achieve the complete architectural survey the integration of laser scanning and photogrammetric data, and CAD models 
has been necessary. Due to the detail of the sculptures and the Queen’s sarcophagus two sensors, with different resolution, range and 
accuracy, have been used to obtain the laser scanning data. Stereo pairs have been taken to obtain the 3D model of these elements to 
complete the model and obtain an ortophotography.  
In this way, a comparative analysis of both techniques has been carried out, in order to decide which one is the suitable for certain 
application. This investigation has been restricted to the tomb, in the two symmetrical parts of the monument.  
 
 

                                                                 
*  Corresponding author.   

1. INTRODUCTION 

Nowadays there are several techniques that allow to obtain the 
precise documentation of cultural heritage elements. This 
information is essential to carry out the necessary studies and 
projects of renovation and restoration. 
 
Among these techniques the most widely used are digital 
photogrammetry and laser scanning, in most of the cases with a 
topographic support. Several authors (Agnello and Lo Brutto, 
2007; Demir at al., 2004; Lambers et al., 2007; Yastikli, 2007) 
show the integration of both methods like one solution, at the 
present time, to collect the three-dimensional information 
necessary in the cultural heritage documentation. 
 
These methods have advantages and drawbacks (Demir et al., 
2004) but both of them have the same problem regards the 
occlusions, geometric accuracy, size of the models obtained 
(that make difficult their management), characteristic lines 
extraction,.... 
 
Close Range Stereophotogrammetry has been extensively used 
for obtaining 3D models of elements from photographs 
(Remondino and El-Hakim, 2006; Yilmaz et al., 2007), since it 
allow to collect geometrical data as well as texture information. 
In same cases, which the cultural heritage object surface is 

considered a plane in, a digital image rectification is enough to 
obtain the metric documentation. But when we work with 
complex object it is necessary the stereophotogrammetry that 
allows 3D vectorization and digital surface model generation 
with a semi-automatic or automatic process (Yastikli, 2007) 
based on image correlation (Schenk, 1999). One of the products 
of this process is the ortophotography, obtained after removing 
the effects of lens distortions, tilt and relief displacement with 
the help of the digital surface model. 
 
As alternative or complement the laser scanners can be found. 
In this case, the object is scanned, with a step decided by the 
operator. So the 3D coordinate (X, Y, Z in the laser scanner 
coordinate system) of every point where the laser beam is 
reflected are obtained (Bradshaw, 1999; Pavlidis et al., 2007). 
Three different measure systems can be found: Time of flight 
(ToF) consists in measuring the distance regarding the time that 
it takes for a photodiode to issue and detect a laser beam. It 
allows obtaining the location of points into space with an 
accuracy of close to 5 mm for distances of 50 m. Difference of 
phase, the distance is calculated based on the phase difference 
between the transmitted and received wave (Pieraccini et al., 
2001), it allows an accuracy of few millimetres for range up to 
100m. Optical triangulation is based on the calculation of 
spatial coordinates from direct intersection. In this case the 
working distance reduces considerably but it improve the 



 

accuracy (Blais, 2004) until few micrometers can be achieved 
(Fröhlich and Mettenleiter, 2004) 
 
To obtain a complete model several scans must be taken and 
then the result point clouds have to be register. Each point can 
be colour by projecting its geometric coordinates onto a colour 
imaging obtained usually by a camera attached to the scanner, 
following the perspective projection model (Sgrenzarolim, 
2005). A better result can be obtained when a high resolution 
external camera is used. In this case there are several methods 
that allow to the image be mapped on the model (González-
Aguilera et al., 2009).  
 
The geometric model, with the colour and texture information, 
obtained with both techniques is highly useful in the 
cataloguing, diffusion, preservation, restoration and of the 
cultural heritage. 
 
In this paper the work is focused in the monument of the 
Elisenda Queen’s Tomb. This monument located in the 
Pedralbes Monastery of Barcelona (Spain) shows two different 
and symmetrical faces. Both of them have been surveyed with 
photogrammetric techniques and laser scanner, with the support 
of topography in order to georeference the final model. 
 
The process to obtain the model can be divided in: 
photogrammetric tasks, laser scanning data processing, and 
finally CAD modelling. 
 
Digital photogrammetric process has allowed to obtain a DSM 
from the image correlation, ortophotographs and the restoration 
of some parts. Moreover, some images have been rectificated to 
support the CAD modelling. Laser scanning data collecting has 
been carried out using different instruments. After data capture, 
the clouds have been registered and oriented to a coordinate 
reference system defined by topography. A triangulation 
process has been performed to generate the surfaces. 
 
From the point clouds, topographic and photogrammetric data 
the CAD model of both sides have been drawn. After, from the 
sections, a theoretical 3D model, avoided the imperfection of 
the triangulated model have been build. 
 
 

2. MONUMENT BACKGROUND. 

2.1 The monument 

The tomb of Elisenda de Montcada in the Monastery of 
Pedralbes is one of the most important funerary monuments of 
Medieval Catalonia. Despite its significance, historiography has 
proven unable to determine its author, or to attribute it to any of 
the well-known masters of the period. Therefore, it is a very 
well designed and executed work of art that remains 
undocumented. The only thing that it is really known is that this 
funerary monument was built in 1364, because, shortly before 
her death, Queen Elisenda expressed her will to be buried in the 
main altar (Mestre and Adell 2001). 
One of the most particular characteristics of Queen Elisenda's 
tomb is the fact that consists of two perfectly symmetrical 
constructions that lean on the same wall. The former is located 
within the church by the altar, and the latter makes up a little 
space in one of the sides of the cloister. The one within the 
church represents Elisenda as a queen, crowned and wearing the 
royal shroud, while in the cloister one, she's wearing the 
Franciscan habit. In both cases, the main focus of attention is 

the representation of the deceased lying body, which in the 
church can be accessed by the whole congregation, while in the 
cloister it can only be approached by the nuns. This particular 
disposition depicts the queen's life, who retired from public life 
in the Clares' Monastery that she founded. 
 

 
Figure 1.  The both faces of the monument. Left, the interior of 

the church. Right, the cloister part. 
 
2.2 Restoration needs. Current condition 

Throughout time the monument has undergone several pictorial 
interventions. In the beginning of the 20th century, the part of 
the monument located in the church suffered an unfortunate 
renovation following the neomedieval style. This intervention 
destroyed the background gothic mural until then preserved, 
and all the structure and figurative elements of this part of the 
monument were repainted. However, this part of the monument 
shows a good state of conservation. 
 
On the other hand, in the cloister, the monument keeps its 
original features, probably because, until recent days, its access 
was restricted to the nuns that lived in the convent. But this part 
of the monument is quite deteriorated. The stony structure have 
been weathered, not only the sculptures but also in the gothic 
tracery. Likewise the polychromatic background mural suffered 
important damage.  
 
In this situation the Institut Municipal del Paisatge Urbà i la 
Qualitat de Vida (Local Institute for Urban Landscape and 
Quality of Life) commissioned the studies prior to the 
restoration of the monument. A polychromy analysis was 
carried out, as well as a study about the execution techniques 
and state of conservation of the different elements of the 
monument. But the most significant aspect of these works is 
that they were applied to both parts of the monument (the 
cloister and the church). 
 
Before establishing the restoration project, among other works, 
the elaboration of a virtual model was proposed to recreate the 
formal and chromatic aspects of the monument in its original 
state. 



 

3. WORK AIMS 

The working group responsible for the monument restoration 
needed accurate and metric graphic information. These 
“documents” (2D o 3D models) should show both the current 
state of the monument and the relationship that have the 
elements on the two sides of the monument. In this way the 
monument's construction processes can be set. 
 
So, one of the objectives was to generate a theoretical 3D model 
which reflects the current reality. This model will have a dual 
role, on one hand it will be a support for rehabilitation work. On 
the other hand, it will allow to disseminate this heritage element 
to the visitors while the works were carried out. 
 
Likewise, the 2D representation of elevations and sections of 
the monument will be obtained, which will make easier the 
analysis of symmetry and the possible construction process. 
In order to take a survey as complete as possible the integration 
of different data collection techniques is proposed. What will 
also allow to compare results and, thus, establish protocols for 
using them in function of the models and the necessary 
accuracy for this type of work. 
 
 

4. METHODOLOGY. DATA OBTAINED. 

The methodologies used are: Topography techniques to 
establish the referenced positions. Digital photogrammetry 
allows to obtain rectifications, orthophotography and a 3D 
model by stereophotogrammetry. A Terrestrial Laser Scan 
(TLS) was used to obtain a dense colored point’s cloud model. 
 
4.1 Topographic works 

The tomb presents, as stated before, two faces of the same wall. 
This fact forced at first the development of a topographic 
methodology that would allow georeferentiating both sides. 
Thus, there would be enough data to lay out the spatial 
information available on each part of the monument, while 
obtaining a model that would relate the elevations or different 
elements on the both faces of the tomb. 
 
The equipment used in topographical survey was a non prism 
total station model Leica 705. 
 
The first task consisted in observing a traverse at both sides of 
the monument. Thus a sole reference system was established 
and, therefore, the different works at both sides could be related 
and the geometry of the whole piece drawn.  
After that, from the traverse stations, the complete survey with 
the most significant elements (cornices, arch vertices, sculpture 
stands, etc.) was obtained. 
 
4.2 Photogrammetry 

In the photogrammetric case, a non-metric reflex digital camera 
Nikon D300S with a 20mm 2.8 AF lens, was used to take the 
necessary images for the different works of rectification and 
restoration. 
 
The photographs were taken considering the camera at use and 
a series of photographic criteria, spatial limits when positioning 
the camera and accuracy to achieve. In case of photogrammetric 
restitution, the most adequate is to use convergence 

photographs; this fact was taken considered when the images 
were taken. 
 
In order to cover the tomb, the photographs were divided in two 
strips, in each side of the monument, with 60-70% longitudinal 
and 50% transverse overlapping. What has finally resulted 14 
stereoscopic pairs for the interior and 10 for exterior of the 
church.  
 
In order to do the photogrammetric rectification, the software 
developed by the authors was used. Conventional photographs 
were used after their distortion correction. In this process two 
reference planes have been considered. The result was 
extremely high resolution rectificated models (1mm/pixel) for 
these planes. 
 
In the stereophotogrammetric case, the software TOPCON 
Image Master has been used to generate the models. The 
characteristic lines were drawn, basically the ones considered as 
rupture lines, such as the edges of the different architectural 
elements and the base of the statues. Then, these lines, together 
with the model correlated with a very dense mesh (step 1cm), 
were used to define the final photogrammetric model that was 
edited and used to color and obtain orthophotographs.  
 
These are not complete in some areas due to occlusions and bad 
model, so they have been completed with partial rectifications. 
 
 

 
Figure 2.  Orthophotography vs photograph. 

 
The surface model, figure 3, was employed to establish the 
comparative analyses between the two survey methodologies: 
digital photogrammetry and laser scan. It has a precision of 
3mm in depth. 
 
 

 
Figure 3. DSM by digital photogrammetry. 

 



 

4.3 Terrestrial Laser Scan (TLS) 

Besides of having a model obtained by photogrammetry, new 
point clouds were achieved by laser scanning. 
 
A general model was generated using the Riegl LMS Z410 and, 
the laser scanning data for a detail model of the sepulcher and 
the sculptures have been collected with a sensor based in optical 
triangulation, MINOLTA Vivid 910, since it get a best accuracy 
(Fontana et al., 2002; Fowles et al., 2003) 
 
In the cloister part, due to the closeness between the gate and 
the monument was necessary to capture the data in two levels, 
which coincided with the ground and the first floor of the 
cloister. In the interior of the church this problem is avoided. 
 
The sensor was installed, in the lower part scanning the wall 
from two lateral positions and a front position, which provided 
clouds horizontally and vertically. From the first floor, the two 
laterals scanning had a slightly low angle. No targets were used 
for georeferenciation, just the well-defined details provided by 
the model itself. A Nikon D100 camera colored the point clouds 
captured by the TLS.  
 
The main problems consisted in the excess of obliquity of some 
of the captures due to the narrowness of the space. The room, 
3.50 x 3.15 m of area, did not allow installing the scanner far 
enough to reach the total height (more than 9 m). From the first 
floor the captures were very close to the monument in order to 
cover the maximum width and avoid such obstacles as the 
banister that protected the area. 
 
The most detail scanning data, with a resolution of 2.5mm on 
the object, of the tomb and the first level of the sculptures, were 
capture, as mentioned above, with a MINOLTA Vivid 910. 
Between the consecutive scanning there was an overlap of 50% 
of the surface. This prevented the completion of the scan of the 
shadow area, which was caused by the inclination of the camera 
in the upper zone of the tomb. Despite this, the equipment was 
able to gather lateral information on the figures. The working 
distance ranged 1 to 2m, with the highest resolution possible as 
to allow 60 partial scans in the church side, and 46 in the 
cloister. These point clouds would be then registered and 
georeferentiated. Therefore, a point cloud, characterized by its 
great density and color, could be extracted. 
 
Colour (RGB value) was assigned automatically to the scanned 
points, in the general cloud thanks to the digital camera 
mounted on the Riegl laser scan, and a Minolta V9i internal 
camera, of less resolution than the external one. So, the images 
taken for the photogrammetric process have been mapped using 
the DLT (Remondino et al., 2009), figure 4. 
 
In this last case, the point clouds were affected by holes in the 
zones coincided with the deep-red colour on the wall. Several 
studies show as the colour of the target object influences on the 
laser beam devolution and in some cases the not return of the 
wave (Clark and Robson, 2004; Gielsdorf et al., 2004; Núñez et 
al., 2005) 
 
As well, the orthophotographs have been obtained. 
 
 
 

 
Figure 4. Laser scanning detail. 

 
 

5. MODELING PROCESS 

The management of the data processed has allowed to obtain 
different result very useful to elaborate the rehabilitation 
project. 

 
5.1 3D model and vectorial CAD data. 

From the point clouds obtained with the laser scanner and with 
the digital photogrametry two models have been generated. 
 
In the case of photogrammetry, as has been said above, the 
model was obtained by correlation using stereo 
photogrammetric models. In order to support the process by the 
computer, the mesh generated had a resolution of 1cm, in other 
case, with the computer that was being used it was impossible 
to manage the models. 
 
To process the laser scanning data INUSTech Rapidform 
software was used. The mesh was create by triangulation for the 
Riegl data, while Minolta data were imported as triangulation 
directly.  
 
The problem, in both cases, is the irregularities that exist in the 
models. They create “picks” in the sections and not represent 
the contour rounding. 
 
Line drawing:  The data obtained allowed establishing the 
position of each of the elements that are part of the monument. 
In order to do so, an image was drawn with scanned data that 
lead to a frontal projection. The generation of this image, from 
the orthogonally visualization of the points cloud to the 
background wall, allowed establishing the actual measures of 
the different elements.  
 
The points from the topographic survey were added to this 
image to determine the working scale and to confirm the correct 
position of each of the elements with respect to the whole.  
 
Hereby a base document (template) was generated to draw the 
lines, figure 5, that determine each of the edges of the 
geometrical design of the arcature, and the different parts of the 
monument (cornices, pilasters, stands for the statues, etc). 
 
 



 

 
Figure 5. Linedraw obtained in the cloister. 

 
In order to graphically reconstruct the monument it was 
essential to determine those elements that, due to their small 
size with respect to the rest of the monument, were not 
sufficiently detailed by the general scan. In these cases the 
detail model was used. 
 
This final definition was established with the aid of detailed 
photographs and manual drawings with specification of the 
actual dimensions on the different sections of the arcature. The 
sculptures were defined by means of profiles generated from a 
scan image and further complemented by the details shown in 
the photogrammetric data and products. 
 
Thanks to all these data, the entire monument was reproduced 
with accuracy better than 5mm-1 cm.  
 
5.2 3D theoretical model of the monument architecture  

The possibility to have a theoretical model is a very useful tool 
in the restoration processes. This model would pick up the 
geometric shapes that the different elements of the monument 
should have in their initial state. 
 
This model has been elaborated taking like base the results 
obtained previously and described in the above sections.  
  
The triangulated models have allowed to create vertical and 
horizontal sections to establish the vertical reference depth 
planes of the monument. 
 

 
Figure 6. 3D model of both faces of the monument. 

 
On the other hand, applying the topographical, photographic 
and laser scanner information the Gothic tracery in a 2D 
vertical plane has been generates. In this way the heights and 
the basic geometry of the different parts of the monument has 
been generated on an orthogonal front view. Combining the 
geometric information of the 2D vertical plane with the 
different depth planes the final 3D theoretical model has been 
achieved. This model was build with NURBS surfaces applying 
Rhinoceros 4.0 software that allows capturing all the geometry 
defined in 3D with high performance, figure 6.   
 
The elaboration process of the virtual model is shown in the 
figure 7. 
 

 
 

Figure 7.  Process schedule. 
 
 

6. COMPARING THE METHODS. RESULTS 

The geo-referenced clouds have a difference regards the control 
points of millimeters, so the models are good enough to be 
compared to each other. 
 



 

The scan in the lower part of the monument allowed 
determining a more accurate mesh model, with 2mm resolution, 
while the photogrammetric one was of 1cm. So the first process 
was homogenized the two meshes to 1cm resolution. 
 
After that, in order to analyze of the results obtained by digital 
photogrammetry and 3D digitizer, longitudinal and transverse 
sections each 20cm have been used. Hereby 20 sections were 
obtained. 
 
When the sections are compared it can be seen that the ones 
from the photogrammetric DSM are more rounded, whereas the 
obtained from the laser scanning data have a zigzag appearance 
since the lines pass through all points measured. Another clear 
effect can be seen in the construction of triangles, in 
photogrammetry break lines were drawn explicitly by the 
operator, and it causes a better suited of the triangles to the 
model. This effect would not be remarkable if the original 
resolution of the laser scanning cloud had been kept. The 
accuracy in depth measurement is higher using a optical 
triangulation  laser scanner like Minolta. This can be seen more 
in the sculptures model than in the tomb. If  the ToF scan is use 
(the Riegl used for the general model) the best result would be 
achieve by photogrammetry. 
 
In any case, the differ from each model a maximum of 1cm 
between sections counterparts, major differences occurring only 
in areas difficult to capture, as in folds and areas tangents. This 
difference would not cause visible change in the 
orthophotographs obtained by the two techniques. 
 
 
6.1 Results  

From the results obtained from the geo-referencing of 3D data 
could be observed how the elements of the monument were 
located on both sides of the wall.  
 
One thing that surprised is that this wall is only 11cm thick. 
This fact confirms that the wall was made on both sides at once. 
The tomb with a total width of about 80cm is unique and the 
center wall rests on top.  
The width of this wall and the positions they take the trays that 
support the central sculpture and media images of the 
Pantocrator, to think that necessarily had to be built in parallel 
as anchors to secure the brackets to the wall and have a correct 
functional stability have to be locked between them.  
 
From the start of the Gothic tracery, and in the frontal plane in 
which it develops, begin to define different heights of the 
supporting elements of the sculptures, the bases of them are 
approximately 30cm upper in the cloister than the church. Still 
maintaining the geometry of gothic arches and is preserved as 
the main triangular nerve in both width and height.  
 
This fact finds that the construction was carried out by both 
sides at once and that at the time of the construction of archery 
adapting to space which is already the height of the nave of the 
church is much larger than the lower hall the cloister and 
therefore this becomes more slender in the interior of the 
church.  
 
The differences can be found in the positions of the various 
elements that rely on the shared wall are below the centimeter, 
similar to the RMS of the measurement tools used. 
 

7. CONCLUSIONS. 

The work showed in this paper is part of the investigation on 
the methods to get information of cultural heritage elements, 
and the processes to obtain complete and accurate 3d models. 
In this case digital photogrammetry, laser scanning, topography 
and Cad modelling have been used to obtain all the necessary 
information to know, better, the building process of one of the 
most important monuments in the Pedralbes monastery 
(Barcelona, Spain). 
 
Two 3D models have been obtained of the complete 
monuments, one from the triangulation of the laser scanning 
point clouds and other from the refined of these surfaces, the 
sections extracted from the clouds and the topographic and 
photogrammetric data. 
 
Moreover the cad model has been achieve by the integration of 
the data from the photogrammetry and laser scanning, with the 
support of the topography data in order to register and 
georeference all the information. From these data the 
orthophotography of the lower part of the monument, 
corresponding with the tomb, has been created. 
 
From the models it has been possible to check that the wall 
between the two parts of the monuments is much thicker than it 
would be though for constructions in the 14th century, so it 
confirms that the wall was made on both sides at once. 
 
From the results of the comparison between models obtained by 
both techniques can be concluded that both, digital 
photogrammetry and laser scanning, can be used successfully to 
obtain the documentation for a rehabilitation, restoration or 
preservation project. But both of them have the same drawbacks 
such as occlusions and the big quantity of data that make 
difficult the data management. 
 
An element to considerer to use one or other is the cost of the 
instruments, while in the data capture by photogrammetry an 
amateur digital camera can be used the laser scanning data 
collecting needs a special sensor of a high price. A drawback of 
the photogrammetry is that control points are necessary to 
obtain the orientation parameters and build the model by 
correlation. 

In comparison with other techniques, the use of digital 
photogrammetry and laser scanning allows obtaining 3D 
models efficiently and in detail even under unfavourable 
conditions. 
 
 
REFERENCES 

References from Journals:  
Blais F., 2004. Review of 20 years of range sensors, Journal of 
Electronic Imaging, 13 (1), pp.231-243. 

Fontana R., Greco M., Materazzi M., Pampaloni E., Pezzati L., 
Rocchini C., Scopigno R., 2002. Three-dimensional modelling 
of statues: the Minerva of Arezzo. Journal of Cultural Heritage, 
3, pp.325-331. 

Fowles P.S., Larson J.H., Dean C., Solajic M., 2003. The laser 
recording and virtual restoration of a wooden sculpture of 
Buddha. Journal of Cultural Heritage, 4, pp.367-371. 



 

Lambers K., Eisenbeiss H., Sauerbier M., Kupferschmidt D., 
Gaisecker T., Sotoodeh S., Hanusch T., 2007. Combining 
photogrammetry and laser scanning for the recording and 
modelling of the Late Intermediate Period site of Pinchango 
Alto, Palpa, Peru. Journal of Archaeological Science, 34, pp. 
1702-1712. 

Pavlidis G., Koutsoudis A., Arnoutoglou F., Tsioukas V., 
Chamzas C., 2007. Methods for 3D digitization of Cultural 
Heritage. In: Journal of Cultural Heritage, Vol 8, pp. 93-98. 

Pieraccini M., Guidi G., Attzeni C., 2001. 3D digitizing of 
cultural heritage. Journal of Cultural Heritage, 2, pp. 63-70. 

Remondino F., El-Hakim S.F., 2006. Image-based 3D 
modeling: a review. Photogrammetric Rec. J., 21 (115), pp. 
269–291. 

Yastikli N., 2007. Documentation of cultural heritage using 
digital photogrammetry and laser scanning. Journal of Cultural 
Heritage, 8, pp. 423-427. 

Yilmaz H.M., Yakar M., Gulec S.A., Dulgerler O.N., 2007. 
Importance of digital close-range photogrammetry in 
documentation of cultural heritage. Journal of Cultural 
Heritage, 8, pp.428-433. 

References from Books: 
Mestre J., Adell J., 2001. Monestirs de Catalunya (in Catalan). 
Editorial 62, Barcelona. 

Schenk T., 1999. Digital Photogrammetry Volume I. Terra 
Science, Laurelville, OH. 

References from Other Literature: 
Agnello F., Lo Brutto M., 2007. Integrated surveying tecniques 
in cultural heritage documentation. The International Archives 
of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial 
Information Sciences, Zurich, Switzerland, Volume XXXVI-
5/W47  

Bradshaw G., 1999. Non-Contact Surface Geometry 
Measurement Techniques, Image Synthesis Group, Trinity 
College, Dublin. 

Clark J., Robson S., 2004. Accuracy of measurements made 
with a Cyrax 2500 Laser Scanner against surfaces of known 
colour. In: ISPRS XX Congress- Commision IV, Istambul, 
Turkey. 

Demir N., Bayram B., Alkış Z., Helvaci C., Çetin I., Vögtle T., 
Ringle K., Steinle E., 2004. Laser scanning for terrestrial 
photogrammetry, alternative system or combined with 
traditional system? In: Comisión V, WG V/2 ISPRS, Istambul, 
Turkey.  

Fröhlich C., Mettenleiter M., 2004. Terrestrial laser scanning -
new perspectives in 3D surveying. In: M. Thies, B. Koch, H. 
Spiecker, H. Weinacker (Eds.), Proceedings of ISPRS Working 
Group VIII/2, Freiburg, pp. 7-13. 

Gielsdorf F., Rietdorf A., Gruending L., 2004. A concept for the 
calibration of terrestrial Laser Scanners. In: FIG Working Week 
2004, Athens, Greece. 
 

Núñez A., Buill F., Múñoz F., 2005. Comportamiento de un 
sensor láser escáner. In: 6ª Semana Geomática, Barcelona, 
Spain. 

Remondino F., Pelagotti A., Del Mastio A., Uccheddu F., 2009. 
Novel data registration techniques for art diagnostics and 3D 
heritage visualization. In:  9th Conference on Optical 3-D 
Measurement Techniques 2009, Vienna, Austria. 
 
Sgrenzarolim M., 2001. Photorealistic 3D reconstruction of 
large, real objects using laser scanning and still images. In: 
Proceedings of 7th International conference on Virtual Systems 
and Multimedia, Berkeley. 

 
  

 
 

 
 

 
 


