










































TOWARD A COLLECTIVE INTELLIGENCE RECOMMENDER 
SYSTEM FOR EDUCATION 

Jaime Meza
1
, L. Vaca

2
, Ester Simó

1
, Joseph Monguet

1
 

1
Universitat Politécnica de Catalunya  (SPAIN)  

2
Escuela Superior Politécnica de Chimborazo (ECUADOR) 

Abstract.  

The development of Information and Communication Technology (ICT), have revolutionized the world 
and have moved us into the information age, however the access and handling of this large amount of 
information is causing valuable time losses. Teachers in Higher Education especially use the Internet 
as a tool to consult materials and content for the development of the subjects. The internet has very 
broad services, and sometimes it is difficult for users to find the contents in an easy and fast way. This 
problem is increasing at the time, causing that students spend a lot of time in search information rather 
than in synthesis, analysis and construction of new knowledge. In this context, several questions have 
emerged: Is it possible to design learning activities that allow us to value the information search and to 
encourage collective participation?. What are the conditions that an ICT tool that supports a process of 
information search has to have to optimize the student's time and learning?. 

This article presents the use and application of a Recommender System (RS) designed on paradigms 
of Collective Intelligence (CI). The RS designed encourages the collective learning and the authentic 
participation of the students. 

The research combines the literature study with the analysis of the ICT tools that have emerged in the 
field of the CI and RS. Also, Design-Based Research (DBR) was used to compile and summarize 
collective intelligence approaches and filtering techniques reported in the literature in Higher 
Education as well as to incrementally improving the tool. 

Several are the benefits that have been evidenced as a result of the exploratory study carried out. 
Among them the following stand out: 

 It improves student motivation, as it helps you discover new content of interest in an easy way. 

 It saves time in the search and classification of teaching material of interest. 

 It fosters specialized reading, inspires competence as a means of learning. 

 It gives the teacher the ability to generate reports of trends and behaviors of their students, 

real-time assessment of the quality of learning material. 

The authors consider that the use of ICT tools that combine the paradigms of the CI and RS presented 
in this work, are a tool that improves the construction of student knowledge and motivates their 
collective development in cyberspace, in addition, the model of Filtering Contents used supports the 
design of models and strategies of collective intelligence in Higher Education. 

Keywords: Collective intelligence, Higher education, Recommender System, ICT tools. 

1 INTRODUCTION 

We live in the information age, however, are we actually using the information in productive tasks? or, 
its access and management it's causing valuable losses of times in the information sea?.  We try to 
response these questions in the next paragraphs. 

The collaboration among colleagues has been always important through the time. Thanks to the fast 
evolution of Information Technology and Computer Science, we have seen many collaboration based 
applications. They are usually called Collective Intelligence (CI). In order to solve a lot of problems, 
people can share their experiences and knowledge with other people through different online ICT tools 
[1]. 

The main idea is to bring together researchers and engineers in areas of computational collective 
intelligence to share their visions, research results, and experiences, this analysis will give an 
opportunity to step further the discussion on the potential of collective intelligence across many 
different communities and areas [1]. As [2] report a psychometric methodology for quantifying a factor 



termed “collective intelligence”, which reflects how well groups perform on a similarly diverse set of 
group problem-solving tasks.  

Now we are in Big Data Age. This is of course a scientific revolution on computer-supported 
collaborative works. Transforming Big Data into Big Knowledge and developing a Knowledge-Based 
System require new visions and approaches in order to provide people with better collaborations using 
ICTs. [1]. Collective intelligence by social network analytics [3] reports an interesting framework on 
temporal fuzzy concept analysis for studying social content evolution along time and semantic 
dimensions. This work extends the goals of the topic detection and tracking (TDT). The paper, 
“associative engines based approach supporting collaborative analytics in the Internet of cultural 
things”, presents an Internet of Things-based application by using collective intelligence technologies. 
They analyzed museum visitors’ behavior [4]. The paper published by [5], reports the concept of 
representing the experiences from users. Particularly, they show an application on manufacturing 
domain. The main contribution of this paper proposes an experience-based collective intelligence 
model. Additionally [6], present an interesting approach on context representation for Complex Event 
Processing (CEP). This study was focusing on temporal probabilistic model for handling dynamic rules 
on collective intelligence; finally [7] show a novel platform for acquiring and processing the contextual 
big data from mobile devices. This mobile context management system is based on rule-based user 
profiling for reasoning with ambiguous and uncertain data. 

As we can see there are several efforts in the field of collective intelligence & recommender systems, 
therefore we focus on combine both for exploring the affectivity of a new approach for increasing the 
students learning, and make decision in real time for teachers. 

2 STATE OF ART & RELATED WORKS 

Currently, higher education institutions have been forced to change from their traditional tasks of 
teaching and research towards an economic and cultural development knew as the third mission. This 
third mission includes an external relationship to get technology transfer and innovation; continuing 
education; and social engagement as mentioned (Veltri et al., 2014; Leitner and Warden, 2004; 
Sánchez et al., 2009) cited by [19]. 

In this view Collective Intelligence (CI) plays an important role, this not new term as was said by (Lévy, 
1994; Pór, 1995; Malone et al., 2008) cited by [19] appeared at the end of 1970 and has exploited in 
the last ten years  where local and distributed assets and expertise are coordinated to achieve a 
collective aim [19]. CI is defined as the combination of behavior choices or ideas from a group of 
people in order to create new ideas. Usually the survey is the basic form of CI [21]. 

Nowadays, a new kind of Collective Intelligence has been enabled by the Internet and for the 
enormous quantity of information generated every single second (Malone T, 2017 
https://www.edge.org/conversation/thomas_w__malone-collective-intelligence). For instance, the 
famous online encyclopedia Wikipedia is the result of users' additions (http://www.wikipedia.org/). 

Recommender systems (RS) are useful to recommend items found on users previous choices [8]. In 
the field of RS there are some efforts to offer new and better recommendations for increasing 
performance. RSs are software tools and techniques that provide suggestions for articles to be useful 
to a user. The suggestions provided are intended to support your users in various decision-making 
processes, such as what items to buy, what music to listen to, or what news to read. Recommendation 
systems have proven to be a valuable means for online users to cope with information overload and 
have become one of the most powerful and popular tools in e-commerce. A number of techniques 
have been proposed for the generation of recommendations and during the last decade many of them 
have also been successfully deployed in commercial environments [25]. In addition, [25] point out that 
RS development is a multidisciplinary effort involving experts from various fields such as Artificial 
Intelligence, Human Computer Interaction, Information Technology, Data Mining, Statistics, Adaptive 
User Interfaces, Marketing or Consumer Behavior. 

The RS has been applied with commercial focus, however over time this tendency has been changed 
to new domains such as health, education and government. [11] Presented a framework titled: 
"Automated collaborative filtering (ACF) systems predict a person's affinity for articles or information 
by connecting that person's interests with the registered interests of a community of People and 
sharing skills among like-minded people. 

https://www.edge.org/memberbio/thomas_w__malone
https://www.edge.org/conversation/thomas_w__malone-collective-intelligence
http://www.wikipedia.org/


In education, according to [10], who cites (Chen and Pu 2014; Chen 2011; Ozok, Fan, and Norcio 
2010) RS are becoming useful and popular in different areas, in the educational field RS had been 
reported in several articles regarding to documentation management (Weng and Chang 2008),  
complementary materials for courses (Bobadilla et al. 2013; Hsu 2008), select e-courses (Hsu 2008; 
Bodea, Dascalu, and Lipai 2012). All these researchers suggest different ways to match the user's 
profiles with the data to be recommend, allowing the user to have proper suggestions according with 
their learning manner [10]. 

Some researchers have pointed to other approaches to content filtering. For example, Burke (2007) 
presents six approaches. However, there are traditionally three approaches to content filtering, these 
are categorized into: Content-Based: Try to recommend a similar article according to the user's 
preference in the past; Collaborative filtering: Identifies users whose tastes are similar to those of a 
particular user and recommends to this user content that other users like, and hybrid is a combination 
of the latter two approach.  On the other hand, the Collective Intelligence system and recommendation 
emerge. For instance: (Oh, Jeong, & Lee, 2013), (Patel & Balakrishnan, 2009), (Ryang, Yun, Pyun, 
Lee, & Kim) have informed several results on the recommender system and Collective Intelligence. 

Also, exist other recommendation systems based on data mining techniques as classification 
algorithms and association rules [17]. According with [17] usually data mining techniques are used in 
e-learning environments, because they permit to discover the patterns applied by students in online 
courses. 

It should also be noted that a determining factor in the design of a system of recommendations is the 
filtering model that is used according to the type of system, then a summary is presented that supports 
the selection of the RS approach (Table 1). 

Table 1. Filtering approach 

Approach   Description 

Content-based The system learns to recommend items that are similar to the ones that the 
user liked in the past. [9] 

Collaborative filtering The simplest and original implementation of this approach recommends to 
the active user the items that other users with similar tastes liked in the past 
[25]. 

Demographic This type of system recommends items based on the demographic profile of 
the user [13]. 

Knowledge-based Knowledge-based systems recommend items based on specific domain 
knowledge about how certain item features meet users needs and 
preferences and, ultimately, how the item is useful for the user [26, 27] cited 
by [25]. 

Community-based. This type of system recommends items based on the preferences of the 
users friends. This technique follows the epigram “Tell me who your friends 
are, and I will tell you who you are”. [28, 29] cited by [25]. 

Hybrid recommender 
systems 

Hybrid systems exploit characteristics of content-based and collaborative 
systems, due to the complementary nature of both, to overcome the 
drawbacks of both systems to obtain better recommendations [30]. 

3 METHOD & PROPOSAL MODEL 

The research combines the study of the literature with the analysis of the ICT tools that have emerged 
in the field of the CI and RS. Design-Based Research (DBR) was used to compile and summarize 
collective intelligence approaches and filtering techniques reported in the literature in the field of 
Higher Education as well as to incrementally adjust the tool. 



The proposal model is splitting in two components: On the one hand the instructional design, and the 
other the recommender engine. 

3.1 Instructional design 

The instructional design has been designed by two stages and some tasks by stages, as we show to 
follow.  

Planning.- These are activities prior to the use of the activity in the classroom, in which the teacher in 
the development of his curriculum or syllabus should establish: 

1. Contents to be used, this compilation will contain information about the material, topics and 
dates of application. 

2. The score for collaboration to the group of students, and so also the list of metrics for measure 
de CI (See Appendix II).  

Execution.- The execution will be guided according to the process of Fig 1, which establishes the 
activities to be fulfilled by both the teacher (s), and the students by each topic. 

 

Figure 1. -  Execution process.  

As it is possible to see in Fig. 1 the CI process involves a complete and constant collaboration & 
competition relationship between teacher and students, and also at the same time there is a close 
relationship between (each other) students, therefore is reasonable to think of CIRS as an IC tool in 
the class. 

3.2 Recommender engine 

Collaborative filtering approach is applied. The recommender engine (Fig.  2) classify by the student 
preferences in relation with the proposal from others classmates. The preferences has tagging with 
the comments, votes or information sharing  with others users. Additionally the first filter applied is 
given by the individual profile. The individual profiles are classified according to class, working group & 
teacher 

Each time that the user generates a new preference tag, the RS engines notify its workgroup. 
Additional when one user received a positive vote all the workgroup is also notified, inviting to do new 
contributions.  

Teacher upload contents

Students search and upload  related & interesting contents of the subject.

System notifies students of closeness and content

Student reviews material, evaluates quality (Votes, comments)

Each student can see the result of the preferences of their material or of the one that has reviewed, and 
his result

System classifies K-Neighbors and perform recommendations

System logs collaboration and calculate metrics



The filtering method develops a search by groups, neighbors, and neighbors preferences. The 
recommendations order is presented according to ranking preferences by document proposed. The 
ranking preferences are computed by the sum of emoticon

1
 value in the vote. 

The recommendations are tagged four sections: Recommenders items, favorites, recent lectures, or 
by categories. The recommender engine classifies by individual, or together all the tagging elements.

 

Figure 2. -  Conceptual design of recommender engine.  

 Recommender's items contain the information together all the tagging elements.  

 Favorites are the items that the user have vote with a positive emoticon that mean "I like" or " I 

love". 

 Recent lectures from the last month into the category of individual profile. 

 Categories related with the specific subject. 

4 EMPIRICAL EXPERIENCE & RESULTS 

In this section, the empirical evidence of CIRS application through a web tool (Appendix I) is 
described. CIRS was used by one group of student from the University of the Armed Forces of 
Ecuador ESPE  in the academic year 2016-2017 in the months of October 2016 till January of 2017. 
The number of students were 24 (18 Masculine, 6 Feminine) the average of age was 20 years age. 
The students had to resolve several topics in the subject of Social Project Manager Administration. By 
each task the students and teacher followed the process represented in the Fig 1. 

The outcomes to CIRS application are shown by its use and users behaviors.  The CIRS was used by 
24 students the participation index was 15 by user, and the access was 38 times by user in four 
months. 

The behavioral results in CIRS  was produced by interaction data collected to illustrate the potential of 
the system on given relevant and useful information by the recommender engine. The data registered 
by students allowed the description of the connections and members centrality within the network. We 
used NodeXL for modeling the student interaction. The analysis of the exploration was done as a 
network of direct relations between nodes; additionally a clustering of vertex clusters was performed.  

                                                      
1
 Each emoticon has a value that allows compute the preference results. The emoticon values are applied according to emotion 

positive or negative [31].  

Common content 
memory (DKR)

(DKR)

Teacher

Recommending
engine

Student

Message engine

Didactic content

Interested content related

Preferences 
(read, comment, vote, share)

Students actions 
over didactic content

Neighbors participation

Individual 
profile

Monitor



The Fig. 3 shows nodes of different sizes represent the degree of student outputs or interactions with 
other students' proposals. There is a concentration in the interaction with the proposals of the class 
itself; however some students interact with other material available in the common memory. 

 

 

Figure 3. -  Student interaction.  

The number of groups generated by the clustering was four. Each group presented a some insight of 
their behavior. The highest concentration was confirmed by 19 vertexes, the student content mostly 
review was about "Complexity in the logical framework ". Therefore this topic allowed to the teacher 
considering analyzed in deep this particular behaviors and accuracy in the topic understanding.  

In the other hand, the relation between propose a interest content and give feedback to the existing 
content was 5,91 and the standard deviation 4,45. 

The outcomes, have relation with [12], who mentions that individuals interactions with common 
memory by converting tacit knowledge into explicit and vicious.  CIRS was created primarily to 
promote the use of shared memory with shared repository of collaborative learning data. The results 
presented evidence a favorable effect in the collaboration, represented by the degree of centrality of 
the nodes, which according to (Cho et al., 2007) cited by [22] High degree of centrality is important 
because it shows a positive association with performance. The performance is improved through 
individual access to resources. In addition, [32] defines collaboration as an activity that cannot be 
divided into small pieces and is concentric in this sense there is concentration on the material of the 
classmates themselves. Finally, [23] argues that collective intelligence systems must help synergy 
among all actors in a collective, and CIRS fulfills these condition. Therefore,  in this context where the 
collaboration & competition is presented the CI emerge. 

5 CONCLUSIONS 

The objective of the presented work is to share the progress on a research program, which purpose is 
to provide processes, tools and resources for fostering the collective intelligence with recommender 
system in the class.  

There are several algorithms for classification, in this experience we focus on the collaboration how 
the best way for improve the recommendation and increasing the student participation, fostering the 
self-learning.   



The application of CIRS has shown evidence on the usefulness of the tools in the collaboration and 
participation into the class. The usefulness of the tool is considered because the evaluation according 
to the contributions, preferences and individual member's profiles, presents a new field for engaged 
the student learning. It's improves the student motivation, and  it helps to the students to discover new 
content of interest in an easy way, moreover, It allows saves time in the search and classification of 
teaching material of interest, and finally it's fosters specialized reading, inspires competence as a 
means of learning. 

In the other hand, It's gives the teacher the ability to generate reports of trends and behaviors of their 
students, real-time assessment of the quality of learning material, therefore accuracy the quality of 
didactic material, but also some insight about improve the didactic material, and increasing the 
performance of teaching-learning process. 

The CIRS can be applied in several fields for instance:  Training courses, types of training in different 
modalities, investigations of student behavior and preferences analysis, analysis of trends and quality 
of materials. 

The proposed instructional design and the corresponding web tool are the result of a creative 
combination of theoretical and practical perspectives. From this point, with a consistent instructional 
design, it will be possible to continue with the development of new features oriented to make 
recommendations on the continuous improvement to the state of art in the field of collective 
intelligence and recommender system in the teaching-learning process. 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS  

We thank the Department of Human and Social Sciences of the University of the Armed Forces ESPE 
(ECUADOR). 

REFERENCES  

[1] Jung, J. J. (2017). Computational Collective Intelligence with Big Data: Challenges and 
Opportunities. 

[2] Woolley, A. W., Chabris, C. F., Pentland, A., Hashmi, N., & Malone, T. W. (2010). Evidence for 
a collective intelligence factor in the performance of human groups. science, 330(6004), 686-
688. 

[3] De Maio, C., Fenza, G., Loia, V., & Orciuoli, F. (2017). Unfolding social content evolution along 
time and semantics. Future Generation Computer Systems, 66, 146-159. 

[4] Chianese, A., Marulli, F., Piccialli, F., Benedusi, P., & Jung, J. E. (2017). An associative engines 
based approach supporting collaborative analytics in the internet of cultural things. Future 
generation computer systems, 66, 187-198. 

[5] Shafiq, S. I., Sanin, C., Szczerbicki, E., & Toro, C. (2017). Towards an experience based 
collective computational intelligence for manufacturing. Future Generation Computer Systems, 
66, 89-99. 

[6] Lee, O. J., & Jung, J. E. (2017). Sequence clustering-based automated rule generation for 
adaptive complex event processing. Future Generation Computer Systems, 66, 100-109. 

[7] Lops, P., De Gemmis, M., & Semeraro, G. (2011). Content-based recommender systems: State 
of the art and trends. In Recommender systems handbook (pp. 73-105). Springer US. 

[8] Achakulvisut, T., Acuna, D. E., Ruangrong, T., & Kording, K. (2016). Science Concierge: A fast 
content-based recommendation system for scientific publications. Cornell University Library. 

[9] Burke, R. (2007). Hybrid web recommender systems. The Adaptive Web, 377–408. 
http://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-72079-9_12 

[10] Dascalu, M.-I., Bodea, C.-N., Mihailescu, M. N., Tanase, E. A., & Ordoñez De Pablos, P. 
(2016). Behaviour &amp; Information Technology Educational recommender systems and their 
application in lifelong learning Educational recommender systems and their application in 
lifelong learning. Behaviour & Information Technology, 354, 290–297. 
http://doi.org/10.1080/0144929X.2015.1128977 



[11] Herlocker, J. L., Konstan, J. a, & Riedl, J. (2000). Explaining collaborative filtering 
recommendations. In Proceedings of the 2000 ACM conference on Computer supported 
cooperative work (pp. 241–250). http://doi.org/10.1145/358916.358995 

[12] Levy, P. (2015). Collective Intelligence for Educators. Educational Philosophy and Theory, 
47(8), 749–754. http://doi.org/10.1080/00131857.2015.1053734 

[13] Mahmood, T., & Ricci, F. (2007). Towards learning user-adaptive state models in a 
conversational recommender system. Proceedings of the 15th Workshop on Adaptivity and 
User Modeling in Interactive Systems, ABIS, 7, 373–378. 

[14] Oh, J., Jeong, O., & Lee, E. (2013). Place Recommendation System, 169–176. 

[15] Patel, A., & Balakrishnan, A. (2009). Generic framework for recommendation system using 
collective intelligence. International Conference for Internet Technology and Secured 
Transactions. 

[16] Ryang, H., Yun, U., Pyun, G., Lee, G., & Kim, J. (2014). Ranking algorithm for book reviews 
with user tendency and collective intelligence. Multimedia Tools and Applications, 6209–6227. 
http://doi.org/10.1007/s11042-014-2101-4 

[17] Sacín, C. V., Agapito, J. B., Shafti, L., & Ortigosa, A. (2009). Recommendation in Higher 
Education Using Data Mining Techniques. Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on 
Educational Data Mining, 191–199. Retrieved from 
http://www.educationaldatamining.org/EDM2009/uploads/proceedings/vialardi.pdf 

[18] Schafer, J., Frankowski, D., Herlocker, J., & Sen, S. (2007). Collaborative Filtering 
Recommender Systems. The Adaptive Web, 291–324. http://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-72079-
9_9 

[19] Secundo, G., Dumay, J., Schiuma, G., & Passiante, G. (2016). Managing intellectual capital 
through a collective intelligence approach. Journal of Intellectual Capital, 17(2), 298–319. 
http://doi.org/10.1108/JIC-05-2015-0046 

[20] Viejo Fernández, X. (2015). Sistemas de Recomendación de Contenidos para Libros 
Inteligentes. Dialectologia: revista electrònica. 

[21] Zhou, J., Luo, T., & Lin, H. (2010). A novel recommendation system with collective intelligence. 
Proceedings - 2010 IEEE 2nd Symposium on Web Society, SWS 2010, 151–157. 
http://doi.org/10.1109/SWS.2010.5607461 

[22] Cadima, R., Ferreira, C., Monguet, J., Ojeda, J., & Fernandez, J. (2010). Promoting social 
network awareness: A social network monitoring system. Computers & Education, 54(4), 1233–
1240. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2009.11.009 

[23] Glenn, J. C. (2013). Collective intelligence systems and an application by The Millennium 
Project for the Egyptian Academy of Scientific Research and Technology. Technological 
Forecasting and Social Change, 97, 7–14. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2013.10.010 

[24] Levy, P. (2015). Collective Intelligence for Educators. Educational Philosophy and Theory, 
47(8), 749–754. http://doi.org/10.1080/00131857.2015.1053734 

[25] Ricci, F., Rokach, L., & Shapira, B. (2011). Introduction to recommender systems handbook 
(pp. 1-35). Springer US. 

[26] Bridge, D., G¨ oker, M., McGinty, L., Smyth, B.: Case-based recommender systems. The 
Knowledge Engineering review 20(3), 315–320 (2006) 

[27] Ricci, F., Cavada, D., Mirzadeh, N., Venturini, A.: Case-based travel recommendations. In: D.R. 
Fesenmaier, K.Woeber, H.Werthner (eds.) Destination Recommendation Systems: Be- 
havioural Foundations and Applications, pp. 67–93. CABI (2006) 

[28] Arazy, O., Kumar, N., Shapira, B.: Improving social recommender systems. IT Professional 
11(4), 38–44 (2009) 

[29] Ben-Shimon, D., Tsikinovsky, A., Rokach, L., Meisels, A., Shani, G., Naamani, L.: Recom- 
mender system from personal social networks. In: K. Wegrzyn-Wolska, P.S. Szczepaniak (eds.) 
AWIC, Advances in Soft Computing, vol. 43, pp. 47–55. Springer (2007) 



[30] Núñez Valdéz, E. R. (2012). Sistemas de recomendación de contenidos para libros inteligentes. 

[31] Meza, J., Ortiz, O., Vaca-Cardenas, M., Roman, S., & Monguet, J. M. (2017). CIR: Fostering 
Collective Creativity. In G. Vincenti, A. Bucciero, M. Helfert, & M. Glowatz (Eds.), E-Learning, E-
Education, and Online Training: Third International Conference, eLEOT 2016, Dublin, Ireland, 
August 31 -- September 2, 2016, Revised Selected Papers (pp. 145–152). Cham: Springer 
International Publishing. http://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-49625-2_18 

[32] Malone, T. W., Laubacher, R., & Dellarocas, C. (2010). The Collective Intelligence Genome 
THE LEADING. MIT Sloan Management Review, 51(51303), 21–31. 
http://doi.org/10.1109/EMR.2010.5559142 

Appendix I. Web tool interfaces 

 

Figure 4. Main interfaces of CIRS 

Appendix II. Collective Intelligence metrics 

Name: Preference 

 

             
        

 
 

Where : 

     A Is the citation and B is the cited 

     n : Number of tasks that are posted 

     t= Index of the task being counted 

Interpretation: .- Add all matches in which A is element of B. Sum all the votes that A has generated in 

favor of B. 

Log in

Contents preferences

Home/ Common Memory

Recommended contents



Name: Coupling 

             
      

      
 

Where : 

     Ra:  Student A preferences 

     Rb:  Student B preferences 

           : Common preferences between A & B 
 

Interpretation:- If a and b, coincide with greater force in having referred to E in several iterations of 

proposals of ideas, there is the probability that E can be considered as an element that increases the 

performance of equipment. 

Name: Collaboration. 

          
                              

          
    

                       
                                         

            
    

                       
                              

          
    

 

Where : 

 Total Ideas:  The total number of ideas proposed in a task 

 Ideas:  List of ideas 

 Idea: Vector index. 

 

TotalComments:  The total number of comments in a task 

Comments:  List of comments 

Comment:  Vector index. 

 

TotalVotes:  The total number of votes in a task 

Votes:  List of votes 

Vote:  Vector index. 

Interpretation: .- Apply proportions for ideas, comments and / or votes, where the one who has more 

ideas, comments and voted the most of them will have the best score. 

Name: Expertise 

 

               
            

                           
 

          

       

  

 

Where : 

TotalIdeas:  The total number of ideas proposed in a task 

Maximumvalue: Maximum rating for the first position of the ranking is assumed 1. 

Ideas:  List of ideas proposed 

Idea: Vector index. 

Ranking position: Hierarchical position occupied by the idea according to preferences. 

Interpretation: .- The model applies a square inverse progression, that is to say that each upward position 

in the ranking punctuates me with half of the previous position, so that no student whose idea will be 

below the first place will get the maximum score , Regardless of the number of ideas proposed. In 

addition each proposed idea gains points indistinct from the position of the ranking. 

Note. In the ranking there will be no ties, since in the ordering criterion, the number of votes is the first 

ordering factor and the second of the exact date and time of the proposal. Therefore the first proposers are 

more likely to win. 

 


