



















































FOAU001-escoda pastor-defx


Urban experiences: EMBT. Gas Natural´s building, Santa 
Caterina market and Diagonal-Mar park. 

 
 

Carmen Escoda Pastor 
Escuela Técnica Superior de Arquitectura de Barcelona, Universidad Politécnica de Cataluña, Avenida 

Diagonal 643, Barcelona, España. 
carmen.escoda@upc.edu 

 

Luis Bravo Farré 
Escuela Técnica Superior de Arquitectura del Vallés, Universidad Politécnica de Cataluña, Avenida 

Diagonal 643, Barcelona, España. 
lbravofarre@gmail.com 

 

Abstract 

The tourist route, a mass phenomenon, is a guided, partial tour (induced by someone else). The guides define 
what should be visited. Yet strolling the streets and discovering requires time. We are at the end of the post-
capitalist period; the situationalists’ dérive, getting lost to find a new interpretation of the city are behind us. 
The city is planned to be visited out of our civilisation’s need to turn itself into a spectacle. 

This paper explores the relationship between the image of the city and the architecture, to determine what 
concept of city is implicit – through the architect’s eye – on the project. We based this on a study of three 
projects of Miralles-Tagliabue, in Barcelona, analysing the city andits transformation through the different 
experiences. 

Keywords: Miralles-Tagliabue, three urban experiences. 

 

Urban experiences: EMBT. Gas Natural´s building, Santa 
Caterina market and Diagonal-Mar park. 

 
Barcelona has lately become a Mediterranean city of remarkable tourist appeal and the high degree of 
quality of his architecture and urban spaces is in great part responsible for this.  
Among the various well known cultural trails through different parts of the city we can find a good 
number of architectural jewels – old, remodeled or recently build- as well as newly recovered public 
and green areas such as the new sea shore line or the recently restored neighborhoods in the heart of 
the old districts. 
Walking those narrow streets through the old quarters, sharing everyday life with the locals, is today 
one of the most interesting and pleasant activities that foreign visitors can do. 
Barcelona, therefore, is now facing the challenge of an urgent and most necessary transformation of its 
old city center to improve its living and urban standards, without losing the charming quality that 
history and time has conferred on this zone; keeping that liveliness, character and special atmosphere 
that both native and tourist appreciate so much. 
In the projects that follow we will see how the town has improved its power of attraction by means of 
gaining new designed unique pieces of architecture, parks and public spaces and developing new 
design and specific project strategies for each site, to successfully deal with the complex and delicate 
matter of the old city center updating and restore. A most special care for the public and the people 
historical memory is the clue that allows to renew while preserving – or even improving- the attraction 
and best qualities of our urban scene. 



  
“…To the extent that the inhabitant of (post) modern city is no longer a subject apart from his or her 
performances, the border between self and city has become fluid (…) the city as experience by a 
subject which is itself the product of urban experience, a de-centred subject which can neither fully 
identify with nor fully dissociate from the things which constitute the city”1 
 
One of the architects who has demonstrated great sensitivity in the establishing of relationships with a 
site´s surroundings, in his dealing of existing trails, urban tracks, the successful inclusion of contextual 
data and footprints of a place, would be Enric Miralles. His plans are likened to tourist guides: they 
reflect and highlight landmarks, buildings, squares and existent trails. In this text, we will examine the 
procedures of three interventions to reorganize three emblematic quarters of Barcelona and see how 
those transformed the city, in order to find out their implicit concept of the city.  These are works 
which have respected footprints, guidelines, cultural, social, physical and historical preexistences and 
which have improved the urban landscape in a time that demands restructuration as union to 
ecological and environmental requirements. 
 
In the sites and neighborhoods where he intervenes, the context is perceived like an accumulation of 
diverse and complex elements, all of them important and revealing. 
 
“It is considered that superposition of historical tracks are fundamental to understand the dynamics 
and configuration of the present day city, so an essential and preliminary document taking form, which 
is necessary for the project evolution as well.”2 
 
All cases succeed at heightening the touristic attractiveness of the sites in their very distinct fashions.  
The market, for instance, stands at the heart of  Casco Antiguo (Old District) and, with its lively offer 
of activity, its popularity as well as public access is very much a place that lends itself to be 
experienced and enjoyed from within. 
 
Gas Natural´s building 
 
Gas Natural´s site is at the heart of the seaside quarter, between the areas of Barceloneta and Villa 
Olimpica (Olympic Village), a particular portion of the city which has undergone great level of 
transformation since before 1992, time of  the stripping of the railroad area and a coastal rehabilitation. 
Immediate contact with the fast lane of Ronda Litoral, neighbouring the Barceloneta area and 
closeness to the seaside suppose the inheritance of a unique set of conditions from the city of 
Barcelona. As an office building, observers mostly see its exterior. The powerful ledge edges a strong 
image while it links to its surroundings and the building´s skin echoes that of the others in the area. 
In 1999, Gas Natural convoked the contest for the construction of its new building. Six teams of 
architects of renowned prestige were invited to propose a design which would serve a double function: 
housing of offices and representation of the energy company. Miralles and Tagliabue´s project, the one 
that was chosen, was the single one not to propose a conventional tower but a complex volumetric 
design. One which, as a result of study, succeeded to be, at once, in touch with the company´s desired 
corporate image, in dialogue with its immediate surroundings and with the larger significance of the 
city. (Fig. 1) 
 

                                                           
1 PATTON, P. (1995) “Imaginary Cities: Images of Postmodernity” en Postmodern cities and spaces. Oxford: 
Blackwell. Pags. 112-121. 
 
2 LAHUERTA, J.J y Tagliabue, B. (1996) “Enric Miralles, Obras y Proyectos”. Madrid, Documentos de 
Arquitectura. Sociedad Editorial Electa España. Pag. 235 
 



 
Fig. 1 
Its success in encompassing all these different ratios of s
that the building is regarded as a landmark of urban scale when seen from the perspective
de Víctor Pradera, prolongation of Paseo San Juan´s avenue. When approaching the building for a 
closer view, however, one begins to make out new, 
which, in their scale, disposition and morphology, are in fact responding to the typology of the area of 
la Barceloneta and to the building´s perception from the fas
large cantilevered body is set in parallel with the apartm
unlike these, it affords the possibili
landscape it inhabits. (Fig. 2) 
 

Fig. 2 
 
The deliberately imperfect surface of glass on the face of the building instructs the vibration of light 
into a particularly rich and allusive reflection, which can be seen all the way from the pier of 
Barcelona, most remarkably when it´s seemingly set abl
equally been built with the user´s relationship to the seaside and pier area in mind: transparency 
extends from the pavement to the ceiling of 

 

ts success in encompassing all these different ratios of significance can now partly be seen in the fact 
that the building is regarded as a landmark of urban scale when seen from the perspective

prolongation of Paseo San Juan´s avenue. When approaching the building for a 
, however, one begins to make out new, different volumes – including a

which, in their scale, disposition and morphology, are in fact responding to the typology of the area of 
la Barceloneta and to the building´s perception from the fast lane of Ronda Litoral, which it faces. The 
large cantilevered body is set in parallel with the apartment blocks also facing the lane;
unlike these, it affords the possibility to completely walk through and forges visual links with the 

 

The deliberately imperfect surface of glass on the face of the building instructs the vibration of light 
into a particularly rich and allusive reflection, which can be seen all the way from the pier of 
Barcelona, most remarkably when it´s seemingly set ablaze during sunset. The offices inside have 
equally been built with the user´s relationship to the seaside and pier area in mind: transparency 
extends from the pavement to the ceiling of all interior spaces and the façade skin

ignificance can now partly be seen in the fact 
that the building is regarded as a landmark of urban scale when seen from the perspective of El Salón 

prolongation of Paseo San Juan´s avenue. When approaching the building for a 
including a rehabilitation one– 

which, in their scale, disposition and morphology, are in fact responding to the typology of the area of 
t lane of Ronda Litoral, which it faces. The 
ent blocks also facing the lane; however, 

and forges visual links with the 

The deliberately imperfect surface of glass on the face of the building instructs the vibration of light 
into a particularly rich and allusive reflection, which can be seen all the way from the pier of 

aze during sunset. The offices inside have 
equally been built with the user´s relationship to the seaside and pier area in mind: transparency 

and the façade skin, keeping users in 



close touch with external views, and just as well, the stretching, long areas of the floor plan ensure that 
all who work there can do it under natural light at all times and in proximity to the views. (Fig. 3 y 4) 
 

 Fig. 3 

 

 

 

Fig. 4 

 

Santa Caterina market 
 
In the neighborhood of Santa Caterina, Miralles-Tagliabue projected the re-designing of the old 
market and came up with a modification of the plan that, up until that point, accommodated the 
forecasted prolongation of Avenue Cambó, set to advance as a rectilinear opening,  devastating every 
old building in its way, without regard for their design, type or disposition. The new proposal, by 
contrast, devises an attentive subtraction of buildings’ pieces that results in an opening that winds its 
way through the neighborhood sinuously, in the manner of the old streets and in organic understanding. 
It respects, as well, the site’s grain of construction and reveals, as it trails, old architectures which shall 
be restored and completed in the new intervention.  
   
Miralles-Tagliabue, authors of the master-plan, coordinated with the three groups of architects 
(Arañó/Ensenyat/Tarrida, Bravo/Contepomi and Fuses/Viader) who had won the contests for the 
housing projects, venues and public spaces included in the plan to re-design the same area. This union 
went to turn into an exhaustive revision of the initial plan, which, in its process, revealed keys for 
major improvements of the area, surpassing the expectations that had been expressed at the PERI (the 
former Master Plan). As the design work progressed, new connections to old roads appeared, as well 
as a new square, substantial volumetric changes, a finer approach to façades of existent buildings, the 
possibility to preserve additional architectural elements to the ones previously planned, etc.  
 
The project to re-design the area (PERI) had to be modified in order to accommodate the direction of 
so significant updates. In doing so, the usual process of management was inverted and also laid proof 
that, in cases like this, a great capacity of possible alternatives to the usual town planning sequence 
exists and is to be found within the project itself. This will be the case when dealing with such areas of 
high complexity, density of significance and historic content. That much is stated as vital by Oriol 
Bohigas, architect and critic who talks about the problematic of remodeling this particular area, who 
also points that the three architects´ teams have succeeded to recompose a fragment of the old, 
historical city centre - a most touristic part of town, without any concessions to stylistic mimicry but 
not without succesfully keeping the type of spaces and volumes created under a morphologic 
continuity that eventuates in an appropriate continuation and update of the site´s deep history. 



  
Fig. 5 
 
 
According to Bohigas: “ It is not only an example of a very well resolved project but of an important 
methodological experience… departing from a generic urban project, three teams of architects have 
elaborated concrete projects, offering each one their personal creative participation… Barcelona hosts 
a number of examples of this method, but up until now in more formal and easily digestible structures: 
transformations on the grid of L’Eixample, Olympic Village, reforms in the neighborhood of Raval 
which come from the project Del Liceo al Seminario, etc. But the issue of Sta. Caterina is more 
complex - more open, less regulated – and therefore even more promising in sight of the result.”3 
 

 
Fig. 6 
 
It is in the footprints of this location, in the presence of historical heritage therein, in the culture, in the 
squares of the old city and the intricate design of old winding streets, that the most important weight of 
this project lies. The project descends to the area, adapts to its complexity and devises a physical and 
historical path that goes to end at the gates of the market. This is a method that has been at use in 
previous projects, like the Scottish Parliament. There, too, the stress fell on attaining a close 
understanding and interaction with the surrounding and significant natural area that didn´t fail to 
encompass the cultural depth and value of the historical centre. (Fig. 5) 

                                                           
3 BOHIGAS, Oriol. ( 3 de marzo de 2004) “Icono y Contexto en Santa Caterina”. El País. Catalunya. 
 



 
Fig. 7 
 
The place that will be called “Plaza de Santa Caterina”, would be a  part of a historical trail that begins 
in Santa Maria Church, would arrive to the city´s Cathedral all the way through Moncada street, 
Marcús Chapel, Giralt el Pellicer street, the market and the Plaza of Santa Caterina and the Avenue 
Cambó. 
 
“The same fragmentary mechanism can be recognized in the works of the Scottish Parliament and the 
Market of Santa Caterina. Not just in the façade´s mosaic, the skylights, in the Parliament´s sessions 
room and the bare structure, the roof´s surfaces or the carpentries of the Market, but in each of its 
spaces and constructive elements and the very identity of the buildings. The attractive and careful 
graphic expression in the floor plans – that the reader will be able to profusely explore in this 
monograph- may also be understood from the same point of view. But, above all, if one analyses the 
amount of architectonic dedication by each unit of space, one shall easily understand the kindness and 
proximity of the project´s decisions in respect to the viewer, evident in both designs. We could say 
they are both warm, familiar, almost domestic buildings.”4 
  
We can see Miralles´ use of allegorical imagery where material items take the place of ideas. In Santa 
Caterina this concept shines in the colorful ceramics roofing the market, echoing the colors of the fruit 
and the vegetables which are sold there within in the diverse stalls. (Fig. 6 y 7) 

                                                           
4
 COLL-BARREU, Joan / EMBT. (2006) “EMBT Miralles-Tagiablue”. Fragmento y continuidad en el 

Parlamento de Escocia y el Mercado de Santa Catalina. Ed. T6, Pamplona, España. 

 



Fig. 8 

 

Fig. 9 

 

The old walls of the market´s perimeter accept the continuative act by which the new structure 
incorporates and extends them, just as the market shares its space with the ruins of an old convent. 
This answers to ideas of inclusion of elements both present and past, in favor of cultural awareness 
and the possibility of re-evaluation and dialogue - a concept known as “present continuous”. (Fig. 8) 
 

 
Fig. 10 
 
“The intervention tries to mix and merge with the original structure. Both aims are accomplished via 
the realization of a new roof, which wraps itself around the structure and extends it beyond the 
perimeter of the construction.”5 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
5 MASSAD, F. y GUERREIRO, A. (8 de febrero de 2005) “La inconclusa arquitectura del sentimiento”. 
Arquitextos, periódico mensual de textos de arquitectura. 
 



Diagonal Mar Park 
 
In Diagonal Mar Park, 1997-2002, a difficult project set for the residual space between private blocks, 
the design will emerge out of the patterns of existent road networks and older railroad tracks. In 
addition, it proposes to connect itself to the nearby beach area, in a move to attain union with that 
close and accessible open space, the beach, which –besides- happens to be the only one big enough for 
the scale of the vast metropolitan area of Barcelona.  (Fig. 9) 

  
Fig. 11 
 
It's design favours an interaction with the city. It is organised by following a series of paths, which 
similar to the branches of a tree, spread out in all directions. (Fig. 10 y 11) 
 

 

Fig. 12 

 

 

Fig. 13 

 
The park rises in the beach and bifurcates in two axis as the main branches of a tree, each one forming 
more branches. The first is a rambla where the people flow; the other one is the life of the man. These 
two axis generate seven spaces: 
 
a.-Branch of the plaza: a walking lane where park visitors from the central area flow to the sea and 
Paseo Marítimo. 



 
b.-Branch of the man childhood and playground: life of man begins here at his childhood, a play 
ground which is characterized by a small basin and some play-devices for the younger. 
 
c.-Taulat street: the park comes to pause at this street, wherefrom astonishing views of the new 
Diagonal Mar neighborhood can be seen. 
 
d.-A meandering walkway above the lake, and the lake underneath in surprising forms.  
 
e.-The Magic Mountain: man goes on forward in evolution to his pre-adolescence. Playground with 
sinuous toboggans in a big green mountain. 
 
f.-The Lake: a wide water basin with steel meandering sculptures, spitting steamed water all around. 
 
g.- The Plaza: a place where neighbors meet and the intersection of the park and Diagonal Avenue. 
 
Miralles creates his own repertoire of artificial nature. Elements such as pergolas, benches, metal and 
vibrant structures that, with the ever changing play of light and shadow, serve to enrich and enliven 
the spaces of the park. Elements that the architect calls “ lungo mare”, for their sinuous forms.  
 
 
Conclusions  
 
The Gas Natural tower is an exemplary site specific project. Is an answer to the requirements of its 
location and fits perfectly in the Barceloneta neighborhood while becoming a unique visual reference 
when perceived from the nearby ring-road.  
In Santa Caterina, the old Market is transformed in a new architectural landmark without losing 
connection with the people historical memory. A new avenue, public space, public housing, 
commercial and remodeling of the street grid around has increased the options for the inhabitants and 
visitors walking through the zone. New constructions merge into the old ones becoming a new unit. 
The old dark and narrow lanes get more light in and the place is now brighter –and safer- without 
losing its charm. The new volumes form bridges that allow the discovering of new spots, trails and 
squares through the old quarters when walking all the way down the nearby harbor. 
In Diagonal Mar Park, though the idea of connecting new gardens to the biggest green area of the 
town –the seashore- could not be realized, an original green space resulted which deserves a visit. It 
serves both the nearby neighborhood and the city as it is - as the other examples we have mentioned 
above- a landmark in itself. 
 
The case of the Market, Diagonal Mar Park, Port Vell and the prolongation of Cambó Avenue are all 
examples of successful interventions in historical areas of the city. These are areas which maintain and 
increase the city´s greatest touristic attraction. When dealing with those, interventions must manage to 
respect the quality and maintain the magnitude of their historic elements, without falling into the 
extreme that is conservationism, which would benumb the location and turn it – as it occurs all too 
frequently– into a dead and lamentable pantomime of itself.  A transformation must most importantly 
recognize and prioritize to maintain the elements contributing to the location´s vitality and flux of 
activity. It is only caring for those that will grant the survival of its charismatic strength, life and 
touristic attractiveness and not close in on the possibility of its cultural and social progress. 
 
References 
 
www.mirallestagliabue.com 
 
BOHIGAS, Oriol. ( 3 de marzo de 2004) “Icono y Contexto en Santa Caterina”. El País. Catalunya. 
 



COLL-BARREU, Joan / EMBT. (2006) “EMBT Miralles-Tagiablue”. Fragmento y continuidad en el 
Parlamento de Escocia y el Mercado de Santa Catalina. Ed. T6, Pamplona, España. 

 
LAHUERTA, J.J y Tagliabue, B. (1996) “Enric Miralles, Obras y Proyectos”. Madrid, Documentos de 
Arquitectura. Sociedad Editorial Electa España. 
 
MASSAD, F. y GUERREIRO, A. (8 de febrero de 2005) “La inconclusa arquitectura del 
sentimiento”. Arquitextos, periódico mensual de textos de arquitectura. 
 
MONTANER, Josep Maria. (1992) "Idea, imagen y símbolo de la ciudad". En La modernidad 
superada. Arquitectura, arte y pensamiento del siglo XX, Gustavo Gili. Barcelona.  
 
PATTON, P. (1995) “Imaginary Cities: Images of Postmodernity” en Postmodern cities and spaces. 
Oxford: Blackwell. 
 


