












































USPDF189646_Jornadas Santander.pdf


 

 

 

THE RENOVATION IN URBAN PUBLIC SPACE 
THE CASE STUDY OF JARDIN DE LA RAMBLA DE SANTS 

 

Ti Xu 
ETSAB - Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya 

ti.xu@upc.edu 

Director de la tesis doctoral: 
Antonio Millán Gómez, ETSAV – Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya 

 

 

Palabras clave: morfología urbana, renovación urbana, conectividad urbana, ferrocarril, 
espacio público 

Resumen:  
La estación de tren, uno de los más importantes componentes en una ciudad, juega un 
papel muy significativo en la conexión de distritos entre sí y con otras ciudades. 
Desafortunadamente, en muchas ciudades el ferrocarril en lugar de actuar como un enlace 
para promover el desarrollo urbano, ha cortado los enlaces internos de las ciudades y los 
ha separado. El proyecto de renovación urbana de Barcelona muestra cómo reconectar 
áreas desconectadas y, más importante, cuán importante es el proyecto para los residentes 
locales y para la morfología urbana. La sintaxis espacial es una buena metodología para 
revelar todo el proceso de renovación, y también puede explicar la influencia y el 
resultado tanto para el ciudadano como para la ciudad.  

________________________________________________________________________________________________________ 

Keywords: urban morphology, urban renovation, urban connection, railway, urban public 
space 

Abstract:  
The train station, one of the most important components of the city, plays a significant role 
to connect each district and others cities. Unfortunately, in many cities their train station 
and rail, instead of acting as a link to promote urban development, have cut off the inner 
links of cities and cut them apart. Urban public renovation project in Barcelona 
demonstrates how to reconnect the separated area together, and more importantly how 
decisive the project to the local residents and the urban morphology is. Space syntax is a 
good methodology to reveal the entire process of the renovation, and it also can explain 
what the influence and result to both citizen and city.  

199



Ti Xu  

 

This article is based on the methodology of space syntax and urban theory to do a 
case study, analyze urban public traffic project renovation in Barcelona, and attempt to 
reveal the differences in before and after, how the project changed the urban morphology, 
to provide the Chinese urban department a study case, and finally summarize the 
methodologies and conclusions.  

1. INTRODUCTION AND CONTEXT 

Since the 1960s, Barcelona has been undergoing the renovation and renewal of 
modern urban public space, and each renovation and renewal often accompanied by some 
important remodeling and innovation of urban traffic space. The renewal of urban traffic 
space is closely related to the development of the entire city. It is a kind of amendment and 
progress to its own problems and a re-recognition of humanity and society. It has a 
positive role in promoting the development of urban areas, realizing the regeneration and 
reconstruction of urban space and enhancing the value of urban space. 

On the traditional cognition of China, the traffic space is usually defined as the pure 
«traffic» attribute, which is a node, space or facilities used by people and vehicles. First of 
all, the current situation of Chinese traffic space is often given priority to and designed by 
car traffic, and the importance of people in traffic space is seriously neglected. Secondly, 
large-scale urban design, urban planning dominated by car behavior, and large space scale 
make people's travel seriously impeded, and pedestrian space is also greatly compressed 
and occupied. In his book Cities for people, Jan Gehl stresses that we must design Cities for 
people, not just for cars, for beautiful buildings, or for blind simple economics. Urban 
design needs to maximize the diversity of social interaction, minimize the demand for 
transportation, enable people to enjoy life in public spaces, and create opportunities for 
unintentional or intentional encounters. Compared with the design of traffic public space 
in China, which is one-sided in pursuit of traffic efficiency, however, the transformation of 
urban traffic space in Barcelona not only meets the basic functional attributes of «traffic», 
but also demonstrates the urban strategy and social appeal to a higher level from the 
perspective of urban management and planning. Based on the perspective of human 
beings and the needs of society, it shows the priority and respect for human beings in 
dimension design, and closely connects to urban planning, urban public space 
transformation and citizens' daily life.  

The train station plays a significant role to connect each district and others cities. 
Unfortunately, many cities their train station and rail, instead of acting as a link to 
promote urban development, railways have cut off the inner links of cities and cut them 
apart. The Barcelona Jardins de la Rambla de Sants, La estacion de Barcelona- La Sagrera 
are positive examples to demonstrate how to contact urban community of each side which 
cut by huge gap of rail and train station, and how to re-establish the communication and 
re-activate the urban vitality. The following words will do a case study of Jardin de La 
Rambla de Sants to show how the urban project revive and reconnect the city. 

2. CASE STUDY: JARDIN DE LA RAMBLA DE SANTS 

Sants railway station built in the 1970s, its railway and affiliate traffic brought 
supplies and labor to Barcelona continuously, however about 30 meters wide gap and 
eight railway tracks cut apart the district Sants into two areas. It destroyed the whole city 

200



The renovation in urban public space: the case study of Jardin de la Rambla de Sants 

 

morphology, constant rail transport and huge crack of urban morphology formed some 
serious problems, such as lead low quality of the urban public space, social problems, 
crime, inconvenient movement of pedestrian, etc. Finally, local people generally move out from the railway track area, and the city start to lose its’ vitality (figure 1). 

 
Figure 1. Sants and Railyway area before and now 

The axial and segment analysis data table of space syntax shows how the urban 
condition changed in this area because of the renovation project Jardin de la Rambla de 
Sants. 

Attributes table 1: mean Integration value in different radius 

 NC m. conn 
m. 
depth 

m.Int 
R200 

m.Int 
R400 

m.Int 
R800 

m.Int 
R1200 

m. Int 
(n) 

Synergy 
R400/N 

Before 1086 4.37 2923.51 25.24 59.02 149.18 246.32 418.42 0.430 

After 1137 4.43 2989.24 25.98 62.91 164.47 273.04 449.30 0.446 
 

Attributes table 2: mean Choice value in different radius 
 m.Choi  

R200 
m.Choi  
R400 

m.Choi  
R800 

m.Choi  
R1200 

m.Choi 
(n) 

Before 43.32 324.86 2261.64 6160.04 17530.8 

After 46.26 365.44 2600.44 7069.54 19362.8 

Growth 6.78% 12.49% 14.98% 14.76% 9.46% 

201



Ti Xu  

 

By contrast, China as emerging country has similar problem situations like this, 
magnificent social architecture and construction do not only play a simple function as 
social service,  but is also responsible for the displaying of the nation power, urban scape 
and authority. This behavior and essence reflect the miss consideration of humanity, and 
the desire of urban future from authority who wants to establish the nation and the city 
upon examples learnt from western-world cities.  

2.1. Re-unified and re-connected urban space and morphology 

From the perspective of urban dimension, Jadins de la Rambla de Sants could not 
simply be understood and defined as an ordinary urban infrastructure or construction, 
which has a significant impact on the urban spatial and social value of the Sants district of 
Barcelona. 

First of all, the establishment of Jardin de la Rambla de Sants reconnects the urban 
fabric with the intervention of urban public space. Fundamentally, the garden strengthens 
the lateral connection between the two sides of the railway. The previous several 
overpasses have been changed into a transport public space for citizens, which can be 
used as the connection of the urban area. Due to this project, the urban accessibility has 
been significantly improved, the urban scars have been repaired, and the regional 
connections have been restored and strengthened.  

 
Figure 2. Connectivity of Jardin de la Rambla de Sants changing between before and after. Average 
Connectivity: before: 4.37, after: 4.43. 

In the analysis result of connectivity of Depthmap (figure 2), urban connectivity 
changes owing renovation can be seen. The average connectivity raised from 4.37 to 4.43, 
a slight increase, but, more apparently, the roads directly connected by the Jardin de la 
Rambla de Sants are quite increased (Table 3). Depending on the change of connectivity, 
we can notice that half of them increased 50%, which means Jardin de la Rambla de Sants 
enhanced the local connectivity dramatically between the two sides of the railway.  

 

 

202



The renovation in urban public space: the case study of Jardin de la Rambla de Sants 

 

Attributes table 3: connectivity of several connected street 

connectivity C/ Tinent Flomesta 
C/Jocs 
Florals 

C/Sant 
Jordi c/pavia 

c/Bonaventura 
Pollés 

Before 3 2 3 3 4 

After 4 5 6 6 6 
 

2.2. Increased urban integration and vitality 

The establishment of Jardin de la Rambla de Sants has a great social value. High 
integration promotes protential value in this district, which means the urban public space 
around railway transformation changed the area into a center area in the Sants district. In 
the urban space not only enriched the urban forms, but also improved the social forms---
society and local resident population structure changed at the same time. For instance, the 
previous dark area that made small robbery easy has been converted into an open and 
connected public space, whilst the combination of square garden public space and 
transport hub space also attracted a lot of people to get in. It enriched the urban vitality 
and cohesion, the stream of people also strengthened the local commercial potential and 
increased urban value (figure 3), improved a residents' well-being and promoted urban 
renovation and development. 

The analysis of RN integration before and after are respectively 418.42 and 449.3 
(figure 3), the garden definitely raised up the value of sants area. As the depthmap 
demonstration, in global the Jardin de la Rambla de Sants is becoming a high integration 
value street, which means the garden is the new center, and it has the potential to be the 
most «to movement» place. 

Moreover, when compared with a pedestrian dimension, radius r400, (Figure 4), the 
previous railway places are low, and the position of railway has no value at all. However, 
after the construction of the Sants Rambla garden, the entire area of the cross of 
C/National N340 and C/Antoni de Capmany became the center area, and also the high 
value area extends to the Sants Rambla garden. Besides, owing to the increase of the 
crossings and Jardin de la Rambla de Sants, those connected street values have been 
enhanced as well. Thus, in the local R400 analysis, the Jardin de Rambla de Sants helped to 
renovate this area and create a new city center, totally changing a previous poor urban 
condition to the current high integration public space. The whole area, especially the Sants 
Rambla Garden connected area, changed from being of low vitality, an almost forgotten 
area (figure 5) into a new center, with new commercial potential, new urban morphology 
and revived urban public space. 

2.3. Increased urban integration and vitality 

Choice measures how likely an axial line or a street segment it is to be passed 
through on all shortest routes from all spaces to all other spaces in the entire system or 
within a predetermined distance (radius) from each segment (Hillier, B., Burdett, R., 
Peponis, J., Penn, A. 1987). 

 

203



Ti Xu  

 

 
Figure 3. Average RN integration value before 418.42 after  449.3 

 
Figure 4. Average RN integration value before 59.02 After: 62.91 

 

Figure 5. The railway cut the city 

204



The renovation in urban public space: the case study of Jardin de la Rambla de Sants 

 

Attributes table 4: mean choice value between different radiuses. 

 M.ch r200 M.ch r400 M.ch r800 M.ch r1200 M.ch N 

Before 43.3 324.86 2261.64 6160.04 19362.8 

After 46.26 365.44 2600.44 7069.54 17530.8 
 

 
Figure 6. R400 Choice. Before: 2261.64 and After: 2600.44 

 
Figure 7. RN Choice. Before: 19362.8 and After: 17530.8 

Depending on the choice analysis, this article selected R400 pedestrian for local 
domains and RN for the global dimension. Firstly, starting with the global dimension, 
(Figure 7) the diagrams do not show big difference between each other, but the Sants 
Rambla area becomes to the most passed through place and form one of the shortest 
routes in the Sants area. In other words, starting from the construction of Jardin de la 
Rambla de Sants, it changed the civic pass choice and solved the traffic problem caused by 
the cut of railway. Secondly, the local dimension of radius R400, (Figure 6) exhibits the 
most significant change in the surrounding area of the Sants Rambla. A quite apparent 

205



Ti Xu  

 

change, before the renovation most streets around the railway showed low choice values, 
and few people would chose those areas as a route to pass through; by contrast, with the 
Jardin de la Rambla de Sants the places near the railway acquired high choice values, 
enhancing people to pass through, helping pedestrian use and increasing vitality.  

Correlation between integration and choice informs about the accessibility of a 
space as destination from all others and the likelihood of being a shortest routes destiny 
from all points to all other points in the layout, i.e. it indexes the agreement between a 
space's potential for to-movement and through-movement.  

«The degree to which a space is likely to lie on the shortest routes from all points to all 
other points in the layout is not an intuitable property of the layout, whereas the 
number of steps a space is from all other spaces is an intuitable property in that knowledge of it can be built up over time by moving around the layout”. Choice may be 
a better predictor of movement for "inhabitants" with better knowledge of the layout 
than for "strangers" who rely on reading the layout, in order to move around» (Hillier 
1987, 2009).  

Those analysis of accessibility (movement interface) also can indicate how the urban 
condition changed. (Figure 8), As the figure (over 0.5) shows the integration and choice 
turn to positive correlation, this area has a good accessibility. The accessibility has a slight 
increase, not dramatic. Because of the data does not show the west urban condition, 
including the entire Sants and some Les Corts area, further research is required for precise 
analysis, that will be done in the future. 

 
Figure 8. Accessibility before and after 

2.4. Highly integrated multiple functional urban public space 

The types of urban public space in a traditional sense can be limited here to four 
types: street, square, park and garden, and usually the public space project has only a 
single attribute. The Jardin de la Rambla de Sants integrates the traditional concept of 
public space classification and integrates the multiple types of space of urban square, park, 
rail transit and public facilities, which is a reconstruction project of urban public space 
superimposed by multiple urban elements. (Figure 9) 

206



The renovation in urban public space: the case study of Jardin de la Rambla de Sants 

 

 
Figure 9. Jardin de la Rambla de Sants revived the area. 

First of all, from the function of public space, the urban garden, square, street and 
other types of public space are integrated, and the original urban space forms of the old 
city are combined to make the urban form diversified. Secondly, urban public activity 
space and traditional traffic space are combined in spatial attribute, which greatly 
enriches the urban interface. The Sants rail garden is located in the Sants railway station, 
Sants square and the old city. In order to avoid the large railway line renovation project, 
the Jardin de la Rambla de Sants not only maintains the existing rail transit system, but 
also meets the demand of road and pedestrian traffic. In addition, the platform park above 
the track meets citizens' demand for public space, greatly expands the existing urban 
interface, and improves the quality of residents' living environment. In terms of hearing 
and vision, this project also solved the problems of noise and visual pressure caused by 
original track construction and train traffic. The diagonal intersecting structure of the 
support platform and the closed glass facade isolates the noise of the track and train 
operation to the maximum extent within the tunnel; a large number of shrubs, climbing 
plants and trees in and around the garden also try to reduce noise pollution caused by rail 
transit. On the visual level, the platform stands on the track, which is tens of meters above 
the ground. As a result, it becomes the highest point of view in the region, providing a new 
visual experience for the surrounding residents, relieving the auditory pressure and visual 
pressure caused by the boring and indifferent rail transit. 

2.5. Urban public space with continuous growth 

The development and continuity of a city cannot be separated from its sustainable 
development and construction. An urban project is the carrier of urban development and 
construction. If successful, it could drive and lead sustainable development of a district or 
a city. However, many cities in China fail to consider the continuity of development and 

207



Ti Xu  

 

planning, the project is independent of city existence, and the urban development policy is 
constantly changed, resulting in the lack of continuity of urban construction and planning.  

Compared with the Chinese single and independent urban projects, Barcelona often 
makes forward-looking and systematic planning and management in urban projects 
combining the existing conditions and the future development of the city. In the case of the 
Jardin de la Rambla de Sants, it also reflects the continuity and extension of the public 
space in Barcelona. The garden total length is 800 meters, in the east it connects with 
Sants square and railway station, and in the west side it gives a full consideration to the 
future urban expansion and development. The extension interface can grow and extend 
westward along the railway, and lead the direction of urban expansion to the Llobregat 
district. Consequently, the continuous and sustainable consideration of Jardin de la 
Rambla de Sants leave a huge potential to the entire city, it can play the function of 
repairing urban scars, enhancing regional accessibility, strengthening urban connection 
and establishing urban public space in the following urban renovation (Figure 10). 

 
Figure 10: the opportunity of continuity of Jardin de la Rambla de Sants 

2.6. A systematic and interconnected urban public space system 

The Sants district is the old town of Barcelona, and the whole area is attached to the 
Sants railway station. Compared with other districts of Barcelona, Sants district has fewer 
parks, limited open space, narrow roads, high urban density, poor living quality, and in 
general, a slow development of urban public space. The Jardin de la Rambla de Sants not 
only provides an open urban terrace for the area, but also strengthens the connection 
between the public space and the surrounding urban area, forming an interconnected 
public space system (Figure 11).  

208



The renovation in urban public space: the case study of Jardin de la Rambla de Sants 

 

Specifically speaking, the East-West of Jardin de la Rambla de Sants meets the north-
south Rambla de Brasil, therefore the formerly closed Sants region is completely 
integrated with the two districts: Les Corts and Zona Franca. As the result, the urban 
public space has been connected and shared, the value of the Sants district has also been 
maximized, and finally the whole western urban public space system of Barcelona is 
formed together by the connection of Jardin de la Rambla de Sants. 

 
Figure 11: possibility of continuity 

 

3. CONCLUSION 

The renewal of traffic public space in Barcelona is not only the optimization of the 
traffic system in the sense of function, but also a great progress in urban planning. From 
the single and simple traffic functional space, it gradually evolved into a complex urban 
public space, additionally, integrated into the deep understanding of the city, the 
community, the environment, the urban space and the requirement of citizens.  

Otherwise, the re-cognition to city and people is also a new urban research aspect 
which Chinese urban department need to seriously face to, the current Chinese city almost 
design for vehicles but not for pedestrian, the shortage of urban public space and public 
transportation will continually stimulate the increase of private cars and intensify the 
traffic pressure. The only way to solve urban problem is back to the original point, and 
design the city with a comfort scale and the pedestrian dimension to modify and design 
the urban public space, especially the traditional traffic space. Due to the process of the 
research, case study of Chinese part did not included this part will be done in the following 
steps.  

4. LISTA DE REFERENCIAS 

Busquets, Joan. 2006. The Urban Evolution of a Compact City. Barcelona: Nicoldi. 

Cerdá, Ildefons. 1867. General theory of urbanization. Barcelona. 

209



Ti Xu  

 

Gehl Jan. 2010. Cities for people. Island Press 

Hillier, B., & Hanson, J. 1984. The Social Logic of Space. Cambridge University Pres.  

Hillier, B. 1996. Space is the Machine. Cambridge University Press.  

Hillier, B. 1999. The Common Language of Space: a way of looking at the social, economic and 
environmental functioning of cities on a common basis. Journal of Environmental Sciences 
Beijing 11, 344-349. 

Hillier, B. 2009. “Spatial Sustainability in Cities: Organic Patterns and Sustainable Forms”. En 
Proceedings of the 7th International Space Syntax Symposium (KO1:1–20), Stockholm, KTH. 
Millán Gómez, Antonio, Felipe Lazo Mella & David López Moreno. 2012. “Organic and inorganic 
overlapping in old Barcelona”. En Proceedings - Eighth International Space Syntax Symposium. 
Santiago de Chile. 

Xiaohong Ling, Michelle & Xiuxiu Sheng. 2017.  “A syntactic comparative research on the old and new axes of Guangzhou, China”. En Proceedings of the 11th Space Syntax Symposium 
 “ ” -  
 

 

210


