






















































Collection and Integration of Local Knowledge and Experience through a Collective Spatial Analysis


 International Journal of

Geo-Information

Article

Collection and Integration of Local Knowledge and
Experience through a Collective Spatial Analysis

Juan Daniel Castillo-Rosas 1,2,*, José José Diez-Rodríguez 3, Alex Fernando Jiménez-Vélez 1,4,
María Amparo Núñez-Andrés 5 and Josep María Monguet-Fierro 1

1 Departament d’Expressió Gràfica a l’Enginyeria, Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya (UPC-BarcelonaTech),
Av. Diagonal, 647, 08028 Barcelona, Spain; afjimenezv@gmail.com (A.F.J.-V.);
jm.monguet@upc.edu (J.M.M.-F.)

2 Dirección General de Cartografía, SEDENA, Av. Industria Militar, 261, 53960 Naucalpan, Mexico
3 Departament de Projectes d’Enginyeria, Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya (UPC-BarcelonaTech),

Av. Diagonal, 647, 08028 Barcelona, Spain; jose.jose.diez@estudiant.upc.edu
4 Departamento de Ciencias de la Computación, Universidad de las Fuerzas Armadas (ESPE),

Av. Gral. Rumiñahui s/n, 170501 Sangolquí, Ecuador
5 Departament d’Enginyeria del Terreny, Cartogràfica i Geofísica, Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya

(UPC-BarcelonaTech), Av. Doctor Marañon, 44-50, 08028 Barcelona, Spain; m.amparo.nunez@upc.edu
* Correspondence: jdcastillo@unam.mx; Tel.: +52-55-2122-8800 (ext. 3160)

Academic Editors: Shih-Lung Shaw, Qingquan Li, Yang Yue and Wolfgang Kainz
Received: 28 October 2016; Accepted: 18 January 2017; Published: 24 January 2017

Abstract: This article discusses the convenience of adopting an approach of Collective Spatial
Analysis in the P/PGIS processes, with the aim of improving the collection and integration of
knowledge and local expertise in decision-making, mainly in the fields of planning and adopting
territorial policies. Based on empirical evidence, as a result of the review of scientific articles
from the Web of Science database, in which it is displayed how the knowledge and experience of
people involved in decision-making supported by P/PGIS are collected and used, a prototype of
a WEB-GSDSS application has been developed. This prototype allows a group of people to participate
anonymously, in an asynchronous and distributed way, in a decision-making process to locate goods,
services, or events through the convergence of their views. Via this application, two case studies
for planning services in districts of Ecuador and Italy were carried out. Early results suggest that in
P/PGIS local and external actors contribute their knowledge and experience to generate information
that afterwards is integrated and analysed in the decision-making process. On the other hand,
in a Collective Spatial Analysis, these actors analyse and generate information in conjunction with
their knowledge and experience during the process of decision-making. We conclude that, although
the Collective Spatial Analysis approach presented is in a subjective and initial stage, it does drive
improvements in the collection and integration of knowledge and local experience, foremost among
them is an interdisciplinary geo-consensus.

Keywords: PGIS; PPGIS; SDSS; SIGIC; spatial decision-making; geo-consensus; Collective
Spatial Analysis

1. Introduction

A vital body of research on Public Participation Geographic Information Systems and Participatory
Geographic Information Systems (P/PGIS) has been extensively developed as a consequence of the
use of Web-mapping and spatial analysis in the participatory planning and adoption of territorial
policies processes. This is for the reason that community-planning agreements with matters that have
implicit or explicit geographical dimensions, maps, and GIS are frequently used to assist discussion.

ISPRS Int. J. Geo-Inf. 2017, 6, 33; doi:10.3390/ijgi6020033 www.mdpi.com/journal/ijgi

http://www.mdpi.com/journal/ijgi
http://www.mdpi.com
http://www.mdpi.com/journal/ijgi


ISPRS Int. J. Geo-Inf. 2017, 6, 33 2 of 14

P/PGIS applications, which involve relevant stakeholders, including citizens, developers, interest
groups, and government officials, are recognised as discovering consensual clarifications to given
encounters by inspiring and endorsing informed citizen participation in policy formulation and
territorial planning [1–3]. The aggregated essential information and the obtainability of geospatial
data on the Internet make Web-based P/PGIS applications more and more widespread [4,5].

On the other hand, the core values of the International Association for Public Participation [6],
state that public participation must involve the affected people with some kind of “consultation”,
”participation” or “collaboration” in the decision-making process. However, this process for the
purpose of planning and adopting territorial policies is a complex one that requires the best
alternatives from all possible perspectives, especially the participation and consensus of the involved
stakeholders [1,3] An understanding of this work as a consensus, “an idea associated with the
decision-making process and the common-agreement building among most of the participants of
an organisation or a community” [7], is particularly useful “for systems in which uncertainty of
information is assumed but the decision making process is required” [8].

For this purpose, in recent years, the use of P/PGIS has been favored as a useful tool for the
inclusion, democratisation, and empowerment of the communities in the plans for local development.
However, there is little evidence that the data collected through these technologies is used for the
decision-making process [9], being mainly used instead to identify social problems and integrate the
objectives of the planning with the preferences and social values for development [10], and so there is
no evidence concerning the use of P/PGIS as a consensus mechanism among the involved stakeholders
in the decision-making process.

In the decision-making process for planning and territory policies, it is usually required that the
data collected from the involved stakeholders is first integrated and then processed through a method
of spatial analysis, a concept closely linked with computer geoprocessing of geospatial data, specially
through Geographical Information Systems [11]. Nonetheless, it is necessary at this point to specify
the following two aspects. First, the spatial analysis can also be carried out through other means,
either by visual and interactive interpretation of data (georeferenced or not) using measuring and
recording instruments, or through straight perception and interpretation of the environment. Secondly,
in all types of spatial analysis without exception, the knowledge, experience, and judgment of the one
conducting the spatial analysis play a key role.

In the same line of thinking, thanks to the evolution of the Web 2.0 and aligned with the philosophy
of collective intelligence, Collective Spatial Analysis aims to generate spatiotemporal locations from
the consensus or convergence of opinions from a group of experts, whose conclusions, assumptions,
or solutions contribute knowledge and experiences to answering questions that help to explore,
describe, explain, or predict characteristics or properties of the complexity of the geographical space
from multiple cognitive perspectives, experiences, and criteria [12].

The term Collective Intelligence, for the purpose of this work, should be understood as ”the
capacity of human collectives to engage in intellectual cooperation in order to create, innovate and
invent” [13]. This is a property that results from the arising of synergies between data, information,
knowledge, software, hardware, and a group of people, who learn from and contribute to the
knowledge of the group in the search for the best alternatives to a given situation [14].

Therefore, this research presents an empirical assessment of the usability of a Web-GSDSS
application called the Geospatial System of Collective Intelligence, which allows a group of people to
participate anonymously, in an asynchronous and distributed way, in a decision-making process to
locate goods, services, or events through the convergence of their views. Early results suggest that
in P/PGIS local and external stakeholders contribute their knowledge and experience to generate
information, which is afterwards integrated and analyzed in a decision-making process; whereas,
in a Collective Spatial Analysis, these actors analyse and generate information in conjunction with
their knowledge and experience during the process of decision-making.



ISPRS Int. J. Geo-Inf. 2017, 6, 33 3 of 14

2. Materials and Methods

2.1. Literature Review

In order to identify how it has been collected and used so far, the knowledge and experience
of people in support of decision-making in P/PGIS, a thorough review of scientific articles was
undertaken, mainly those in the Web of Science database. From these, a study by Brown and
Fagerholm [9] stands out, in which the review of 32 articles with empirical evidence was compiled to
determine the current and best practices in the use of P/PGIS. Therefore, this is taken as a baseline to
which an update of 7 more articles is added and shown in Table 1, which adds up to a total of 39 peer
reviewed scientific articles from 1998 to 2015 that describe the sampling, data collection, and spatial
analysis methods used, among other aspects.

From the 39 reviewed cases, and just as authors Brown & Fagerholm [9] state, there is little
empirical evidence about the use of data collected through P/PGIS to support decision-making in
planning (6 cases), and from these only in one of them was the data collection built up and local
experience taken into account during the decision-making process, albeit in a hypothetical way [3].

In this case, a Web application was presented which allowed the participants to achieve
a consensus in real time during the decision-making process by using the multicriteria decision
analysis (MCDA) to make a selection from among the predefined polygons and through the scorings
that the group provided about a set of alternatives presented.

It is worth mentioning that in a different case study a similar process was implemented, where
in the stakeholders debated their opinions in workshops that were monitored by the researchers.
These aimed at reaching a consensus about the selection of locations in a zone of study that was
displayed on a screen. The opinions about spatial locations of the participants were recorded in a GIS
that updated the screen at all times as feedback was provided by the group; however, the final goal of
that work was not to support the decision-making process but to determine how the processes and
outcomes of the P/PGIS made an impact on empowerment [2].

A prototype of a WEB Group Spatial Decision Support System (Web-GSDSS) application was
developed (Figure 1), to which a function was added to automate the spatial version of the Delphi
method [15,16], in combination with the Delphi method in real-time [17–20] and the Vector Consensus.

ISPRS Int. J. Geo-Inf. 2017, 6, 33  3 of 13 

 

2. Materials and Methods  

2.1. Literature Review 

In order to identify how it has been collected and used so far, the knowledge and experience of 
people in support of decision-making in P/PGIS, a thorough review of scientific articles was 
undertaken, mainly those in the Web of Science database. From these, a study by Brown and 
Fagerholm [9] stands out, in which the review of 32 articles with empirical evidence was compiled to 
determine the current and best practices in the use of P/PGIS. Therefore, this is taken as a baseline to 
which an update of 7 more articles is added and shown in Table 1, which adds up to a total of 39 peer 
reviewed scientific articles from 1998 to 2015 that describe the sampling, data collection, and spatial 
analysis methods used, among other aspects. 

From the 39 reviewed cases, and just as authors Brown & Fagerholm [9] state, there is little empirical 
evidence about the use of data collected through P/PGIS to support decision-making in planning (6 cases), 
and from these only in one of them was the data collection built up and local experience taken into 
account during the decision-making process, albeit in a hypothetical way [3]. 

In this case, a Web application was presented which allowed the participants to achieve a 
consensus in real time during the decision-making process by using the multicriteria decision analysis 
(MCDA) to make a selection from among the predefined polygons and through the scorings that the 
group provided about a set of alternatives presented. 

It is worth mentioning that in a different case study a similar process was implemented, where 
in the stakeholders debated their opinions in workshops that were monitored by the researchers. These 
aimed at reaching a consensus about the selection of locations in a zone of study that was displayed on 
a screen. The opinions about spatial locations of the participants were recorded in a GIS that updated 
the screen at all times as feedback was provided by the group; however, the final goal of that work 
was not to support the decision-making process but to determine how the processes and outcomes 
of the P/PGIS made an impact on empowerment [2]. 

A prototype of a WEB Group Spatial Decision Support System (Web-GSDSS) application was 
developed (Figure 1), to which a function was added to automate the spatial version of the Delphi 
method [15,16], in combination with the Delphi method in real-time [17–20] and the Vector Consensus. 

 
Figure 1. Architecture of Geospatial System of Collective Intelligence (SIGIC). 

Figure 1. Architecture of Geospatial System of Collective Intelligence (SIGIC).



ISPRS Int. J. Geo-Inf. 2017, 6, 33 4 of 14

Table 1. Updated (2009–2015) of the empirical PPGIS/PGIS studies for mapping ecosystem services from Greg Brown and Fagerholm [9] up to 1 December 2015.

Study Year Location
Ecosystem
Services
Mapped

Participatory
Mapping

Technology

Spatial
Mapping
Method

Map Scale
Sampling Method,
Participants, Data
Collection Method

Spatial Analyses
Published
References

Contribution to Advancing
PPGIS/PGIS Practice

2013 Sydney, AU
Landscape
services

Digital
Internet
Google Maps

Points, lines
(Zoom level = 12)
1:72,000 several
spatial scales

Survey online and in
the field, GPS
tracking (n = 516)

Compared frequency data, such as the
socio-demographics and rider
characteristics, Pearson’s chi-square
tests were applied. The rating-scale data
were analysed with analysis of variance
(ANOVA), including skill level and
sampling mode (field vs. online).
Open-ended questions were analszed
qualitatively by identifying the major
categories/themes emerging from
participant’s comments

[21]
Decision support: allowing park
agencies to prioritize future
visitor management actions

2012
Southern
Suriname

Landscape
services

Cartographical
maps

Polygons

Varied from
1:100,000 to
1:250,000. Base
map with DEM
(size A1)

Workshops with
indigenous
communities
(n = 191)

Identified high concentrations of values
that defined as service provisioning
hotspots (SPH) by applying a cut-off
value equal to the upper third of the
polygon density distribution

[22]

Feasibility: identifying
conservation areas necessary to
safeguard the provision of
important ecosystem services for
indigenous communities

N/d

Hypothetical
study area.
Northern Ohio
along the western
Lake Erie, USA

Landscape
values typology

Digital
Internet
Google Maps

Predefined
polygons on
a map

(Zoom level = 12)
Method or Borda
Count, survey
(n = 21)

Multi-Criteria Decision Analysis
(MCDA) to attain consensus with the
Borda method

[3]
Decision support:
Evaluation of alternatives
for wind farm selection

2010 and 2004 1
Kangaroo Island,
AU

Landscape
services

Digital
Internet
Google Maps

Points (Zoom level = 12)
Random survey
(n = 86)

Compare the spatial distributions of
markers placed by respondents by using
kernel density ”hotspot” analysis and
the phi-coefficient (ϕ) statistics to
measure the strength of the relationship
(explanation following)

[23]
Feasibility: identifying and
monitoring regional tourism
development preferences

2007–2008 Meinong, TW
Landscape
values typology

Digital
Internet
Google Earth

Points
Different
zoom level

Workshops
(n = 25)

Continuous discussion to attain
a delimitation of consensus points

[2]

Data quality: analyse how the
processes and outcomes of the
PPGIS can make an impact on
empowerment

2011
Otago and
Southland, NZ

Landscape
values typology

Digital
Internet
Google Maps

Points
(Zoom level = 12)
1:100,000

Survey recruited
through a random
mail, newspapers,
and visitor contact
(n = 260)

Benchmarking PPGIS native vegetation
classification against the expected native
values, 1000 random points within the
two regions were identified using
stratified sampling based on the
proportion of native vegetation markers
placed in each region

[24]
Data quality: assesses the spatial
accuracy of PPGIS data collected

2009
Garstang,
Lancashire, UK

Landscape
typology

Digital
Internet
Google Maps

Polygons
(spray
patterns)

Several spatial
scales

Survey recruited
through a random
mail (n = 33)

Initial patterns in the data may
be revealed through simple
density analysis

[25]
Data quality: create spatial
representations on a map using
a familiar airbrush-style interface

1 Is shown in the table of Greg Brown & Fagerholm [9] (p. 123).



ISPRS Int. J. Geo-Inf. 2017, 6, 33 5 of 14

Model [7] was followed in order to create the Real-Time Spatial Delphi method [26].
This application, named Geospatial System of Collective Intelligence (SIGIC after its acronym in
Spanish), was used to allow a panel of experts to provide their opinions in an anonymous, distributed,
and asynchronous real-time way to answer a spatial survey, in which each question requires an answer
or specific opinion reflected in a map with given limits. Just as it is done in other types of surveys,
and by assuming an isotropy in a bi-dimensional space [15], such limits are represented by the shape of
a circle with a different color for each question in the survey. Note that the questions are not “classical”
questions like in any classical questionnaire. The answers are in the form of placing a point on a map.

2.2. Methods

Each spatial answer is complemented by a short argument in text, and each circle also serves the
experts as an indication of the limits of the map in regard to the area of the convergence of their opinions
or geo-consensus, which comprises at least 50% of all points coming from the answers or opinions by
the panel according to Di Zio and Pacinelli [15], ”the classical Delphi provides the first and third quartile
calculation to define a range containing 50% of the evaluations of the panel (in the case of frequency
distribution, the interquartile range includes 50% of the values of the distribution)”. Also, because
it is a real time application, as the survey is being answered or modified, the circumference usually
changes its size too, with the understanding that the smaller the size of the circle, the higher the degree
of spatial consensus (geo-consensus), and vice versa.

It should be mentioned that, by following the Real Time Delphi procedure [19,27], the respondents
participate in a given time period, always anonymously, and they can change their answers as many
times as they want, but every change will invalidate the previous answer. Consequently, only the
latest changes in each question are considered because each participant can only provide one answer
per question. In addition, in order to promote controlled feedback and the convergence of opinions,
they can observe their own answers and the updated answers from the others. Thus, the participants
are informed in real time throughout the exercise process and of when the final result of the exercise is
obtained as well. It is also worth mentioning that each participant can include some digital documents
such as pictures, videos, texts, etc., for the same purpose.

ISPRS Int. J. Geo-Inf. 2017, 6, x FOR PEER REVIEW  5 of 13 

 

Model [7] was followed in order to create the Real-Time Spatial Delphi method [26]. This 
application, named Geospatial System of Collective Intelligence (SIGIC after its acronym in Spanish), 
was used to allow a panel of experts to provide their opinions in an anonymous, distributed, and 
asynchronous real-time way to answer a spatial survey, in which each question requires an answer 
or specific opinion reflected in a map with given limits. Just as it is done in other types of surveys, 
and by assuming an isotropy in a bi-dimensional space [15], such limits are represented by the shape 
of a circle with a different color for each question in the survey. Note that the questions are not 
“classical” questions like in any classical questionnaire. The answers are in the form of placing a point 
on a map.  

2.2. Methods 

Each spatial answer is complemented by a short argument in text, and each circle also serves the 
experts as an indication of the limits of the map in regard to the area of the convergence of their opinions 
or geo-consensus, which comprises at least 50% of all points coming from the answers or opinions by 
the panel according to Di Zio and Pacinelli [15], ”the classical Delphi provides the first and third 
quartile calculation to define a range containing 50% of the evaluations of the panel (in the case of 
frequency distribution, the interquartile range includes 50% of the values of the distribution)”. Also, 
because it is a real time application, as the survey is being answered or modified, the circumference 
usually changes its size too, with the understanding that the smaller the size of the circle, the higher 
the degree of spatial consensus (geo-consensus), and vice versa. 

It should be mentioned that, by following the Real Time Delphi procedure [19,27], the respondents 
participate in a given time period, always anonymously, and they can change their answers as many 
times as they want, but every change will invalidate the previous answer. Consequently, only the latest 
changes in each question are considered because each participant can only provide one answer per 
question. In addition, in order to promote controlled feedback and the convergence of opinions, they 
can observe their own answers and the updated answers from the others. Thus, the participants are 
informed in real time throughout the exercise process and of when the final result of the exercise is 
obtained as well. It is also worth mentioning that each participant can include some digital 
documents such as pictures, videos, texts, etc., for the same purpose. 

 
Figure 2. Scheme of the methodological process (elaborated by the authors). 

Figure 2. Scheme of the methodological process (elaborated by the authors).

This application, mostly developed based on the open source software GET SDI Portal [28],
is multilingual, compatible with the formats for geospatial data based on the ISO/OGC norms,



ISPRS Int. J. Geo-Inf. 2017, 6, 33 6 of 14

and incorporates various tools and user-friendly services based on free APIs such as Twitter, Wikipedia,
Openweathermap, and Google Maps, among others. This is additional to the well-known functions
for the manipulation of a map’s view (i.e. zoom, pan, distance, and so on).

In order to provide a broad overview of the general workflow, as well as to describe the
functions as a whole for the proper description of the system implemented, in Figure 2 we present
the context diagram that illustrates the overall method of the Geospatial System of Collective
Intelligence. The three main phases that compose it can be observed (preparation, geo-consensus,
and results), as well as the four cardinal groups of participation (decision-makers, technical equipment,
experts, and automations), the basic tasks and processes, and the logical sequence flow and main
interconnections between all of them.

3. Results

3.1. Case 1: Location of Places for Installation of Mobile Blood-Collection Units

It is a well-known fact that blood is a vital liquid to human life as well as a much-needed
commodity in various medical treatments, even more so if it is required for cases of surgeries and
medical emergencies. Therefore, the security and integrity of the blood supply has come to be
considered by the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies as fundamental to
the health system safety of each country [29].

Each year, several public and private organisations around the world promote blood-collection
campaigns in order to obtain this liquid through voluntary contributions from donors. Since it is
impossible to manufacture or acquire it by any other means, its supply remains closely related to the
corresponding number of donors. Hence, it is necessary to focus efforts in providing enough judgment
elements to allow faster decision-making processes both in planning these campaigns, as well as in
their logistics and operation. The territorial aspects in both cases, though, must be considered as
a determinant factor [30,31].

Thanks to the initiative of the National Blood Program of the Ministry of Public Health of Ecuador,
and seeking to increase the number of blood donors for the 2016 blood drive campaign, compared
to this year’s, an exercise was conducted to locate, through the judgment of various social actors,
four strategic locations for the installation of a mobile blood-collection unit.

In this way, a multidisciplinary team was formed with 17 representatives from the academic
sector, public administration, and civil organisation, all with expertise in the operation and logistics
of blood-collection campaigns and/or public health. With the support of this team (hereafter called
2the panel of experts”), an exercise was created in order to determine the location of four strategic
points for the mobile blood-collection day of 2016, to be held in the city of Santa Ana de los Ríos de
Cuenca, Ecuador, which has a population of about 500,000 inhabitants, according to official data. It is
noteworthy that, of the 17 experts referred to, none had experience in the use of geographic information
systems and digital mapping.

Once registered in the system, each expert was provided with login credentials (username and
password), a guide for system operation, and necessary contacts in case they needed some support,
leaving the expert panel duly set. Those who participated did so in an anonymous, asynchronous, and
distributed exercise during 22 calendar days (18 September to 9 October 2015), answering a survey
spatially (and literally) composed of 5 questions. Four of these questions required the participants to
identify, in order of importance, the donor turnout volume and the places to make the blood-collection,
whereas the fifth one served to demand the assignment of an extra place in case they considered
it necessary.

To that end, and in order to support the opinion of the experts, in the system were included the
geospatial layers of population census tracts classified into three categories (less than 3000 inhabitants,
between 3000 and 5000 inhabitants, and more than 5000 inhabitants), as well as hospital centers (of first
and second level) and other important public buildings in the city (sports fields, educational buildings,



ISPRS Int. J. Geo-Inf. 2017, 6, 33 7 of 14

religious temples, parks and plazas, malls, and gas stations), all of them provided by the Ministry of
Health. Similarly, two initial documents were added as non-georeferenced documentary information,
and during the experimentation seven more documents were added.

As an initial reference and in order to establish spatial limits to the survey (as is analogously
done in other survey types), a circle of 8 km in diameter was placed on the map, the center of
which corresponds approximately to the geometric center of the city of Santa Ana de los Ríos de
Cuenca, Ecuador, covering with this circumference almost the whole city. After 22 days of the exercise,
the identification of four places to carry out the blood-collection campaign was determined through
the convergence of the spatial opinions coming from most of the experts (geo-consensus). Note that
a fifth place was also identified by consensus, but only of six experts of the panel.

In Figure 3, each graph shows the spatial evolution of the geo-consensus, determined by the
diameter of the circle, which indicates the portion of territory containing at least 50% of an expert’s
spatial opinions regarding the chosen sites. As a result of this, the qualitative assessment shows
a smaller diameter that indicates a greater consensus and vice versa. In the y-axis, the time is
represented from the beginning of the exercise until the conclusion. Notice that starting at the 10th,
it gradually achieves a greater consensus on the location of places, which was due to the greater
participation of the experts, as can be seen through the interpolation curve that shows the reduction of
each circle during the course of the 22 days of the exercise.

ISPRS Int. J. Geo-Inf. 2017, 6, 33  7 of 13 

 

religious temples, parks and plazas, malls, and gas stations), all of them provided by the Ministry of 
Health. Similarly, two initial documents were added as non-georeferenced documentary information, 
and during the experimentation seven more documents were added. 

As an initial reference and in order to establish spatial limits to the survey (as is analogously 
done in other survey types), a circle of 8 km in diameter was placed on the map, the center of which 
corresponds approximately to the geometric center of the city of Santa Ana de los Ríos de Cuenca, 
Ecuador, covering with this circumference almost the whole city. After 22 days of the exercise, the 
identification of four places to carry out the blood-collection campaign was determined through the 
convergence of the spatial opinions coming from most of the experts (geo-consensus). Note that a 
fifth place was also identified by consensus, but only of six experts of the panel. 

In Figure 3, each graph shows the spatial evolution of the geo-consensus, determined by the 
diameter of the circle, which indicates the portion of territory containing at least 50% of an expert’s 
spatial opinions regarding the chosen sites. As a result of this, the qualitative assessment shows a 
smaller diameter that indicates a greater consensus and vice versa. In the y-axis, the time is 
represented from the beginning of the exercise until the conclusion. Notice that starting at the 10th, 
it gradually achieves a greater consensus on the location of places, which was due to the greater 
participation of the experts, as can be seen through the interpolation curve that shows the reduction 
of each circle during the course of the 22 days of the exercise. 

Figure 3. Spatiotemporal evolution of the geo-consensus on questions 1 (a); 2 (b); 3 (c) and 4 (d). 
Location of places for installation of mobile blood-collection units. 

On the other hand, in Figure 4, part of the user interface system is shown, with the panel survey 
(with the questions in Spanish) and the map with the final geo-consensus areas corresponding to each 
of the four questions mentioned previously. In the upper left corner of the map can be seen the 
answers to question 1 in blue, the diameter of which corresponds to 90.77 m on the ground, and the 
answers to question 4 in pink, with a diameter of 189.30 m. In the lower right quadrant, the answers 
to question 2 are in yellow, with a diameter of 256.12 m, and the answers to question 3, with a circle of 
1.76 km in diameter, are in green. The arguments window for question 3 is also shown, in which you 
can see the justification comments of two expert panelists (in Spanish). The date and time of each 
response are shown too, as well as whether it belongs or not to the geo-consensus (in green and red, 
respectively). Finally, the diameter and area of the corresponding circle when each user stated their 
opinion are also shown. 

Figure 3. Spatiotemporal evolution of the geo-consensus on questions 1 (a); 2 (b); 3 (c) and 4 (d).
Location of places for installation of mobile blood-collection units.

On the other hand, in Figure 4, part of the user interface system is shown, with the panel survey
(with the questions in Spanish) and the map with the final geo-consensus areas corresponding to each
of the four questions mentioned previously. In the upper left corner of the map can be seen the answers
to question 1 in blue, the diameter of which corresponds to 90.77 m on the ground, and the answers to
question 4 in pink, with a diameter of 189.30 m. In the lower right quadrant, the answers to question 2
are in yellow, with a diameter of 256.12 m, and the answers to question 3, with a circle of 1.76 km in
diameter, are in green. The arguments window for question 3 is also shown, in which you can see the
justification comments of two expert panelists (in Spanish). The date and time of each response are
shown too, as well as whether it belongs or not to the geo-consensus (in green and red, respectively).
Finally, the diameter and area of the corresponding circle when each user stated their opinion are
also shown.



ISPRS Int. J. Geo-Inf. 2017, 6, 33 8 of 14

ISPRS Int. J. Geo-Inf. 2017, 6, 33  8 of 13 

 

 
Figure 4. Map with circles corresponding to the final geo-consensus of questions 1–4. 

In Figure 5, each graph shows the evolution of the geo-consensus derived from the participation of 
6 experts of the panel, who considered the need to establish one more mobile unit for blood-collection, in 
addition to the others. Hereafter, comes the general geo-consensus chart, in which the moments of the 
exercise with higher and lower activity of the experts can be viewed, among other features. 

Figure 5. Spatiotemporal evolution of the geo-consensus on question 5 (a); and the geo-consensus 
related to the whole exercise (b). 

3.2. Case 2: Zoning of Street Prostitution 

In general terms, zoning is a complex process through which a state intervenes to regulate the 
land use of territorial divisions in order to control its activities, keep order, and preserve the well-being 
and sustainability of its inhabitants. Certainly, and to find the best alternatives for such cases, it is 
ever more evident to take into consideration the participation of the diverse social stakeholders 
involved. Consequently, being able “to democratise” the selection of the most convenient location for a 
given purpose during the decision-making process can represent a significant contribution [2]. 

Nowadays, there is no doubt that a social aspect requiring immediate attention in terms of zoning 
is street prostitution, which not being illegal in certain cities of the globe, as in the Italian case [32], tends 
to proliferate and turns into a bigger public health problem, among other negative aspects. Because of 
this, in this section, a case study is presented which aimed to identify suitable locations from the point 
of view of varied social stakeholders for the zoning of street prostitution in the municipalities of Silvi, 
Città Sant' Angelo, Montesilvano, Pescara, and Francavilla Al Mare of the Abruzzo region in Italy, 
which, because of its geographical location in middle of the Italian peninsula, facing the Adriatic sea, is 
a major pole of attraction for immigrants from West Africa and Eastern Europe, which are key regions 
along the sexual trade routes in the region [33,34]. 

Figure 4. Map with circles corresponding to the final geo-consensus of questions 1–4.

In Figure 5, each graph shows the evolution of the geo-consensus derived from the participation of
6 experts of the panel, who considered the need to establish one more mobile unit for blood-collection,
in addition to the others. Hereafter, comes the general geo-consensus chart, in which the moments of
the exercise with higher and lower activity of the experts can be viewed, among other features.

ISPRS Int. J. Geo-Inf. 2017, 6, 33  8 of 13 

 

 
Figure 4. Map with circles corresponding to the final geo-consensus of questions 1–4. 

In Figure 5, each graph shows the evolution of the geo-consensus derived from the participation of 
6 experts of the panel, who considered the need to establish one more mobile unit for blood-collection, in 
addition to the others. Hereafter, comes the general geo-consensus chart, in which the moments of the 
exercise with higher and lower activity of the experts can be viewed, among other features. 

Figure 5. Spatiotemporal evolution of the geo-consensus on question 5 (a); and the geo-consensus 
related to the whole exercise (b). 

3.2. Case 2: Zoning of Street Prostitution 

In general terms, zoning is a complex process through which a state intervenes to regulate the 
land use of territorial divisions in order to control its activities, keep order, and preserve the well-being 
and sustainability of its inhabitants. Certainly, and to find the best alternatives for such cases, it is 
ever more evident to take into consideration the participation of the diverse social stakeholders 
involved. Consequently, being able “to democratise” the selection of the most convenient location for a 
given purpose during the decision-making process can represent a significant contribution [2]. 

Nowadays, there is no doubt that a social aspect requiring immediate attention in terms of zoning 
is street prostitution, which not being illegal in certain cities of the globe, as in the Italian case [32], tends 
to proliferate and turns into a bigger public health problem, among other negative aspects. Because of 
this, in this section, a case study is presented which aimed to identify suitable locations from the point 
of view of varied social stakeholders for the zoning of street prostitution in the municipalities of Silvi, 
Città Sant' Angelo, Montesilvano, Pescara, and Francavilla Al Mare of the Abruzzo region in Italy, 
which, because of its geographical location in middle of the Italian peninsula, facing the Adriatic sea, is 
a major pole of attraction for immigrants from West Africa and Eastern Europe, which are key regions 
along the sexual trade routes in the region [33,34]. 

Figure 5. Spatiotemporal evolution of the geo-consensus on question 5 (a); and the geo-consensus
related to the whole exercise (b).

3.2. Case 2: Zoning of Street Prostitution

In general terms, zoning is a complex process through which a state intervenes to regulate the
land use of territorial divisions in order to control its activities, keep order, and preserve the well-being
and sustainability of its inhabitants. Certainly, and to find the best alternatives for such cases, it is ever
more evident to take into consideration the participation of the diverse social stakeholders involved.
Consequently, being able “to democratise” the selection of the most convenient location for a given
purpose during the decision-making process can represent a significant contribution [2].

Nowadays, there is no doubt that a social aspect requiring immediate attention in terms of zoning
is street prostitution, which not being illegal in certain cities of the globe, as in the Italian case [32],
tends to proliferate and turns into a bigger public health problem, among other negative aspects.
Because of this, in this section, a case study is presented which aimed to identify suitable locations from
the point of view of varied social stakeholders for the zoning of street prostitution in the municipalities
of Silvi, Città Sant' Angelo, Montesilvano, Pescara, and Francavilla Al Mare of the Abruzzo region in
Italy, which, because of its geographical location in middle of the Italian peninsula, facing the Adriatic



ISPRS Int. J. Geo-Inf. 2017, 6, 33 9 of 14

sea, is a major pole of attraction for immigrants from West Africa and Eastern Europe, which are key
regions along the sexual trade routes in the region [33,34].

In this study, nine representatives from the government, academia, and social organisations
took part and made up the panel of experts who, through the system, answered in an anonymous,
asynchronous, and distributed way a spatial survey consisting of 5 questions (one for each of the
abovementioned municipalities). These questions required answers in order to indicate on a map the
suitable locations for the zoning of street prostitution in each of the municipalities, and also asked the
participants to justify via a short text message the selection of their location in an effort to promote
feedback and the convergence of opinions among everyone on the panel of experts.

It should be mentioned though, that the support given to the experts consisted only of the addition
of one layer of geospatial information in the system, which showed the administrative division of
the five municipalities in the study, which was carried out across 34 calendar days that included the
summer holidays period (7 August/9 September 2015).

As an initial reference, and in order to establish the spatial limits of the survey (as analogously
done for other types of surveys), a concentric circle in each of the municipalities was placed
according to its territorial expansion (Silvi 8.9 km, Città Sant' Angelo 14.4 km, Montesilvano 7.26 km,
Pescara 10.6 km, and Francavilla Al Mare 8.78 km), so each municipality was represented with
a different diameter.

At the end of the 34 days of the study, and through the convergence of the spatial opinions of the
majority of the experts (geo-consensus), three suitable locations for the zoning of street prostitution
could be identified, which corresponded to four of the municipalities in the stud. Oone of the locations
could be common to the municipalities of Silvi and Città Sant’ Angelo. However, it was not possible to
precisely determine a suitable location in the municipality of Francavilla Al Mare.

The process of geo-consensus can be seen in Figure 6. Please note how the dimensions of the
geo-consensuses in the graphs of questions 2, 3, and 4 show on their own well delimited areas, whereas
the extension of the geo-consensuses related to questions 1 and 5 entail non-defined aspects. Due to this,
the extension of about two kilometers that they represent allows for multiple options. Nevertheless,
the visual analysis of the areas of geo-consensus represented on the map can suggest for questions 1
and 2 the possible intersection of a same surface, the dimension of which is of a considerable magnitude
(Figure 7) but which can be supported through a study of the arguments for both questions given by
the experts.

ISPRS Int. J. Geo-Inf. 2017, 6, 33  9 of 13 

 

In this study, nine representatives from the government, academia, and social organisations took 
part and made up the panel of experts who, through the system, answered in an anonymous, 
asynchronous, and distributed way a spatial survey consisting of 5 questions (one for each of the 
abovementioned municipalities). These questions required answers in order to indicate on a map the 
suitable locations for the zoning of street prostitution in each of the municipalities, and also asked 
the participants to justify via a short text message the selection of their location in an effort to promote 
feedback and the convergence of opinions among everyone on the panel of experts. 

It should be mentioned though, that the support given to the experts consisted only of the 
addition of one layer of geospatial information in the system, which showed the administrative division 
of the five municipalities in the study, which was carried out across 34 calendar days that included the 
summer holidays period (7 August/9 September 2015). 

As an initial reference, and in order to establish the spatial limits of the survey (as analogously 
done for other types of surveys), a concentric circle in each of the municipalities was placed according 
to its territorial expansion (Silvi 8.9 km, Città Sant' Angelo 14.4 km, Montesilvano 7.26 km, Pescara 10.6 
km, and Francavilla Al Mare 8.78 km), so each municipality was represented with a different diameter. 

At the end of the 34 days of the study, and through the convergence of the spatial opinions of the 
majority of the experts (geo-consensus), three suitable locations for the zoning of street prostitution 
could be identified, which corresponded to four of the municipalities in the stud. Oone of the 
locations could be common to the municipalities of Silvi and Città Sant’ Angelo. However, it was not 
possible to precisely determine a suitable location in the municipality of Francavilla Al Mare.  

The process of geo-consensus can be seen in Figure 6. Please note how the dimensions of  
the geo-consensuses in the graphs of questions 2, 3, and 4 show on their own well delimited areas, 
whereas the extension of the geo-consensuses related to questions 1 and 5 entail non-defined aspects. 
Due to this, the extension of about two kilometers that they represent allows for multiple options. 
Nevertheless, the visual analysis of the areas of geo-consensus represented on the map can suggest for 
questions 1 and 2 the possible intersection of a same surface, the dimension of which is of a considerable 
magnitude (Figure 7) but which can be supported through a study of the arguments for both questions 
given by the experts. 

Figure 6. Cont.



ISPRS Int. J. Geo-Inf. 2017, 6, 33 10 of 14

ISPRS Int. J. Geo-Inf. 2017, 6, 33  10 of 13 

 

 

Figure 6. Spatiotemporal evolution of the geo-consensuses related to determining the locations for 
the zoning of street prostitution. Questions 1 (a); 2 (b); 3 (c); 4 (d) and 5 (e). 

 
Figure 7. Specific case concerning the potential intersection of the locations corresponding to 
questions 1 and 2 for the municipalities of Silvi and Città Sant’ Angelo. 

4. Discussion and Conclusions  

A review of the literature shows that, in most cases, the data collection is carried out and local 
experience is first taken into consideration through P/PGIS. Then this information is used during the 
spatial analysis for the decision-making process, so it is necessary to focus efforts on developing 
mechanisms that allow the direct participation of the stakeholders during this process through the 
selection of alternatives via consensus and not only based on opinions about their preferences. 

It becomes evident that these practices are more and more needed, given that the decision-making 
process for the purpose of planning and adoption of territorial policies is a complex one that requires 
the best alternatives from all possible perspectives, especially the participation and consensus of the 
involved stakeholders [1–3]. 

Concerning the studies that already provide mechanisms that allow involved stakeholders to 
participate in P/PGIS during the decision-making process through a Collective Spatial Analysis based 
on consensus, one can mention those proposed by Mekonnen and Gorsevski [3] and Tsai et al. [2], 
which represent the most significant achievements in this regard. However, it should be considered 
that, in the first case, the focus was based on locations dependent on the previous selection of 
characteristics and places to evaluate, so a potential selection outside those alternatives was not 
considered, which could be seen as a restriction to participants. Moreover, and regarding the interface 
of their model, albeit one of simple operation, the required information must be provided by people 
with a certain specialization and mastery of the subject, at least as far as the estimated variables are 
concerned. 

Figure 6. Spatiotemporal evolution of the geo-consensuses related to determining the locations for the
zoning of street prostitution. Questions 1 (a); 2 (b); 3 (c); 4 (d) and 5 (e).

ISPRS Int. J. Geo-Inf. 2017, 6, 33  10 of 13 

 

 

Figure 6. Spatiotemporal evolution of the geo-consensuses related to determining the locations for 
the zoning of street prostitution. Questions 1 (a); 2 (b); 3 (c); 4 (d) and 5 (e). 

 
Figure 7. Specific case concerning the potential intersection of the locations corresponding to 
questions 1 and 2 for the municipalities of Silvi and Città Sant’ Angelo. 

4. Discussion and Conclusions  

A review of the literature shows that, in most cases, the data collection is carried out and local 
experience is first taken into consideration through P/PGIS. Then this information is used during the 
spatial analysis for the decision-making process, so it is necessary to focus efforts on developing 
mechanisms that allow the direct participation of the stakeholders during this process through the 
selection of alternatives via consensus and not only based on opinions about their preferences. 

It becomes evident that these practices are more and more needed, given that the decision-making 
process for the purpose of planning and adoption of territorial policies is a complex one that requires 
the best alternatives from all possible perspectives, especially the participation and consensus of the 
involved stakeholders [1–3]. 

Concerning the studies that already provide mechanisms that allow involved stakeholders to 
participate in P/PGIS during the decision-making process through a Collective Spatial Analysis based 
on consensus, one can mention those proposed by Mekonnen and Gorsevski [3] and Tsai et al. [2], 
which represent the most significant achievements in this regard. However, it should be considered 
that, in the first case, the focus was based on locations dependent on the previous selection of 
characteristics and places to evaluate, so a potential selection outside those alternatives was not 
considered, which could be seen as a restriction to participants. Moreover, and regarding the interface 
of their model, albeit one of simple operation, the required information must be provided by people 
with a certain specialization and mastery of the subject, at least as far as the estimated variables are 
concerned. 

Figure 7. Specific case concerning the potential intersection of the locations corresponding to questions
1 and 2 for the municipalities of Silvi and Città Sant’ Angelo.

4. Discussion and Conclusions

A review of the literature shows that, in most cases, the data collection is carried out and local
experience is first taken into consideration through P/PGIS. Then this information is used during
the spatial analysis for the decision-making process, so it is necessary to focus efforts on developing
mechanisms that allow the direct participation of the stakeholders during this process through the
selection of alternatives via consensus and not only based on opinions about their preferences.

It becomes evident that these practices are more and more needed, given that the decision-making
process for the purpose of planning and adoption of territorial policies is a complex one that requires
the best alternatives from all possible perspectives, especially the participation and consensus of the
involved stakeholders [1–3].

Concerning the studies that already provide mechanisms that allow involved stakeholders to
participate in P/PGIS during the decision-making process through a Collective Spatial Analysis based
on consensus, one can mention those proposed by Mekonnen and Gorsevski [3] and Tsai et al. [2], which
represent the most significant achievements in this regard. However, it should be considered that, in the
first case, the focus was based on locations dependent on the previous selection of characteristics and
places to evaluate, so a potential selection outside those alternatives was not considered, which could
be seen as a restriction to participants. Moreover, and regarding the interface of their model, albeit one



ISPRS Int. J. Geo-Inf. 2017, 6, 33 11 of 14

of simple operation, the required information must be provided by people with a certain specialization
and mastery of the subject, at least as far as the estimated variables are concerned.

Regarding the second proposal, we consider that, for certain cases, confrontation of the different
actors may not be the best way to approach decision-making due to potential conflicts among parties
or a larger influence being exerted by one of them. This is in addition to the execution times, which are
significant in regard to other available methods.

Thus, this article intends to contribute to the knowledge leading to the solution of the
inconveniences previously mentioned, given that the method presented here allows for a collaborative
work in a simple, interactive, asynchronous, real-time, and distributed way, promoting at all times
the free selection of locations by the participants through spatial consensus in an anonymous way,
which will always display the preference of the majority delivering controlled feedback.

In addition, it is important to note that, in this proposal, the participants can provide additional
information and modify their answers as many times as it is considered convenient throughout the
duration of the exercise, which is new in the practice of P/PGIS, thereby generating and stimulating
the Collective Spatial Analysis. In light of the aforementioned, and although this approach is still in
a subjective and initial stage, it does drive improvements in the collection and integration of knowledge
and local experience, amongst which is an interdisciplinary and consensual contribution.

The case studies presented in this paper were respectively proposed to the authors by the
Ministry of Public Health of Ecuador, and a non-profit youth empowerment organisation working in
collaboration with the University of Chieti-Pescara, Italy, with the goal of having experts from different
disciplines contributing to the decision-making process regarding the selection of the most appropriate
sites for each case.

For this research these case studies allowed the evaluation of the possibility of constituting
a Collective Spatial Analysis and of the implementation of the SIGIC as a tool to foster a geo-consensus,
since both depict aspects of spatial decision-making in planning different realities of geographical
complexity, such as public health (site location for an annual blood collection campaign) and land-use
planning (zoning of street prostitution). However, it is common that in such aspects the intervention of
different social actors is necessary for the selection of the best alternative, preferably in a consensual
way, which was possible to obtain in such cases through the methodology displayed here.

Thanks to this approach, multidisciplinary groups without experience in the use of
geo-technologies were able to interact, study and, determine the locations of greater convenience
from their different perspectives and interests through the consensus of their spatial opinions, thereby
facilitating the decision-making process.

It should also be considered that the tool presented here is an archetype that is based on a Spatial
Decision Support System (SDSS), and, like any other decision support system, this does not generate
an ultimate solution, but only contributes, together with other elements, to the choice of the most
suitable alternatives.

It can be said that a Collective Spatial Analysis is feasible if it is understood as the situation in
which a group (through its conclusions, assumptions, or solutions) studies, reflects, and responds to
questions that help to determine useful locations to explore, explain, or predict the characteristics or
properties necessary for decision-making, taking the complexity of the geographic space in account.

This represents an important advantage over the standard Spatial Analysis, especially in those
situations where there is little data to perform geo-processing, in circumstances that are characterised
by uncertainty, nonlinearity, emergency, and surprise, or even as a support to limit, guide, verify,
and/or correct the results of other spatial analysis alternatives.

The contribution of this research to society can be directly justified, since the decisions to locate
services and infrastructure, for instance, would not be invariably taken from the judgment of one
single stance but rather determined through various social agents, who along with their background
and experience, provide their opinions to reach a geo-consensus. Thus, more democratic solutions are
brought forward, and in this way the gap between everyone’s varied interests is reduced.



ISPRS Int. J. Geo-Inf. 2017, 6, 33 12 of 14

In that regard, this system is being tested in different areas of the world and for different topics.
To date, here are the surveys that have been carried out:

• Location of monitoring sites for HIV screening tests for pregnant women (Esmeraldas, Ecuador);
• Environmental planning and management at a scientific station (Pedro Vicente Maldonado, Ecuador);
• Strategic Environmental Assessment of wind energy (Mexico);
• Location of an air quality monitoring station (Pescara, Italy).

In this way, the approach presented here can be a starting point to establish new goals
and objectives for research regarding the support of spatial decision-making through a Collective
Spatial Analysis.

As an example, the following research questions are suggested. How should Collective Spatial
Analysis in a supervised remote sensing classification for multidisciplinary groups of experts be used
to determine the set of classes (training areas)? Is it possible to apply Collective Spatial Analysis to
locate some good, service, or event by geo-consensus with the participation of groups called openly
through the main social networks? Could the quality of the data in the cartographic production area
be improved by means of Collective Spatial Analysis? What results would be obtained if Collective
Spatial Analysis were to be used in conjunction with the determination of dates in order to obtain
a prospective spatio-temporal consensus from the criterion of a panel of experts?

Finally, we believe that it would be beneficial to explore the use of this archetype by including
it in expert systems; either to incorporate the subjective knowledge of a collective group into such
systems or as a way of delimiting and/or correcting automated data models.

Acknowledgments: The authors would like to thank the sub-secretary of the Governance of Public Health and
the National Blood Program, the Ecuadorian Ministry of Public Health, and Simone Di Zio of the University
of Chieti-Pescara for their support in the realization of this research. They would further like thank their
PhD colleague Marco Lino Calderón Saldierna for his valuable collaboration in the development of this work.

Author Contributions: This research was conducted with the initiative and methodological proposal of
Juan Daniel Castillo-Rosas, who has also developed the SIGIC platform and has analysed the results of this
work with the support and guidance of María Amparo Núñez-Andres and Josep María Monguet-Fierro.
José José Diez-Rodríguez assisted with the analysis of results and the drafting of the discussion section and
conclusions as well as the editing work. Alex Fernando Jiménez-Vélez materialised the exercise of blood collection
and contributed to the interpretation of the results of both cases presented in this paper.

Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare that there are no conflicts of interest.

References

1. Voss, A.; Denisovich, I.; Gatalsky, P.; Gavouchidis, K.; Klotz, A.; Roeder, S.; Voss, H. Evolution of
a participatory GIS. Comput. Environ. Urban Syst. 2004, 28, 635–651. [CrossRef]

2. Tsai, B.-W.; Lu, D.-J.; Chung, M.-K.; Lien, M.-C. Evaluation of PPGIS empowerment—A case study of
Meinong Yellow Butterfly Valley in Taiwan. J. Environ. Manag. 2013, 116, 204–212. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

3. Mekonnen, A.D.; Gorsevski, P.V. A web-based participatory GIS (PGIS) for offshore wind farm suitability
within Lake Erie, Ohio. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2015, 41, 162–177. [CrossRef]

4. Perkins, C. Community Mapping. Cartogr. J. 2007, 44, 127–137. [CrossRef]
5. Kingston, R. Public participation in local policy decision-making: The role of web-based mapping. Cartogr. J.

2007, 44, 138–144. [CrossRef]
6. IAP2 International Association of Public Participation. Available online: http://www.iap2.org/?page=A4

(accessed on 10 October 2015).
7. Monguet, J.M.; Gutiérrez, A.; Ferruzca, M.; Alatriste, Y.; Martínez, C.; Córdoba, C.; Fernández, J.; Sanguino, T.;

Aguilá, J.; Ramírez, M. Vector consensus model. In Organizational Integration of Enterprise Systems and
Resources: Advancements and Applications; Business Science Reference (an imprint of IGI Global): Hershey, PA,
USA, 2012; pp. 303–317.

8. Nguyen, N.T. Consensus system for solving conflicts in distributed systems. Inf. Sci. 2002, 147, 91–122.
[CrossRef]

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compenvurbsys.2003.12.003
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2012.12.005
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23321371
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2014.08.030
http://dx.doi.org/10.1179/000870407X213440
http://dx.doi.org/10.1179/000870407X213459
http://www.iap2.org/?page=A4
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0020-0255(02)00260-8


ISPRS Int. J. Geo-Inf. 2017, 6, 33 13 of 14

9. Brown, G.; Fagerholm, N. Empirical PPGIS/PGIS mapping of ecosystem services: A review and evaluation.
Ecosyst. Serv. 2014, 13, 119–133. [CrossRef]

10. Brown, G.; Weber, D.; de Bie, K. Is PPGIS good enough? An empirical evaluation of the quality of PPGIS
crowd-sourced spatial data for conservation planning. Land Use Policy 2015, 43, 228–238. [CrossRef]

11. Fischer, M.M.; Getis, A. Handbook of Applied Spatial Analysis. Software Tools, Methods and Applications;
Fischer, M.M., Getis, A., Eds.; Springer: Heidelberg, Germany, 2010.

12. Castillo Rosas, J.D.; Núñez Andrés, M.A.; Monguet Fierro, J.M.; Jiménez Vélez, A. Towards a collective spatial
analysis: Proposal of a new paradigm for supporting the spatial decision-making from a geoprospective
approach. In Proceedings of the 1st International Conference on Geographical Information Systems Theory,
Applications and Management (GISTAM), Barcelona, Spain, 18–30 April 2015.

13. Lévy, P. From social computing to reflexive collective intelligence: The IEML research program. Inf. Sci. 2010,
180, 71–94. [CrossRef]

14. Glenn, J.C. Collective intelligence systems and an application by the millennium project for the egyptian
academy of scientific research and technology. Technol. Forecast. Soc. Chang. 2013, 97, 7–14. [CrossRef]

15. Di Zio, S.; Pacinelli, A. Opinion convergence in location: A spatial version of the delphi method.
Technol. Forecast. Soc. Chang. 2011, 78, 1565–1578. [CrossRef]

16. Di Zio, S. Convergenza di opinioni in ambito territoriale: Proposta di un real time spatial Delphi. In 13◦

Conferenza Italiana Utenti ESRI; ESRI Italia: Roma, Italy, 2012; pp. 1–7.
17. Gnatzy, T.; Warth, J.; von der Gracht, H.; Darkow, I.-L. Validating an innovative real-time

Delphi approach—A methodological comparison between real-time and conventional Delphi studies.
Technol. Forecast. Soc. Chang. 2011, 78, 1681–1694. [CrossRef]

18. Gordon, T.; Pease, A. RT Delphi: An efficient, “round-less” almost real time Delphi method. Technol. Forecast.
Soc. Chang. 2006, 73, 321–333. [CrossRef]

19. Gordon, T.J. The real-time Delphi method. In Futures Research Methodology Version 3.0; Glenn, J.C., Gordon, T.J.,
Eds.; The Millennium Project, American Council for the United Nations University: Washington, DC, USA,
2009; p. 19.

20. Hsieh, C.-H.; Tzeng, F.-M.; Wu, C.-G.; Kao, J.-S.; Lai, Y.-Y. The comparison of online Delphi and real-time
Delphi. In Proceedings of the 2011 Technology Management in the Energy Smart World (PICMET), Taoyuan,
Taiwan, 31 July–4 August 2011.

21. Wolf, I.D.; Wohlfart, T.; Brown, G.; Bartolomé Lasa, A. The use of public participation GIS (PPGIS) for park
visitor management: A case study of mountain biking. Tour. Manag. 2015, 51, 112–130. [CrossRef]

22. Ramirez-Gomez, S.O.I.; Brown, G.; Verweij, P.A.; Boot, R. Participatory mapping to identify indigenous
community use zones: Implications for conservation planning in southern Suriname. J. Nat. Conserv. 2016,
29, 69–78. [CrossRef]

23. Brown, G.; Weber, D. Using Public Participation GIS (PPGIS) on the geoweb to monitor tourism development
preferences. J. Sustain. Tour. 2013, 21, 192–211. [CrossRef]

24. Brown, G. An empirical evaluation of the spatial accuracy of Public Participation GIS (PPGIS) data.
Appl. Geogr. 2012, 34, 289–294. [CrossRef]

25. Huck, J.J.; Whyatt, J.D.; Coulton, P. Spraycan: A PPGIS for capturing imprecise notions of place. Appl. Geogr.
2014, 55, 229–237. [CrossRef]

26. Di Zio, S.; Castillo-Rosas, J.D.; Lamelza, L. Real Time Spatial Delphi: Fast convergence of experts’ opinions
on the territory. Technol. Forecast. Soc. Chang. 2017, 115, 143–154. [CrossRef]

27. TMP. The Millennium Project. Available online: http://www.millennium-project.org/millennium/RTD-
general.html (accessed on 15 August 2015).

28. GET Geospatial Enabling Technologies & MaP Ltd. Available online: http://www.getmap.gr/v2/eng/
index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=255&Itemid=554 (accessed on 8 September 2015).

29. IFRC. The International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies. Available online:
http://www.ifrc.org/ (accessed on 5 October 2015).

30. Halbout, P.; Lebaudy, J.P.; Gagneux, F.; Brosius, N.; Pelletier, B.; Danic, B. La géomatique au service de la
collecte de sang. Transfus. Clin. Biol. 2015, 22, 112–126. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

31. Mobasher, A.; Ekici, A.; Özener, O.Ö. Coordinating collection and appointment scheduling operations at the
blood donation sites. Comput. Ind. Eng. 2015, 87, 260–266. [CrossRef]

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoser.2014.10.007
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.landusepol.2014.11.014
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ins.2009.08.001
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2013.10.010
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2010.09.010
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2011.04.006
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2005.09.005
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tourman.2015.05.003
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jnc.2015.11.004
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/09669582.2012.693501
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.apgeog.2011.12.004
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.apgeog.2014.09.007
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.techfore.2016.09.029
http://www.millennium-project.org/millennium/RTD-general.html
http://www.millennium-project.org/millennium/RTD-general.html
http://www.getmap.gr/v2/eng/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=255&Itemid=554
http://www.getmap.gr/v2/eng/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=255&Itemid=554
http://www.ifrc.org/
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tracli.2015.05.008
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26068884
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cie.2015.05.020


ISPRS Int. J. Geo-Inf. 2017, 6, 33 14 of 14

32. Schmitt, S.; Euchner, E.-M.; Preidel, C. Regulating prostitution and same-sex marriage in Italy and Spain: the
interplay of political and societal veto players in two catholic societies. J. Eur. Public Policy 2013, 20, 425–441.
[CrossRef]

33. Mancuso, M. Estimating the revenues of sexual exploitation: Applying a new methodology to the Italian
context. Glob. Crime 2014, 15, 10–26. [CrossRef]

34. Solivetti, L.M. Old and new criminality: Territory, society and immigration in Italy. In Organized Crime,
Corruption and Crime Prevention; Caneppele, S., Calderoni, F., Eds.; Springer International Publishing: Milano,
Italy, 2014; pp. 103–114.

© 2017 by the authors; licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13501763.2013.761512
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/17440572.2013.878655
http://creativecommons.org/
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.

	Introduction 
	Materials and Methods 
	Literature Review 
	Methods 

	Results 
	Case 1: Location of Places for Installation of Mobile Blood-Collection Units 
	Case 2: Zoning of Street Prostitution 

	Discussion and Conclusions 

