





















































From Raw Data to Meaningful Information: A Representational Approach to Cadastral Databases in Relation to Urban Planning


 

Future Internet 2014, 6, 612-639; doi:10.3390/fi6040612 
 

future internet 
ISSN 1999-5903 

www.mdpi.com/journal/futureinternet 

Article 

From Raw Data to Meaningful Information: A Representational 
Approach to Cadastral Databases in Relation to Urban Planning 

Francesc Valls Dalmau 1,*, Pilar Garcia-Almirall 2, Ernest Redondo Domínguez 1 and  

David Fonseca Escudero 3 

1 Department of Architectural Representation and Visual Analysis I, Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya, 

649 Diagonal Av., Barcelona 08028, Spain; E-Mail: ernesto.redondo@upc.edu 
2 Department of Architectural Technology I, Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya, 649 Diagonal Av., 

Barcelona 08028, Spain; E-Mail: pilar.garcia-almirall@upc.edu 
3 Architecture Department, La Salle Campus Barcelona, Ramon Llull University, 2 Quatre Camins St., 

Barcelona 08022, Spain; E-Mail: fonsi@salle.url.edu 

* Author to whom correspondence should be addressed; E-Mail: francesc.valls@upc.edu;  

Tel.: +34-934011933; Fax: +34-934016332. 

External Editors: Robert Amor and Salvatore Flavio Pileggi 

Received: 15 June 2014; in revised form: 19 September 2014 / Accepted: 15 October 2014 /  

Published: 24 October 2014 

 

Abstract: Digesting the data hose that cities are constantly producing is complex; data is 

usually structured with different criteria, which makes comparative analysis of multiple 

cities challenging. However, the publicly available data from the Spanish cadaster contains 

urban information in a documented format with common semantics for the whole territory, 

which makes these analyses possible. This paper uses the information about the 3D geometry 

of buildings, their use and their year of construction, stored in cadastral databases, to study 

the relation between the built environment (what the city is) and the urban plan (what the 

city wants to become), translating the concepts of the cadastral data into the semantics of  

the urban plan. Different representation techniques to better understand the city from the 

pedestrians’ point of view and to communicate this information more effectively are  

also discussed. 

Keywords: 3D GIS; urban planning; representation; cadaster; smart visualization;  

urban regeneration; semantics translation 

 

OPEN ACCESS



Future Internet 2014, 6 613 

 

 

1. Introduction 

Urban morphology is constantly evolving: buildings are built, demolished, and remodeled altering the 

landscape of our cities through the collective action of their inhabitants. Urban Plans describe what we want 

our cities to be, undergoing revisions as we change the vision of the future of our cities. The analysis of the 

complex interaction throughout time between what the city is and what it wants to become [1–3] allows 

urban planners to understand both past and present state of the city to plan for a better future. 

Urban planning is a complex process that involves actors from different disciplines collaborating and 

managing heterogeneous data from different sources [4]. The visual representation of data allows the 

exploration of complex datasets [5], and can improve the collaboration of the teams involved through  

better communication [6]. 

The purpose of this paper is to present a methodology to provide urban planners with analytic 

visualization tools to better understand the complexity of urban renewal processes [7], using publicly 

available cadastral data. This approach makes possible to use the methodology in multiple Spanish 

regions since cadastral data covers the whole Spanish territory with a uniform semantic criteria. 

The methodology extends a previously developed work [8], using a multifaceted approach to the 

study of urban morphology in relation to planning regulations in multiple dimensions (spatial, temporal 

and conceptual), to visually analyze and communicate the complexity of urban development. 

After a review of the literature on data representation and specifically on the representation of 3D and 

temporal data, followed by the introduction of the case of study, Section 2 outlines the harmonization 

process applied to the data due to semantic and geometric mismatches between the cadastral and 

planning information, Section 3 describes the methodology of the visualization techniques developed, 

Section 4 presents a discussion of the results obtained and their applicability, and Section 5 presents  

our conclusions. 

1.1. Representational Approach 

Cities produce a constant flow of heterogeneously structured data [9,10]; to extract and communicate 

meaningful information from this data it has to be converted to a medium that can be understood by 

human beings, which is not a trivial process [11]. 

From the late 1960s with the work of Bertin [12,13], a systematic approach to the study of the most 

adequate way to represent statistical data was developed by Cleveland [14–18], and the study of the 

aesthetic and conceptual properties of graphics as a vehicle to deliver meaningful information was 

studied by Tufte [19–21]. More recently, with the capacity of computers to store, manage and display 

large amounts of data, a more computer-centric approach to representing data has emerged [22–25],  

with the focus shifting to explaining to the machine how to map concepts to graphical elements. 

According to the grammar of graphics [23] definition, the representation of spatial data would limit the 

number of “aesthetics” because the shape and position of the graphical elements is mapped to the 

location and geometry of the represented elements themselves, leaving usually just color [26], and in 

some cases pattern, to convey the desired information. 

The representation of geographic data [27–29] has specific challenges because it deals with different 

kinds of information [30] depending on the nature of the data, making the visualization of historical [31] 



Future Internet 2014, 6 614 

 

 

and conceptual [32] information challenging, although the results can be appreciated as an art form for 

their aesthetic properties [33,34]. 

This paper tries to address some of the difficulties in the representation of urban data, specifically 

regarding the interaction between built reality and urban planning, and how it affects its  

three-dimensional morphology, the activities that take place in the city, and its evolution in time, 

considering specially its impact on the pedestrians’ perception of the city. 

The representation of three categories of information of the building stock was explored in the case 

of study: spatial (the 3D volume of buildings and planning regulations), temporal (the year of construction) 

and conceptual (dominant use inside buildings). 

The representation of urban phenomena in three dimensions is challenging, while advances have been 

made in the realistic representation of cities using procedural methods [35–38] or data captured from  

reality [39], the use of the third dimension for aesthetic purposes [40], to convey information through 

the abstract representation of the 3D volumes [41], or the generalization or simplification of the 3D  

geometry [42,43] remains less explored. 

Visualizing the temporal component of spatial data is even more complex than the representation of  

three-dimensional data. It has been conceptually laid out [44,45] and some examples of implementation 

in 4D cadastral data can be found to document the lifecycle of the building stock [46]. 

The pedestrians’ perception of the built environment, from the street level, has been described from 

the functional [47] and visual [48] perspectives; recently the use of geotagged images have allowed 

volunteers to evaluate the subjective perception of different neighborhoods [49]. 

Finally, some techniques have been used recently introduced to explore complex spatial 2D data, 

using conditioned choropleth maps to visualize multidimensional data [50] and arrays of spatially 

positioned maps [51] to better display dense OD matrices. 

1.2. Case of Study 

The case of study chosen for the development of the methodology was the old quarter of the  

Sant Andreu District in Barcelona. The buildings in the area of study (Figure 1) are part of the center of 

the former town of Sant Andreu, from which the district takes its name, and the development it 

underwent in the 19th century when it was incorporated to Barcelona. 

This historic development resulted in a complex urban structure suitable to use as a workbench to test 

the methodology for the representation of 3D features, their temporal development and their perception 

from the pedestrians’ point of view: 

 Semantic correction of height information of cadastral and planning databases (Section 2.3) 
 3D representation of height information on a 2D surface, compared to traditional 2D representation 

(Sections 3.1 and 4.3) 

 Occlusion of the built volumes from the street (Sections 3.2 and 4.5) and onto neighboring volumes 
(Sections 3.3 and 4.6) 

 Visualization of the temporal evolution of the building stock (Section 4.8) 
 Representation main of uses on the ground floor (Sections 3.4 and 4.7) 

  



Future Internet 2014, 6 615 

 

 

Figure 1. Area of study in the Sant Andreu District of Barcelona. 

 

2. Materials 

The Spanish cadaster provides a comprehensive inventory of all real estate properties in the Spanish 

territory with a common specification, and includes information about the physical configuration of 

every building and the uses inside them. These are some of the main aspects urban planning regulates: 

the mass of the buildings (their size and shape) and the allowed uses according to zoning regulations. 

The comprehensive information included in cadastral data outweighed some of its limitations:  

(a) it contains data about the year of construction that spans more than a century (b) has building height 

information available; and (c) includes use information for each unit. 

The objective of this study was to assess the information stored in the cadaster databases, especially 

in relation to the urban planning regulations, and the interpretation of the data stored in these two sources 

with different semantics, to be able to relate them spatially and conceptually. 

2.1. Cadastral Data Import and Normalization 

The Cadastral data used in this paper is publicly available in the Cadastral Electronic Site where it 

can be freely downloaded, excluding personal identifiable information to preserve the anonymity of real 

estate owners. Cartographic data can be downloaded for any municipality as a standard shapefile,  

but information without graphical representation is only provided in a special legacy American Standard 

Code for Information Interchange (ASCII) fixed width format instead of a tabular or Extensible Markup 

Language (XML) or CityGML [52] format. 



Future Internet 2014, 6 616 

 

 

2.1.1. Cadastral Data Import 

The format in which the data was stored was a flat ASCII file with 2,856,819 lines (for the municipality 

of Barcelona) with 1000 characters per line. Three classes of information needed, which would correspond 

to three different tables in a relational database, were interleaved in the data stream: parcels (76,556 records), 

buildings (93,713 records) and private units (1,451,737 records). These three tables are structured 

hierarchically by design, where each private unit belongs to one building and each building belongs to 

one parcel, and each record of the lower rank table has its own unique key and the foreign key of the 

higher rank table it belongs to. A script had to be developed with the R programming language to parse 

the ASCII file and extract the raw data needed: use, floor number, year of construction and unique id. 

2.1.2. Cadastral Data Normalization 

The encoding of the raw data corresponding to both use and floor number had to be normalized in 

order to be usable for the purpose of this study. 

According to the format specification, the position in the building of each unit, measured in number 

of floors from the ground floor is encoded as a three character alphanumeric string. In order to obtain a 

numeric value for the floor, a dictionary of key-value pairs was used to translate each unique key to a 

numeric value measuring the number of floors above street level (negative integers in the case of 

subterranean floors). 

Two special cases (attic and over-attic) were impossible to translate with a dictionary since its 

interpretation depended on their context: their value is one floor (attic) or two floors (over-attic) higher 

than the highest of the other units in the same parcel. For these cases, a series of queries in a Structured 

Query Language (SQL) database had to be built to assign the correct height value. 

The format specification encodes the use of each unit with three levels of detail in a tree-like structure, 

where each level has a more specific semantic detail than the previous one: level 1 has 10 categories, 

level 2 has 31 categories, and level 3 has 70 categories. Levels 2 and 3 were discarded because for the 

purposes of the study the detail of level 1 was adequate. 

2.2. Parcel Level Aggregation 

The resulting tables were not displayable for representation purposes because the cadaster does not 

provide an associated geometry. The most detailed geometry provided is the parcel layer, and as a 

consequence the data in the tables had to be summarized at the parcel level for the attributes of year of 

construction and use, to be able to analyze and visualize spatial patterns in the data. 

2.2.1. Year of Construction 

The year of construction of the units that belong to parcel is not necessarily the same for all items. 

Two measures were calculated to summarize this data at the parcel level: the most recent year and the  

weighted average. 

Since we were dealing with two time series where buildings are built and regulations are modified, 

the most recent year of construction of all units in a parcel was necessary in order to be able to compare 



Future Internet 2014, 6 617 

 

 

which parcels were compliant at the time of a given regulation change that could potentially modify the 

allowed height of any given parcel. 

On the other hand, a synthetic measure of building age had to be computed for each parcel. A simple 

arithmetic mean was not suitable because the units did not have the same built area and should contribute 

proportionally to their size in the average using a weighted average with the following formula (1): 

∑ ∙∈
∑ ∈

 (1)

2.2.2. Dominant Use 

Each parcel can contain multiple units with different uses in each floor. The use attribute of each unit 

had to be summarized at the parcel level for each floor to obtain its dominant use and its degree of this 

dominance over the rest of the uses. 

For each floor, a contingency table with the built area for each parcel and use was generated, and the 

dominant use (the use with a greater built area) was stored as an attribute of the parcel along with its 

percentage of the total built area (marginal total of all uses for each parcel). 

2.2.3. Overbuilt and Underbuilt Area Measurement 

It is not legally allowed to compensate overbuilt volumes with underbuilt ones inside a parcel, and 

accordingly aggregate calculations had to be performed independently for both situations to avoid the 

aggregate operations adding positive and negative numbers. This operation would be mathematically correct 

but it is not possible according to the regulations, which state that an unwarranted height in  

a part of a building is an offence independently of the same parcel having another part below the  

authorized height. 

Formulae 2 to 6 show the aggregation operations to calculate for each parcel: the total built area (2), 

the maximum allowed built area in zones (3), the overbuilt area in zones (4), the underbuilt area in  

zones (5), and the overbuilt area in systems (6). 

	 	 ∙
∈

 
(2)

	 	 ∙
∈

 
(3)

∙
∈

 
(4)

∙
∈

 
(5)

	 	 ∙
∈

 
(6)

  



Future Internet 2014, 6 618 

 

 

Using the following notation: 

 HB: Real height of the building, measured in number of floors above street level. 
 HP: Maximum height according to the plan, measured in number of floors above street level. 
 A: Area of a polygon entity (surface of land occupied). 
 Parc: Set of parcels inside the area of study. 
 Subp: Set of sub-parcels. 
 FragZ: Set of fragments from the spatial intersection between parcel and planning layers  

(in zones). 

 FragS: Set of fragments from the spatial difference between parcel and planning layers  
(in systems). 

2.3. Cadastral Cartography 

The cartographic information from the cadaster is distributed in 13 shapefiles that thematically 

represent information of a different nature that the institution manages. Two of these shapefiles were 

used in this study: the built volume geometry and the parcels geometry. The built volume layer was used 

to relate the existing height to the maximum height allowed by the urban plan layer using an overlay 

operation; the parcels layer were used for representational purposes because they are the only entities 

that are capable to display aggregated data from non-graphical tables linked through the parcel  

unique identifier. 

In the built volume geometry, the height of buildings is not stored as true 3D geometry [53,54] but  

as 2.5D cartography in a sub-parcel dataset (being sub-parcels pieces within a parcel with a distinct 

height from neighboring sub-parcels). Height information is stored as an alphanumeric string, which 

encodes several pieces of information about the sub-parcel, including the number of floors below and 

above street level. For example, a sub-parcel with a “–II+V” attribute has two subterranean floors and 

five floors above street level. 

2.3.1. Height Information Correction 

The height code had to be translated using a dictionary with three fields (code, height above ground, 

height below ground) through the interpretation of the documentation provided by the cadaster; however, 

since the heights had to be compared to the planning regulations, it was imperative that they were 

semantically comparable and not necessarily a direct representation of reality (as if it was a 3D model). 

2.3.2. Semantically Adjusting Cartographic Data to Planning Regulations 

To be consistent with the nature of the planning regulations, some adjustments had to be made regarding 

(a) balconies; (b) ventilation courtyards; and (c) staircase towers: 

(a) The volumes of balconies over the streets were disregarded because the Metropolitan regulations 

do not directly regulate the maximum height of these volumes but instead the buildings they are 

attached to. Therefore, a balcony would not be allowed only as a consequence of the floor it was 

attached to not being allowed. 



Future Internet 2014, 6 619 

 

 

(b) Ventilation courtyards are a typological device that allows placing uses like kitchens and 

bedrooms in the core of the building and still be able to get ventilation and natural light. Although 

these courtyards are geometrically voids, from the planning regulations point of view, they are a 

design decision of the architect of the building and should not be considered as such but instead 

built up to the lowest volume they serve in its own parcel. 

(c) Staircase towers are not assigned a height value but are considered built volume. Since they have 

to give access to the adjacent volumes, its assumed height should be at least the height of the 

highest volume it serves in its own parcel. 

Since ventilation courtyards accounted for almost 20% of the area of all sub-parcels and staircase 

towers for another 2%, to get accurate results a methodology [8] had to be developed to automatically 

assign height values to this types of entities from their spatial context (Figure 2). 

Figure 2. Correction of staircase towers (a) and ventilation courtyards (b). 

STAIRCASE TOWERS  VENTILATION COURTYARDS 

Original state (uncorrected)  Volumes after correction  Original state (uncorrected)  Volumes after correction 

 

→ 

 

→

 

→ 

 

 

 

→

 

(a)  (b) 

The calculation of the height to be assigned involved two topological relationships: (a) adjacency  

to other polygons but (b) considering only polygons inside the same parcel. Since the Geographic 

Information System (GIS) used was non-topological, a methodology had to be implemented using 

Structured Query Language (SQL) from adjacency information stored in long form (origin, destination, 

value) instead of as a sparse matrix (Figure 3). 

2.4. Planning Data 

The Barcelona Metropolitan Area Urban Plan is in effect since 1976 [55] and its cartography relative 

to the maximum height must be interpreted [56] from the textual description according to multiple 

parameters: width of the street(s) the parcel faces, slope of the street(s), typology of the street, position 

relative to the corner of a city block, geometry this corner (arc radius, chamfer distance), zoning 

regulations, and the principle of the regulation granting the lesser amount of built area where there are 

conflicting interpretations. 

The interpretation of the regulations regarding the maximum heights was performed in collaboration 

with the staff in the Urban Studies Bureau of the Urban Planning Department of the Barcelona  

City Council. 



Future Internet 2014, 6 620 

 

 

The height information of the planning layer was compared to the height information of the actual 

buildings layer using two Boolean spatial operations: (a) a spatial intersection, the result of which was 

the fragments of sub-parcel inside zones and (b) a spatial difference, the result of which was the 

fragments of sub-parcel inside systems (roads and parks). With the result of the overlay operations it 

was possible to determine the conformity to the urban plan for each of the resulting fragments (Table 1) 

from their building height (HB) and planned height (HP). The layers in the overlay operation had some 

metric imprecision which resulted in some sliver polygons that had to be cleaned up. 

Figure 3. Diagram of the process to obtain the staircase towers (top) and ventilation courtyards 

(bottom) heights from neighboring geometry. 

 

Table 1. Types of fragments from the overlay operations. 

Fragment Plan Entity Condition Operation Symbology 

Underbuilt Zones HB − HP < 0 Intersection Blue hues 
Conformant Zones HB = HP Intersection Grey 

Overbuilt Zones HB − HP > 0 Intersection Pink hues 
Overbuilt Systems HB > 0 Difference Dark green 

Conformant Systems HB = 0 Difference Light green 

3. Methods 

Data is processed by machines but ultimately consumed by people. Different methodologies were 

developed to communicate effectively the results of the study, to make them more easily understandable 

and to give deeper insight to the intended audience of urban planners and architects, not necessarily 

familiar with GIS technology but highly proficient in multiple representation techniques. Different 



Future Internet 2014, 6 621 

 

 

strategies were developed to better convey the results, using several graphic approaches to visualize data 

in a more natural and human-centric way. 

3.1. Representation of Overlapping Information in 3D 

The morphology of the buildings is not exactly what the planning regulations mandate; some parts of 

the city could be higher (underbuilt volumes) while some other parts are higher than what the regulations 

allow. It is difficult to display this information on a map because its abstract planar representation does 

not match the way we experience the urban environment. A criterion was developed to display the 

overlapping information of overbuilt and underbuilt fragments (Figure 4). The third dimension allowed 

the authors to display overlapping information without having to resort to 2D representation constructs 

such as transparency or hatching. 

Figure 4. Height interpretation in the 3D model. 

 

The result was akin to a 3D stacked bar graph, where the third dimension represented the height of the 

building, the bars had the shape and the position of the cartographic data it represented, and the floors 

overbuilt or underbuilt were displayed with a color code, adding a fourth conceptual dimension with the 

relationship between built and planned volumes. 

3.2. Pedestrian-centric Representation of Height in 2D 

The spatial configuration from the pedestrians’ point of view has been studied in the horizontal  

plane [57,58]. To visualize the perception pedestrians have of the height of buildings when walking 

along a street, a new representation technique was developed that allowed to show in a map the apparent 

surface that occludes the view of the sky from a pedestrian point of view. 

The occlusion produced by the height of the buildings depends on the position of the highest  

floor relative to the eye level of the observer and it does not increase linearly with each additional  

floor (Figure 5, left). 

The length of the segment that is the projection of the shortest plane that can occlude the highest 

visible point of the building (Figure 5, right) was calculated with the following formulae (7) and was 

implemented in Python (Code 1). 



Future Internet 2014, 6 622 

 

 

α tan

β 	π 2 α⁄

∙ cos β

 (7)  

Figure 5. Diminishing occlusion by height (left), occlusion projection calculation (right). 

 

Code 1. Python function to calculate occlusion projection. 

 

The calculation and has the following properties (Figure 6): 

 For e = 0 is the apparent surface as seen from the pavement 
 When d approaches infinity and e = 0, d is the projection of the height on the horizontal plane (d = h) 
 As d increases, it has the oblique asymptote y = h·x − e 

  

def segment(floors, dist, eye): 

    # All numbers are assumed positive 

    if floors == 0: 

        return 0 

    else: 

        alpha = math.atan((floors * 3 - eye) / dist) 

        beta = math.pi / 2 - alpha 

        seg = dist * math.cos(beta) 

        return seg 



Future Internet 2014, 6 623 

 

 

Figure 6. Apparent occlusion for floors 1 to 5 depending on observer distance to façade. 

 

The polygon geometry of the height volumes was decomposed into lines that had the unique identifier 

of its right and left polygons, and the value of the apparent occlusion of each segment was assigned to 

the lines without neighbor (the edge of the volumes facing the street) with a series of SQL queries  

(Figure 7). This value was used as the offset distance in a buffer operation to create the projected entities. 

Figure 7. Diagram of the method to project the apparent occlusion onto the ground plane. 

 

3.3. View Occlusion by Neighboring Volumes 

To visualize the occlusion of neighboring volumes, the height of each volume was projected onto the 

volumes in their immediate vicinity that had a lower height, proportional to the difference of their respective 

heights (Figure 8). 
  



Future Internet 2014, 6 624 

 

 

Figure 8. Projection of relative height onto lower volumes (left) and street (right). 

 

As described in Section 3.2, the geometry was decomposed into lines, and with a series of SQL 

queries (Figure 9) each line was assigned the value of the number of heights that each neighbor rose 

above the roof of the lower entity. These values were buffered after being multiplied by the cosine of 

the angle of incidence to avoid overlapping entities. 

Figure 9. Diagram of the method to project the relative height onto lower volumes. 

 

3.4. Dominant Use in Ground Floor from Pedestrian Point of View 

From the pedestrian point of view, the ground floor is the part of the building it interacts more with, and 

defines the character of the street. To investigate the spatial distribution of uses on the ground floor, and 

identify the presence of commercial streets and residential streets a methodology to visualize the main use 

along the perimeter of the city blocks was developed. 

As described in Sections 3.2 and 3.3 for the volume geometry, the parcel geometry was decomposed 

into lines that had two fields containing the unique identifiers of the parcels at each side. The lines that had 

no neighbor (the facades at the limits of the city block) were assigned the value of the dominant use of the 

corresponding parcel and visualized with a different color for each use (Figure 10). 
  



Future Internet 2014, 6 625 

 

 

Figure 10. Diagram of the process to assign the parcel dominant use to its façade(s). 

 

4. Results 

Understanding the interactions of pedestrians when walking along a street is crucial for urban planners 

because it has a direct impact on their perception of the city. In this study, from Cadastral and Planning 

data, the authors have used different visualization techniques to represent the height of the buildings  

(in relation to the plan, their visibility from the street, or their visibility from other buildings),  

the different uses present in the built environment and the age of the edification to give new insights into 

an entity as complex as a city. 

4.1. Representation of Aggregate Data 

From the aggregation process described in Section 2.2.3, three measures of the compliance to the 

building regulations were obtained for every parcel: overbuilt area, underbuilt area and overbuilt area on 

systems (roads and parks). 

Figure 11. Map of amount of underbuilt (left) and overbuilt (right) area per parcel. 

 



Future Internet 2014, 6 626 

 

 

To display the magnitudes of these measures in a map and investigate their spatial distribution, a 

choropleth map for each measure was used (Figure 11), because the position and shape of each parcel 

could not be used to display any information besides their own location and geometry, and the 

magnitudes measured had to be displayed through the use of markings (labels, hatches, symbols or color) 

which were the only aesthetics available. 

The disadvantage of this approach was that the person reading the maps had to refocus his or her 

attention in each of the maps individually; to assist the observer to focus on the information, the maps 

were displayed side by side at the same scale with the same orientation and size, and the breaks in the 

color categorization were the same for each map. 

4.2. Representation of Fragments in 2D 

The magnitude of the conformity (measured in area units) for each resulting sub-parcel fragment was 

represented in a map measuring number of floors beneath or exceeding the allowed height.  

To visualize spatial patterns in the distribution of overbuilt and underbuilt zones in the area of study, 

the map displayed the number of heights above or below the planning regulation as two diverging color 

ramps for positive and negative numbers, with more saturated colors for higher absolute values and a 

neutral gray for fragments that measured exactly the same height as the urban plan specified (Figure 12). 

Figure 12. Partial map of underbuilt and overbuilt fragments. 

 

These three categories appeared visually clustered together. To check the strength of this clustering, 

a Moran Test to measure their spatial autocorrelation was applied to the fragments: they were divided 

into 3 categories: underbuilt, compliant and overbuilt (Figure 13). Three tests were performed (Table 2): 

(a) categorized fragments; (b) categorized fragments erasing the boundaries between equal contiguous 



Future Internet 2014, 6 627 

 

 

categories inside same parcel; and (c) categorized fragments erasing all boundaries between equal 

contiguous categories. 

Table 2. Moran Test results. 

Dissolve Moran’s I Expected z-score p-value 

None (a) 0.515340 −0.000060 95.380891 <10−6 
Inside Parcel (b) 0.136500 −0.000183 14.635925 <10−6 

All (c) 0.108415 −0.000142 12.782081 <10−6 

Figure 13. Partial map of fragments according to their legal status. 

 

For the three cases the null hypothesis of no spatial autocorrelation is rejected with a highly 

statistically significant p-value. The hypothesis of the authors is that this observed clustering is not result 

of some kind of preferential attachment between situations of the same category, but the consequence of 

the renovation processes the zone has underwent, where the maximum allowed height has been raised 

or lowered in multiple street segments rendering the buildings in those streets higher or lower that what 

the plan prescribed. 

4.3. Representation of Fragments in 3D 

The 2D representation described in Section 4.2 was a very valuable analytical tool, but the 

representation of the results using 2D maps was unable to fully convey the complex volumetric 

information because height data had to be abstracted to be represented in plan view as color scales,  

hatch densities or labels. To visualize this information in a more intuitive way, a different approach had 

to be developed to make it easier to interpret, as described in Section 3.1.  



Future Internet 2014, 6 628 

 

 

The use of 3D imagery allowed the authors to represent the volumes in a more natural and intuitive way 

since it matched the way we experience our cities (Figure 14), allowing the viewers to visualize and relate 

two concepts simultaneously (real height and planned height) much more easily than using 2D maps. 

Figure 14. Overbuilt (red) and underbuilt (green) fragments in the case of study. 

 

To visualize the accuracy of the results, an axonometric aerial photograph was compared to its 

corresponding 3D representation (Figure 15); in the 3D synthetic image the differences between built 

reality and planned city are more apparent and easier to interpret. The image on the right is not a 

representation of the built reality but an abstraction of the real city seen through the point of view of  

the urban plan. 

Figure 15. (a) Aerial axonometric view (Bing Maps) and (b) 3D representation of the same area. 

(a) (b) 



Future Internet 2014, 6 629 

 

 

4.4. Map of the Projection of the Apparent Surface 

To better understand the perception of pedestrians from the street, the technique described in  

Section 3.2 was applied to the area of study. In the resulting map (Figure 16), the length of the shaded 

area (dark gray) measured orthogonally from the façade plane, corresponds to the magnitude of occlusion 

of the corresponding built volume from the pedestrian point of view when walking along the street. 

Without this representation, it is difficult to comprehend this pedestrian’s perception of the public 

space. In the map it can be appreciated among other aspects that (a) some streets with equal width can 

appear wider or narrower depending on the height of the buildings along their sides; (b) some streets 

have a more regular skyline along their length than others; and (c) some streets have more symmetrical 

sides than others. This visualization should be valuable for urban planners both as an analysis and  

design tool. 

Figure 16. Apparent occlusion projected onto the ground plane. 

 

4.5. Façade Height Projection onto the Horizontal Plane 

The visualization of the height of buildings from the street explained in the subsection above does not 

explain the relation of their geometry with the heights allowed by the urban plan: it is not possible to 

know whether the configuration of the cross-section of the street is a consequence of what the plan 

mandates or not. 

To be able to get a better insight into this relation, another visualization was developed where the height 

was projected onto the horizontal plane at an angle, and the projection was colored with the same codification 

used for the 3D representation explained in Section 3.1 (Figure 4). 

The resulting map (Figure 17) was capable of showing whether the skyline observed in the built 

environment was a consequence of what the urban plan dictates or the result of buildings being 

underbuilt or overbuilt, resulting in a powerful tool for urban planners. 



Future Internet 2014, 6 630 

 

 

Figure 17. Height projected onto the ground plane colored by legal status. 

 

4.6. Occlusion by Higher Neighboring Volumes 

The majority of the roofs in the area of study, as is usual in Mediterranean climates, are flat because 

the rainfall is rare and the high population density makes the rooftops valuable spaces of recreation  

and other uses. 

The methodology described in Section 3.3 was used to visualize the occlusion that higher volumes 

have on lower ones. The result has some similarities to a shaded map because conceptually it would be 

the result of recording the shaded area from a light orbiting each volume at a fixed distance. 

Figure 18. Occlusion of higher volumes onto neighboring lower volumes. 

 



Future Internet 2014, 6 631 

 

 

The resulting map (Figure 18) shows the magnitude of this occlusion in a darker color; it allows the 

visualization of the occlusions for each rooftop, which have an impact on the views of their surroundings, 

the amount of sunlight they receive, their exposure to wind and their protection from street noise. 

4.7. Activities on Ground Floor 

Pedestrians interact primarily with the ground floor of the buildings, and different activities give 

streets different characters. The main activity on the ground floor was studied with the methodology 

described in Section 2.2.2 to be able to typify the streets according to the activities developed  

along them. 

The area of study was markedly residential in all floors above ground (Figure 19, left), but the ground 

floor showed some variability in the activities developed, being the four main activities in decreasing order: 

residential, retail, industrial and offices. 

The temporal series showed that in more recent times (from the 1970s onwards) the proportion of 

floor space located at the ground floor had decreased, probably because buildings had gotten taller and 

subterranean floors were excavated to accommodate space for parking vehicles (Figure 19, right). 

Figure 19. Built area per floor and use (left) and temporal evolution relative to street level (right). 

 

A choropleth map displaying the four main activities in each parcel was used to visualize their spatial 

distribution (Figure 20). Each use was assigned a color and to illustrate the degree of dominance of each use 

among the rest, as the percentage of the dominant use in the parcel decreased, its hue faded to white. 

The resulting map clearly showed the presence of the main commercial street of the area (Gran de Sant 

Andreu) in the north-south axis in the center of the area of study. 

To visualize the activities on the ground floor from the pedestrian point of view, the methodology 

described in Section 3.4 was used to display the main activity at the façade front (Figure 21). This map 

abandons a parcel-centric approach for a street-centric approach, and displays the different activities 



Future Internet 2014, 6 632 

 

 

where pedestrians interact with the buildings: their façade, avoiding the distortion that the size and shape 

of the parcels can introduce. 

Figure 20. Map of parcels colored by main use at street level. 

 

Figure 21. Map of parcel fronts colored by main use at street level. 

 



Future Internet 2014, 6 633 

 

 

4.8. Historic Perspective 

The edification age estimated per parcel as described in Section 2.2.1, was related to three other 

variables: planning regulations, use and vertical position inside the building. Although it was not possible 

to display this information on a map because of the inherent difficulties of displaying time information 

on a static image, the exploration of their relationship gave some insight about the historic perspective 

of the current situation. 

4.8.1. Building Age and Planning Regulations 

The calculation of the area for each situation (underbuilt, compliant and overbuilt) as described in  

Section 2.2.3 was aggregated in slices of five years in two graphs, conceptually similar to population 

pyramids (Figure 22). The first graph showed the total built area stacked with the overbuilt area on top and 

the underbuilt area below (Figure 22, left), using the same conceptual framework used to display the 

fragments height in 3D (Sections 3.1 and 4.3). The second graph (Figure 22, right) showed the same 

information, but excluding the allowed part to focus only on the amount of discrepancy from the plan. 

This graphs show a peak in the overbuilt area around the year the Metropolitan Plan was approved 

and a sharp decline afterwards. They also show a decline in the underbuilt area for buildings from the 

end of the Spanish Civil War to the present. 

Figure 22. Distribution of legal status by year of construction. 

 

4.8.2. Built Area per Year of Construction and Use 

A weighted histogram of the built area for each use (Figure 23) showed the dominance of the residential 

use in the whole period (1850–2012) with a small but constant amount of retail and industrial uses 

throughout, and a consolidation of the built environment around the decade of the 1980s, with little  

activity afterwards. 
  



Future Internet 2014, 6 634 

 

 

Figure 23. Weighted histogram of built area per year of construction and use. 

 

4.8.3. Built Area per Year of Construction and Floor 

A weighted histogram of the built area for each floor (Figure 24) showed the evolution of the height 

of the buildings over time. The data was categorized into three categories (subterranean, ground floor 

and above ground) and given diverging color scales for positive and negative floor numbers. 

The graph showed the highest buildings were built from the 1960s onwards, when the construction 

industry was able to build up to 12 floors competitively. It also shows that the majority of the ground 

floor area was built at the beginning of the 20th Century and around the date of approval of the 

Metropolitan Plan, when the construction of subterranean floors began to take off. 

Figure 24. Weighted histogram of built area per year of construction and floor. 

 



Future Internet 2014, 6 635 

 

 

5. Conclusions 

The public data from the Spanish cadaster offers a lot of useful information for urban planners. 

Nevertheless, its usefulness is restricted by the adoption of non-standard storage formats and the lack of 

semantically clear concepts in some of its sections. The presented methodological approach seeks to 

extract meaningful information from cadastral data using representational and semantic strategies. 

The visualization techniques developed allowed better communication and understanding of the 

information stored in the databases and their interrelationships: 

 The 3D visualization techniques allowed the discovery of patterns not obvious even for trained 
professionals, using the third dimension to convey information not possible in 2D, with the third 

dimension helping understand conceptual data. 

 The 2D representation of height and use information onto the horizontal plan resulted in a very 
compact and synthetic visualization of the relation between the streets skyline, the planning 

regulations and the built environment from a pedestrian point of view. 

 For data without associated cartography, multiple visualization techniques were used to  
extract meaningful data, in the form of charts or through aggregation operations into higher order 

geometric entities. 

 To represent temporal information, a visualization similar to population pyramids was used for the 
age of buildings. 

The subject described by both the urban regulations and the cadaster is the urban built environment; 

however, they were conceived to serve different purposes and therefore are structured differently. To be able 

to integrate both sources to get better insights on the evolution of the morphology of the city in renovation 

processes, it was necessary to translate both classes of information into a common conceptual framework. 

Due to the nuances in the interpretation of building regulations and the legacy format used by the 

cadaster, the translation operation required a team that was able to work with both data sources. In the 

future, if a semantic Spatial Data Infrastructure (SDI) is in place, these databases could be automatically 

queried and their information extracted with less ambiguity [59], allowing a better collaboration of the 

professionals involved. However, the concepts in this semantic SDI need to be defined by the 

professionals involved in the planning process; this paper tries to assess some of the concepts that could 

be included in such SDI, in parallel to the work being developed by the Building Information Modeling 

(BIM) community to integrate building licensing [60] into their workflow. 

Future Work 

The model used for 3D representation assumed a flat surface without topography; to improve the 

accuracy and usefulness of the visualization of the results it is proposed that a Digital Elevation Model 

(DEM) is incorporated in the 3D model; however, to validate the geometry of the resulting more complex 

model, a 3D geometry checking process would have to be implemented [61–63]. In addition, a process 

to correct the sliver polygons resulting from artifacts in the overlay operation could be implemented [64]. 

To extend the methodology to regions outside the Spanish territory covered by the cadaster, the 

publicly available Volunteered Geographic Information (VGI) of the OpenStreetMap project [65] could 

be used [66], allowing the comparison of the urban fabric of different cities or neighborhoods. 



Future Internet 2014, 6 636 

 

 

Furthermore, it would be valuable to explore the usefulness of using Augmented Reality (AR) tools 

to visualize the information on site for planners and in public participation processes [67], and to develop 

tools to evaluate the environmental impact of renovation processes [68]. 

Acknowledgments 

This research was supported by the Non-Oriented Fundamental Research Project  

EDU2012-37247/EDUC of the VI National Plan for Scientific Research, Development and 

Technological Innovation 2008-2011, Government of Spain, titled “E-learning 3.0 in the teaching of 

architecture. Case studies of educational research for the foreseeable future”. 

The authors would like to thank Montserrat Moix Bergadà for her invaluable insights during the 

elaboration of this paper, and the staff in the Urban Studies Bureau of the Urban Planning Department 

of the Barcelona City Council for their collaboration. We also thank the anonymous reviewers for their 

valuable comments. 

Author Contributions 

Francesc Valls Dalmau, Pilar Garcia-Almirall, Ernest Redondo Domínguez and David Fonseca 

Escudero designed the study, developed the methodology, collected the data, performed the analysis, 

and wrote the manuscript. 

Conflicts of Interest 

The authors declare no conflict of interest 

References 

1. Lynch, K. The Image of the City; The MIT Press: Cambridge, MA, USA, 1960. 

2. Borja, J. Luces y Sombras del Urbanismo de Barcelona, 2nd ed.; Editorial UOC: Barcelona, Spain, 

2010. (In Spanish) 

3. Nel·lo, O. Dinàmiques urbanes, activitats emergents i polítiques públiques a la Regió Metropolitana de 

Barcelona. Pap. Regió Metrop. Barc. Territ. Estratègies Planejament 2002, 2002, 105–114. (In Catalan) 

4. Klaasen, I.T. Knowledge-based Design: Developing Urban & Regional Design into a Science;  

Delft University of Technology: Delft, The Netherlands, 2003. 

5. Keim, D.A. Information visualization and visual data mining. IEEE Trans. Vis. Comput. Graph. 

2002, 8, 1–8. 

6. Zlatanova, S.; Itard, L.; Kibria, M.S.; Van Dorst, M. A user requirements study of digital 3D models 

for urban renewal. Open House Int. 2010, 35, 37–46. 

7. Nelson, A.C.; Burby, R.J.; Feser, E.; Dawkins, C.J.; Malizia, E.E.; Quercia, R. Urban Containment 

and Central-City Revitalization. J. Am. Plann. Assoc. 2004, 70, 411–425. 

8. Garcia-Almirall, P.; Valls Dalmau, F.; Moix Bergada, M. Planned vs. Real City: 3D GIS for 

Analyzing the Transformation of Urban Morphology. In Proceedings of the 17th AGILE 

Conference on Geographic Information Science, Castellón de la Plana, Spain, 3–6 June 2014. 



Future Internet 2014, 6 637 

 

 

9. Behnisch, M.; Ultsch, A. Urban data-mining: Spatiotemporal exploration of multidimensional data. 

Build. Res. Inf. 2009, 37, 520–532. 

10. Spielman, S.E.; Thill, J.-C. Social area analysis, data mining, and GIS. Comput. Environ.  

Urban Syst. 2008, 32, 110–122. 

11. Wainer, H. How to display data badly. Am. Stat. 1984, 38, 137–147. 

12. Bertin, J.; Barbut, M. Sémiologie Graphique. Les diagrammes, Les réseaux, Les cartes;  

Mouton: Paris, France, 1967. (In French) 

13. Bertin, J. La Graphique et le Traitement Graphique de L’information; Flammarion: Paris, France, 

1977. (In French) 

14. Cleveland, W.S. Graphs in Scientific Publications. Am. Stat. 1984, 38, 261–269. 

15. Cleveland, W.S. Graphical Methods for Data Presentation: Full Scale Breaks, Dot Charts, and 

Multibased Logging. Am. Stat. 1984, 38, 270–280. 

16. Cleveland, W.S.; McGill, R. Graphical Perception: Theory, Experimentation, and Application to 

the Development of Graphical Methods. J. Am. Stat. Assoc. 1984, 79, 531–554. 

17. Cleveland, W.S.; McGill, R. Graphical Perception and Graphical Methods for Analyzing Scientific 

Data. Science 1985, 229, 828–833. 

18. Cleveland, W.S.; McGill, R. Graphical Perception: The visual decoding of quantitative information 

on graphical displays of data. J. R. Stat. Soc. Ser. Gen. 1987, 150, 192–229. 

19. Tufte, E.R. Envisioning Information; Graphics Press: Cheshire, CT, USA, 1990. 

20. Tufte, E.R. Visual Explanations: Images and Quantities, Evidence and Narrative; Graphics Press: 

Cheshire, CT, USA, 1997. 

21. Tufte, E.R. The Visual Display of Quantitative Information, 2nd ed.; Graphics Press: Cheshire, CT, 

USA, 2001. 

22. Friendly, M.; SAS Institute. Visualizing Categorical Data; SAS Institute: Cary, NC, USA, 2001. 

23. Wilkinson, L.; Wills, G. The Grammar of Graphics; Springer: New York, NY, USA, 2005. 

24. Wickham, H. Ggplot2: Elegant Graphics for Data Analysis; Springer: Dordrecht, The Netherlands, 

2009. 

25. Wickham, H. A layered grammar of graphics. J. Comput. Graph. Stat. 2010, 19, 3–28. 

26. Harrower, M.; Brewer, C.A. ColorBrewer.org: An Online Tool for Selecting Colour Schemes  

for Maps. Cartogr. J. 2003, 40, 27–37. 

27. Peuquet, D.J. Representations of geographic space: Toward a conceptual synthesis. Ann. Assoc.  

Am. Geogr. 1988, 78, 375–394. 

28. Mennis, J.L.; Peuquet, D.J.; Qian, L. A conceptual framework for incorporating cognitive principles 

into geographical database representation. Int. J. Geogr. Inf. Sci. 2000, 14, 501–520. 

29. Goodchild, M.F.; Yuan, M.; Cova, T.J. Towards a general theory of geographic representation  

in GIS. Int. J. Geogr. Inf. Sci. 2007, 21, 239–260. 

30. Goodchild, M.F. Geographical data modeling. Comput. Geosci. 1992, 18, 401–408. 

31. Gregory, I.N. “A map is just a bad graph”: Why spatial statistics are important in historical GIS.  

In Placing History: How Maps, Spatial Data and GIS are Changing Historical Scholarship; 

Knowles, A.K., Ed.; ESRI Press: Redlands, CA, USA, 2008; pp. 123–149. 

32. Harmon, K. You are Here: Personal Geographies and Other Maps of the Imagination, 1st ed.; 

Princeton Architectural Press: New York, NY, USA, 2003. 



Future Internet 2014, 6 638 

 

 

33. Tufte, E.R. Beautiful Evidence, 1st ed.; Graphics Press: Cheshire, CT, USA, 2006. 

34. Harmon, K.; Clemans, G. The Map as Art: Contemporary Artists Explore Cartography; Princeton 

Architectural Press: New York, NY, USA, 2010. 

35. Parish, Y.I.H.; Müller, P. Procedural Modeling of Cities. In Proceedings of the 28th Annual 

Conference on Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques, SIGGRAPH ’01; ACM: New York, 

NY, USA, 2001; pp. 301–308. 

36. Wonka, P.; Wimmer, M.; Sillion, F.; Ribarsky, W. Instant Architecture. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2003 

Papers, SIGGRAPH ’03; ACM: New York, NY, USA, 2003; pp. 669–677. 

37. Müller, P.; Wonka, P.; Haegler, S.; Ulmer, A.; Van Gool, L. Procedural Modeling of Buildings. In 

ACM SIGGRAPH 2006 Papers, SIGGRAPH ’06; ACM: New York, NY, USA, 2006; pp. 614–623. 

38. Müller, P.; Zeng, G.; Wonka, P.; Van Gool, L. Image-based Procedural Modeling of Facades.  

In ACM SIGGRAPH 2007 Papers, SIGGRAPH ’07; ACM: New York, NY, USA, 2007. 

39. Gruen, A.; Behnisch, M.; Kohler, N. Perspectives in the reality-based generation, nD modelling, 

and operation of buildings and building stocks. Build. Res. Inf. 2009, 37, 503–519. 

40. Döllner, J.; Walther, M. Real-time expressive rendering of city models. In Proceedings of  

the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization, 2003. IV 2003, London, UK, 

16–18 July 2003; pp. 245–250. 

41. Döllner, J.; Baumann, K.; Buchholz, H. Virtual 3D City Models as Foundation of Complex Urban 

Information Spaces. In 11th International Conference on Urban Planning and Spatial Development 

in the Information Society (REAL CORP); Schrenk, M., Ed.; CORP—Competence Center of Urban 

and Regional Planning: Vienna, Austria, 2006; pp. 107–112. 

42. Glander, T.; Döllner, J. Abstract representations for interactive visualization of virtual 3D city 

models. Comput. Environ. Urban Syst. 2009, 33, 375–387. 

43. Semmo, A.; Trapp, M.; Kyprianidis, J.E.; Döllner, J. Interactive Visualization of Generalized Virtual 

3D City Models Using Level-of-Abstraction Transitions. Comput. Graph. Forum 2012, 31, 885–894. 

44. Peuquet, D.J. It’s About Time: A Conceptual Framework for the Representation of Temporal 

Dynamics in Geographic Information Systems. Ann. Assoc. Am. Geogr. 1994, 84, 441–461. 

45. Peuquet, D.J. Making Space for Time: Issues in Space-Time Data Representation. GeoInformatica 

2001, 5, 11–32. 

46. Döner, F.; Thompson, R.; Stoter, J.; Lemmen, C.; Ploeger, H.; van Oosterom, P.; Zlatanova, S.  

4D cadastres: First analysis of legal, organizational, and technical impact—With a case study on 

utility networks. Land Use Policy 2010, 27, 1068–1081. 

47. Pushkarev, B.S. Urban Space for Pedestrians: A Quantitative Approach, 1st ed.; The MIT Press: 

Cambridge, MA, USA, 1976. 

48. Hillier, B.; Penn, A.; Hanson, J.; Grajewski, T.; Xu, J. Natural movement: Or, configuration and 

attraction in urban pedestrian movement. Environ. Plan. B Plan. Des. 1993, 20, 29–66. 

49. Salesses, P.; Schechtner, K.; Hidalgo, C.A. The Collaborative Image of The City: Mapping the 

Inequality of Urban Perception. PLoS One 2013, 8, e68400. 

50. Carr, D.B.; White, D.; MacEachren, A.M. Conditioned Choropleth Maps and Hypothesis 

Generation. Ann. Assoc. Am. Geogr. 2005, 95, 32–53. 

51. Wood, J.; Dykes, J.; Slingsby, A. Visualisation of Origins, Destinations and Flows with OD Maps. 

Cartogr. J. 2010, 47, 117–129. 



Future Internet 2014, 6 639 

 

 

52. Gröger, G.; Plümer, L. CityGML—Interoperable semantic 3D city models. ISPRS J. Photogramm. 

Remote Sens. 2012, 71, 12–33. 

53. Karki, S.; Thompson, R.; McDougall, K. Data validation in 3D cadastre. In Developments in 3D 

Geo-Information Sciences; Neutens, T., Maeyer, P., Eds.; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 

2010; pp. 92–122. 

54. Van Oosterom, P. Research and development in 3D cadastres. Comput. Environ. Urban Syst. 2013, 

40, 1–6. 

55. Corporación Metropolitana de Barcelona. Plan General Metropolitano de Ordenación Urbana; 

Comisión Provincial de Urbanismo de Barcelona: Barcelona, Spain, 1976. (In Spanish) 

56. Esteban, J. Elementos de ordenación urbana; Edicions UPC: Barcelona, Spain, 1998. (In Spanish) 

57. Turner, A. Analysing the visual dynamics of spatial morphology. Environ. Plan. B Plan. Des. 2003, 

30, 657–676. 

58. Hillier, B. Space is the Machine: A Configurational Theory of Architecture; Space Syntax: London, 

UK, 2007. 

59. Li, W.; Goodchild, M.F.; Raskin, R. Towards geospatial semantic search: Exploiting latent semantic 

relations in geospatial data. Int. J. Digit. Earth 2012, 7, 17–37. 

60. Benner, J.; Geiger, A.; Häfele, K.-H. Concept for building licensing based on standardized 3D  

geo information. In Proceedings of the 5th International 3D GeoInfo Conference, Berlin, Germany, 

3–4 November 2010. 

61. Kazar, B.M.; Kothuri, R.; van Oosterom, P.; Ravada, S. On Valid and Invalid Three-Dimensional 

Geometries. In Advances in 3D Geoinformation Systems; van Oosterom, P., Zlatanova, S., 

Penninga, F., Fendel, E.M., Eds.; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2008; pp. 19–46. 

62. Gröger, G.; Plümer, L. How to achieve consistency for 3D city models. GeoInformatica 2011, 15, 

137–165. 

63. Ledoux, H.; Meijers, M. Topologically consistent 3D city models obtained by extrusion. Int. J. 

Geogr. Inf. Sci. 2011, 25, 557–574. 

64. Ledoux, H.; Arroyo Ohori, K.; Meijers, M. A triangulation-based approach to automatically repair 

GIS polygons. Comput. Geosci. 2014, 66, 121–131. 

65. OSM Foundation Simple 3D Buildings. Available online: http://wiki.openstreetmap.org/wiki/ 

Simple_3D_Buildings (accessed on 18 September 2014). 

66. Over, M.; Schilling, A.; Neubauer, S.; Zipf, A. Generating web-based 3D City Models from 

OpenStreetMap: The current situation in Germany. Comput. Environ. Urban Syst. 2010, 34, 496–507. 

67. Koeman, L. An Exploratory Study into the Public and Situated Visualisation of Local Data in Urban 

Communities. In Proceedings of the 2014 Companion Publication on Designing Interactive 

Systems, DIS Companion ’14; ACM: New York, NY, USA, 2014; pp. 173–176. 

68. Power, A. Does demolition or refurbishment of old and inefficient homes help to increase our 

environmental, social and economic viability? Energy Policy 2008, 36, 4487–4501. 

© 2014 by the authors; licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access article 

distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution license 

(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/). 

















<<
  /ASCII85EncodePages false
  /AllowTransparency false
  /AutoPositionEPSFiles true
  /AutoRotatePages /All
  /Binding /Left
  /CalGrayProfile (Dot Gain 15%)
  /CalRGBProfile (Adobe RGB \0501998\051)
  /CalCMYKProfile (Coated FOGRA27 \050ISO 12647-2:2004\051)
  /sRGBProfile (sRGB IEC61966-2.1)
  /CannotEmbedFontPolicy /Error
  /CompatibilityLevel 1.4
  /CompressObjects /Tags
  /CompressPages true
  /ConvertImagesToIndexed true
  /PassThroughJPEGImages true
  /CreateJobTicket false
  /DefaultRenderingIntent /Default
  /DetectBlends true
  /DetectCurves 0.0000
  /ColorConversionStrategy /UseDeviceIndependentColor
  /DoThumbnails false
  /EmbedAllFonts true
  /EmbedOpenType false
  /ParseICCProfilesInComments true
  /EmbedJobOptions true
  /DSCReportingLevel 0
  /EmitDSCWarnings false
  /EndPage -1
  /ImageMemory 1048576
  /LockDistillerParams false
  /MaxSubsetPct 100
  /Optimize false
  /OPM 1
  /ParseDSCComments true
  /ParseDSCCommentsForDocInfo true
  /PreserveCopyPage true
  /PreserveDICMYKValues true
  /PreserveEPSInfo true
  /PreserveFlatness true
  /PreserveHalftoneInfo false
  /PreserveOPIComments false
  /PreserveOverprintSettings true
  /StartPage 1
  /SubsetFonts true
  /TransferFunctionInfo /Apply
  /UCRandBGInfo /Remove
  /UsePrologue false
  /ColorSettingsFile (Europe Prepress)
  /AlwaysEmbed [ true
    /Cambria
    /CambriaMath
    /TimesNewRomanPS-BoldItalicMT
    /TimesNewRomanPS-BoldMT
    /TimesNewRomanPS-ItalicMT
    /TimesNewRomanPSMT
  ]
  /NeverEmbed [ true
  ]
  /AntiAliasColorImages false
  /CropColorImages true
  /ColorImageMinResolution 300
  /ColorImageMinResolutionPolicy /OK
  /DownsampleColorImages true
  /ColorImageDownsampleType /Bicubic
  /ColorImageResolution 600
  /ColorImageDepth -1
  /ColorImageMinDownsampleDepth 1
  /ColorImageDownsampleThreshold 1.50000
  /EncodeColorImages true
  /ColorImageFilter /DCTEncode
  /AutoFilterColorImages true
  /ColorImageAutoFilterStrategy /JPEG
  /ColorACSImageDict <<
    /QFactor 0.15
    /HSamples [1 1 1 1] /VSamples [1 1 1 1]
  >>
  /ColorImageDict <<
    /QFactor 0.15
    /HSamples [1 1 1 1] /VSamples [1 1 1 1]
  >>
  /JPEG2000ColorACSImageDict <<
    /TileWidth 256
    /TileHeight 256
    /Quality 30
  >>
  /JPEG2000ColorImageDict <<
    /TileWidth 256
    /TileHeight 256
    /Quality 30
  >>
  /AntiAliasGrayImages false
  /CropGrayImages true
  /GrayImageMinResolution 300
  /GrayImageMinResolutionPolicy /OK
  /DownsampleGrayImages true
  /GrayImageDownsampleType /Bicubic
  /GrayImageResolution 600
  /GrayImageDepth -1
  /GrayImageMinDownsampleDepth 2
  /GrayImageDownsampleThreshold 1.50000
  /EncodeGrayImages true
  /GrayImageFilter /DCTEncode
  /AutoFilterGrayImages true
  /GrayImageAutoFilterStrategy /JPEG
  /GrayACSImageDict <<
    /QFactor 0.15
    /HSamples [1 1 1 1] /VSamples [1 1 1 1]
  >>
  /GrayImageDict <<
    /QFactor 0.15
    /HSamples [1 1 1 1] /VSamples [1 1 1 1]
  >>
  /JPEG2000GrayACSImageDict <<
    /TileWidth 256
    /TileHeight 256
    /Quality 30
  >>
  /JPEG2000GrayImageDict <<
    /TileWidth 256
    /TileHeight 256
    /Quality 30
  >>
  /AntiAliasMonoImages false
  /CropMonoImages true
  /MonoImageMinResolution 1200
  /MonoImageMinResolutionPolicy /OK
  /DownsampleMonoImages true
  /MonoImageDownsampleType /Bicubic
  /MonoImageResolution 1200
  /MonoImageDepth -1
  /MonoImageDownsampleThreshold 1.50000
  /EncodeMonoImages true
  /MonoImageFilter /CCITTFaxEncode
  /MonoImageDict <<
    /K -1
  >>
  /AllowPSXObjects false
  /CheckCompliance [
    /PDFA1B:2005
  ]
  /PDFX1aCheck false
  /PDFX3Check false
  /PDFXCompliantPDFOnly false
  /PDFXNoTrimBoxError false
  /PDFXTrimBoxToMediaBoxOffset [
    0.00000
    0.00000
    0.00000
    0.00000
  ]
  /PDFXSetBleedBoxToMediaBox true
  /PDFXBleedBoxToTrimBoxOffset [
    0.00000
    0.00000
    0.00000
    0.00000
  ]
  /PDFXOutputIntentProfile (Coated FOGRA39 \050ISO 12647-2:2004\051)
  /PDFXOutputConditionIdentifier ()
  /PDFXOutputCondition ()
  /PDFXRegistryName ()
  /PDFXTrapped /False

  /CreateJDFFile false
  /Description <<
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
    /CHS <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>
    /CHT <feff4f7f752890194e9b8a2d5b9a53ef5efa7acb970089816aa267e562165fc598087b2654080020005000440046002f0041002d003100620020898f7bc47684002000410064006f006200650020005000440046002065874ef6ff0c5f8c8005662f96fb5b5065874ef69577671f51325b5862165efa7acb6a9468487684002000490053004f00206a196e96300295dc65bc5efa7acb7b2654080020005000440046002f00410020898f7bc476840020005000440046002065874ef676848a737d308cc78a0aff0c8acb53c395b1300a004100630072006f00620061007400204f7f7528800563075357300b30025efa7acb76840020005000440046002065874ef653ef4ee54f7f75280020004100630072006f0062006100740020548c002000410064006f00620065002000520065006100640065007200200035002e00300020621666f49ad87248672c958b555f3002>
    /CZE <FEFF0054006f0074006f0020006e006100730074006100760065006e00ed00200070006f0075017e0069006a007400650020006b0020007600790074007600e101590065006e00ed00200064006f006b0075006d0065006e0074016f002000410064006f006200650020005000440046002c0020006b00740065007200e9002000700072006f006a0064006f00750020006b006f006e00740072006f006c006f00750020006e00650062006f0020006d0075007300ed0020007600790068006f0076006f0076006100740020006e006f0072006d011b002000490053004f0020005000440046002f0041002d00310062002000750072010d0065006e00e9002000700072006f00200064006c006f00750068006f0064006f006200e90020007500630068006f007600e1007600e1006e00ed00200028006100720063006800690076006100630069002900200065006c0065006b00740072006f006e00690063006b00fd0063006800200064006f006b0075006d0065006e0074016f002e0020002000440061006c016100ed00200069006e0066006f0072006d0061006300650020006f0020007600790074007600e101590065006e00ed00200064006f006b0075006d0065006e0074016f00200050004400460020007600790068006f00760075006a00ed006300ed006300680020006e006f0072006d011b0020005000440046002f00410020006e0061006a00640065007400650020007600200075017e00690076006100740065006c0073006b00e900200070015900ed00720075010d006300650020004100630072006f0062006100740075002e002000200056007900740076006f01590065006e00e900200064006f006b0075006d0065006e0074007900200050004400460020006c007a00650020006f007400650076015900ed007400200076002000610070006c0069006b0061006300690020004100630072006f006200610074002000610020004100630072006f006200610074002000520065006100640065007200200035002e0030002000610020006e006f0076011b006a016100ed00630068002e>
    /DAN <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>
    /DEU <feff00560065007200770065006e00640065006e0020005300690065002000640069006500730065002000450069006e007300740065006c006c0075006e00670065006e0020007a0075006d002000450072007300740065006c006c0065006e00200076006f006e0020005000440046002f0041002d00310062002d006b006f006d00700061007400690062006c0065006e002000410064006f006200650020005000440046002d0044006f006b0075006d0065006e00740065006e002e0020005000440046002f0041002d003100620020006900730074002000650069006e0065002000490053004f002d004e006f0072006d0020006600fc0072002000640069006500200041007200630068006900760069006500720075006e006700200065006c0065006b00740072006f006e00690073006300680065007200200044006f006b0075006d0065006e00740065002e0020005700650069007400650072006500200049006e0066006f0072006d006100740069006f006e0065006e0020007a0075006d002000450072007300740065006c006c0065006e00200076006f006e0020005000440046002f0041002d00310062002d006b006f006d00700061007400690062006c0065006e0020005000440046002d0044006f006b0075006d0065006e00740065006e002000660069006e00640065006e002000530069006500200069006d0020004100630072006f006200610074002d00480061006e00640062007500630068002e002000450072007300740065006c006c007400650020005000440046002d0044006f006b0075006d0065006e007400650020006b00f6006e006e0065006e0020006d006900740020004100630072006f00620061007400200075006e0064002000410064006f00620065002000520065006100640065007200200035002e00300020006f0064006500720020006800f600680065007200200067006500f600660066006e00650074002000770065007200640065006e002e>
    /ESP <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>
    /ETI <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>
    /FRA <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>
    /GRE <FEFF03A703C103B703C303B903BC03BF03C003BF03B903AE03C303C403B5002003B103C503C403AD03C2002003C403B903C2002003C103C503B803BC03AF03C303B503B903C2002003B303B903B1002003BD03B1002003B403B703BC03B903BF03C503C103B303AE03C303B503C403B5002003AD03B303B303C103B103C603B1002000410064006F006200650020005000440046002003C003BF03C5002003C003C103AD03C003B503B9002003BD03B1002003B503BB03B503B303C703B803BF03CD03BD002003AE002003BD03B1002003C303C503BC03BC03BF03C103C603CE03BD03BF03BD03C403B103B9002003BC03B5002003C403BF0020005000440046002F0041002D00310062002C002003AD03BD03B1002003C003C103CC03C403C503C003BF002000490053004F002003B303B903B1002003C403B703BD002003BC03B103BA03C103BF03C003C103CC03B803B503C303BC03B7002003B403B903B103C603CD03BB03B103BE03B70020002803B103C103C703B503B903BF03B803AD03C403B703C303B70029002003B703BB03B503BA03C403C103BF03BD03B903BA03CE03BD002003B503B303B303C103AC03C603C903BD002E00200020039303B903B1002003C003B503C103B903C303C303CC03C403B503C103B503C2002003C003BB03B703C103BF03C603BF03C103AF03B503C2002003C303C703B503C403B903BA03AC002003BC03B5002003C403B7002003B403B703BC03B903BF03C503C103B303AF03B1002003B503B303B303C103AC03C603C903BD0020005000440046002003C003BF03C5002003C303C503BC03BC03BF03C103C603CE03BD03BF03BD03C403B103B9002003BC03B5002003C403BF002003C003C103CC03C403C503C003BF0020005000440046002F0041002C002003B103BD03B103C403C103AD03BE03C403B5002003C303C403BF03BD002003BF03B403B703B303CC002003C703C103AE03C303B703C2002003C403BF03C50020004100630072006F006200610074002E0020002003A403B1002003AD03B303B303C103B103C603B10020005000440046002003C003BF03C5002003B803B1002003B403B703BC03B903BF03C503C103B303B703B803BF03CD03BD002003B103BD03BF03AF03B303BF03C503BD002003BC03B50020004100630072006F006200610074002003BA03B103B9002000410064006F00620065002000520065006100640065007200200035002E0030002003BA03B103B9002003BD03B503CC03C403B503C103B503C2002003B503BA03B403CC03C303B503B903C2002E>
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
    /HUN <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>
    /ITA <feff005500740069006c0069007a007a006100720065002000710075006500730074006500200069006d0070006f007300740061007a0069006f006e006900200070006500720020006c006100200063007200650061007a0069006f006e006500200064006900200064006f00630075006d0065006e00740069002000410064006f0062006500200050004400460020006300680065002000760065007200720061006e006e006f00200073006f00740074006f0070006f007300740069002000610020007600650072006900660069006300610020006f00200063006800650020006400650076006f006e006f002000650073007300650072006500200063006f006e0066006f0072006d006900200061006c006c006f0020007300740061006e00640061007200640020005000440046002f0041002d00310062002c00200075006e006f0020007300740061006e0064006100720064002000490053004f00200070006500720020006c006100200063006f006e00730065007200760061007a0069006f006e00650020002d002000610072006300680069007600690061007a0069006f006e00650020002d002000610020006c0075006e0067006f0020007400650072006d0069006e006500200064006900200064006f00630075006d0065006e0074006900200065006c0065007400740072006f006e006900630069002e002000500065007200200075006c0074006500720069006f0072006900200069006e0066006f0072006d0061007a0069006f006e0069002000730075006c006c006100200063007200650061007a0069006f006e006500200064006900200075006e002000500044004600200063006f006e0066006f0072006d006500200061002000740061006c00650020007300740061006e0064006100720064002c002000660061007200650020007200690066006500720069006d0065006e0074006f00200061006c006c0061002000470075006900640061002000640065006c006c0027007500740065006e007400650020006400690020004100630072006f006200610074002e002000c800200070006f00730073006900620069006c006500200061007000720069007200650020006900200064006f00630075006d0065006e007400690020005000440046002000630072006500610074006900200063006f006e0020004100630072006f006200610074002c002000410064006f00620065002000520065006100640065007200200035002e003000200065002000760065007200730069006f006e006900200073007500630063006500730073006900760065002e>
    /JPN <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>
    /KOR <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>
    /LTH <FEFF004e006100750064006f006b0069007400650020016100690075006f007300200070006100720061006d006500740072007500730020006e006f0072011700640061006d0069002000730075006b0075007200740069002000410064006f00620065002000500044004600200064006f006b0075006d0065006e007400750073002c0020006b0075007200690075006f00730020007200650069006b00690061002000740069006b00720069006e00740069002000610072006200610020006b007500720069006500200074007500720069002000610074006900740069006b007400690020005000440046002f0041002d00310062002c00200065006c0065006b00740072006f006e0069006e0069017300200064006f006b0075006d0065006e0074017300200069006c00670061006c00610069006b0069006f00200073006100750067006f006a0069006d006f00200028006100720063006800790076006100760069006d006f0029002000490053004f0020007300740061006e00640061007200740105002e0020004400610075006700690061007500200069006e0066006f0072006d006100630069006a006f0073002c0020006b0061006900700020006b00750072007400690020007300750020005000440046002f00410020007300750064006500720069006e0061006d00750073002000500044004600200064006f006b0075006d0065006e007400750073002c00200072006100730069007400650020004100630072006f0062006100740020006e006100750064006f0074006f006a006f0020007600610064006f00760065002e0020002000530075006b00750072007400750073002000500044004600200064006f006b0075006d0065006e007400750073002000670061006c0069006d006100200061007400690064006100720079007400690020007300750020004100630072006f006200610074002000690072002000410064006f00620065002000520065006100640065007200200035002e00300020006200650069002000760117006c00650073006e0117006d00690073002000760065007200730069006a006f006d00690073002e>
    /LVI <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>
    /NLD (Gebruik deze instellingen om Adobe PDF-bestanden te maken die moeten worden gecontroleerd of die moeten voldoen aan PDF/A-1b, een ISO-standaard voor de langetermijnopslag \(archivering\) van elektronische documenten. Zie voor meer informatie over het maken van PDF/A-compatibele PDF-documenten de Acrobat-gebruikershandleiding. PDF-documenten kunnen worden geopend met Acrobat en Adobe Reader 5.0 en hoger.)
    /NOR <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>
    /POL <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>
    /PTB <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>
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
    /SKY <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>
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
    /SUO <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>
    /SVE <feff0041006e007600e4006e006400200064006500730073006100200069006e0073007400e4006c006c006e0069006e0067006100720020006600f60072002000610074007400200073006b006100700061002000410064006f006200650020005000440046002d0064006f006b0075006d0065006e007400200073006f006d00200073006b00610020006b006f006e00740072006f006c006c006500720061007300200065006c006c0065007200200073006f006d0020006d00e50073007400650020006600f6006c006a00610020007300740061006e00640061007200640065006e0020005000440046002f0041002d00310062002c00200065006e002000490053004f002d007300740061006e00640061007200640020006600f600720020006c00e5006e00670074006900640073006200650076006100720061006e006400650020002800610072006b00690076006500720069006e0067002900200061007600200065006c0065006b00740072006f006e00690073006b006100200064006f006b0075006d0065006e0074002e0020004d0065007200200069006e0066006f0072006d006100740069006f006e0020006f006d002000680075007200200064007500200073006b00610070006100720020005000440046002d0064006f006b0075006d0065006e007400200073006f006d0020006600f6006c006a006500720020007300740061006e00640061007200640065006e0020005000440046002f0041002000660069006e006e00730020006900200061006e007600e4006e00640061007200680061006e00640062006f006b0065006e0020006600f600720020004100630072006f006200610074002e00200053006b006100700061006400650020005000440046002d0064006f006b0075006d0065006e00740020006b0061006e002000f600700070006e006100730020006d006500640020004100630072006f006200610074002000730061006d0074002000410064006f00620065002000520065006100640065007200200035002e00300020006f00630068002000730065006e006100720065002000760065007200730069006f006e00650072002e>
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
    /ENU (Use these settings to create Adobe PDF documents that are to be checked or must conform to PDF/A-1b, an ISO standard for the long-term preservation \(archival\) of electronic documents.  For more information on creating PDF/A compliant PDF documents, please refer to the Acrobat User Guide.  Created PDF documents can be opened with Acrobat and Adobe Reader 5.0 and later.)
  >>
>> setdistillerparams
<<
  /HWResolution [2400 2400]
  /PageSize [612.000 792.000]
>> setpagedevice

