












































  


Using Integral E-Portfolio to learn Linear Algebra

M.Isabel Garcı́a-Planas
Departement de Matemàtica Applicada I

Universitat de Politècnica Catalunya
Barcelona, Spain

maria.isabel.garcia@upc.edu

Judit Taberna
Departament d’Expressió Gràfica Arquitectònica I

Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya
Barcelona, Spain

judit.taberna@gmail.com

Abstract—The use of e-portfolio is becoming common
in the learning and assessment of students. This is due to
the need of teachers to enhance student autonomy making
them to reflect on the process of learning. Lately, we have
worked with different software, facilitating its generation
and use. In this paper, the recent experience in the use of
e-portfolio for undergraduate students of the Universitat
Politècnica de Catalunya are set.

Index Terms—E-portfolio, integral e-portfolio, linear
algebra.

1. INTRODUCTION

Throughout history the use of portfolios was
more common in other areas of knowledge than
mathematics in general and linear algebra in partic-
ular, as, for example, in architecture and arts fields.
The emergence of Information and Communication
Technology (ICT) has caused a change in the world
of education and one tool in within the ICT context
is the use of e-portfolio.

In recent years is becoming habitual use of the
electronic portfolio for learning and assessment
of students. This is due to the need for teachers
empower students through reflection on their own
learning processes ([17]). The electronic portfolio
not only is an electronic learning portfolio, its great
potential could be used in other professional fields.
In the field of education has extended its use as a
technique for gathering evidence and competencies
rather than integrating evaluation in the teaching-
learning process by collecting samples of learning
activities at key moments and reflecting on achieve-
ments and difficulties encountered in the scope of
both generic and specific competencies that had
been proposed, showing their ability and progress.

In the last years several authors work in intro-
ducing the e-portfolio at the higher education, as

we can see in [2], [4], [5], [8], [10],[11], [13], [17]
and [16] for example.

2. LINEAR ALGEBRA FOR UNDERGRADUATES

It is well known that Linear algebra is funda-
mental in different areas of sciences. Because of
multiple problems can be modelled by means linear
systems where linear algebra became essential to
obtain and discuss the solution.

Nevertheless, one of the main difficulties to over-
come in the first year courses of university students
enrolled in different programs other than the career
math is that they do not see the importance that
mathematics may have in their fields of interest.
This can seriously affect their motivation in the
course, and its ultimate success. This effect appears
to be more pronounced in the first year of linear
algebra due to its abstract factor, while the calculus
find it easier to think that may be useful.

To address the question that every teacher of
linear algebra often heard: why do we need to know
that? we can make use of new technologies and in
particular we can use the e-portfolio.

After to propose several projects about real life
problems, students can place their progress in the e-
portfolio. Through the e-portfolio, the students can
discuss among peers and with the teacher.

In this paper we present a model of e-portfolio
for the subject of linear algebra. This model will be
implemented in engineering studies of the higher
technical School of Engineering at the Universitat
Politècnica de Catalunya.

To prepare this e-portfolio has been essential
define the goals which we want that the students
reach as well as the topics that we consider basic
to overcome objectives.

Mathematics and Computers in Science and Industry

ISBN: 978-1-61804-247-7 75



The topics include linear system equations, vector
spaces, matrices, linear maps, the matrix of a linear
transformation, change of basis, eigenvalues and
eigenvectors (see [12] and [15] for an undergraduate
course of linear algebra).

3. E-PORTFOLIO

Portfolio is a word of French origin “portefeuille”
meaning briefcase for carrying books, papers, etc.
In the field in question, the university teaching, the
word comes from “Portfolio Assessment” or “Port-
folio process”, so it has the sense of “assessment
folder” or a broader form of “learning portfolio”. In
the case where this activity takes place on a digital
platform called an e-portfolio. More specifically in
our context, the portfolio is a method of teaching,
learning and assessment is the contribution of differ-
ent types of productions by students through which
they can judge their abilities in the context of a
discipline or field of study. These productions staff
report process followed by the student, allowing him
and others to see their efforts and achievements in
relation to the learning objectives and evaluation
criteria previously established.

A. Different ways of using the e-Portfolio

The e-portfolio allows students and teachers, cre-
ate and manage a virtual space with both personal,
academic and professional (see [3]); turn incorpo-
rating a review and justification of the importance
of these activities have.

a) E-Portfolio Evaluation:
It allows to assess the achievement of specific

criteria to obtain a degree or work.
b) E-Learning Portfolio:

Allows providing information on learning ob-
jectives incorporating both self-reflection and
the student and the teacher

c) E-Portfolio “Demonstration of best practices”:
Allows submit information to specific audi-
ences or achievements.

d) E-Portfolio Transition:
Let us bring evidence and records useful in
times of transition or passage of an academic
level to another

Regardless of the mode of use of e-portfolio,
the process of design, creation and development in-

volves data collection, organization, reorganization
and presentation.

Hellen C. Barrett in [6] proposes a balance
between all the possibilities of use of e-Portfolio
and is represented by means the graphic Figure
1. Specifically in the graph, the author proposes a

Learning
Experiences

Learning
Outcomes or

Standards
Hyperlinks to

supporting
reflections and

documents
Hyperlinks to
digital archive

Interaction

Balancing
the Two Faces of

ePortfolios

Portfolio as
Workspace

Process

Portfolio as
Showcase

Product

Organization:
Thematic

Organization:
Chronological

Reflection:
Immediate

Reflection:
Retrospective

Primary
Purpose:

Learning or
Reflection

Primary
Purpose:

Showcase or
Accountability

Reflective
Journal

(Blog entries
over time)

 Pages/screens
organized

thematically
with rationale

Collection
of Artifacts

Selection

Documentation of Learning Documentation of Achievement

Evaluation
Summative Assessment

OF Learning

Feedback
Formative Assessment

FOR Learning

©2009, Helen C. Barrett, Ph.D.
http://electronicportfolios.org/balance/

Main Activity:
Learning & Collaboration

Main Activity:
Showcasing Achievement

Personal Learning Environment Assessment Management System

Audience:
Primarily Internal

Audience:
Primarily External

Social
Networks

Presentation

Multiple presentation portfolios
depending on purpose and audience)

Direction
(Goals)

role of teacher
& peers

role of teacher
& self

Figure 1. Balancing the Two Faces of ePortfolios [6]

balance between different aspects of the e-Portfolio
that interact along a continuum such as: Process-
Product, Immediate reflection-Reflection retrospec-
tive, Reflective journal-Organized web pages, For-
mative evaluation-Summative evaluation, Learn-
ing documentation-Documentation of achievements,
among others.

4. THE E-PORTFOLIO AND LINEAR ALGEBRA
COURSE

After analyzing the different types of e-portfolio,
firstly we thought that the most appropriate model
of e-portfolio would be used in a course of linear
algebra is the “e-Portfolio as a repository of learning
experiences”

By means this kind of e-portfolio, teachers and
students can work activities and teaching and learn-
ing using the Internet. More specifically

a) The student uses the e-portfolio for:
1) Collect, systematically, the learning

achievements,
2) Self-assess how to acquire and develop

the skills required in the subjects they are
studying.

Mathematics and Computers in Science and Industry

ISBN: 978-1-61804-247-7 76



3) Self-assess their learning outcome.
b) The teacher uses the e-portfolio for:

1) Collect and place the work done by stu-
dents in their courses.

2) Evaluate how to acquire and develop
skills by students through the implemen-
tation of some activities (with the tutor,
with the peer group, independently, etc..).

3) Evaluate the outcome of learning.
But finally and after observing that the different
uses of e-portfolio are not exclusive and all of them
can be used simultaneously, we believe that the
most appropriate is to use the “integral e-portfolio”,
that is to say an e-portfolio that integrates all the
different uses.

With this type of e-portfolio, cooperative learning
is stimulated, this type of learning is very important
for engineering studies (see [1]).

5. INTEGRAL E-PORTFOLIO EDITION

To implement the integral e-portfolio we use the
integrated Moodle and Mahara (Mahoodle) plat-
form, as well as the simultaneous use of platforms
Exabis inside Moodle and Google Sites.

Different authors as for example Diana Bri,
Miguel Garcı́a, Hugo Colls, Jaime Lloret in [7]),
analyze educational platforms in order to facilite the
decision about platform on which to choose.

“Mahoodle is the usual name given to the joining
of the systems Mahara and Moodle. Mahara is an
open source e-Portfolio and social networking web
application and Moodle it is an open source e-
learning platform, also known as a Learning Man-
agement System, or Virtual Learning Environment.
Both systems have built-in support for each other in
the form of single sign-on and transfer of content
or export different types of objects from Moodle to
Mahara (API Portfolio) and to import objects from
Mahara to Moodle (API repository). You can only
link one to one Moodle Mahara either place the level
of an individual institution or individual institution.
You can not link Moodle in various institutions in
Mahara. Exabis is also an open source of e-Portfolio
able to be connected to Moodle by means of a plug.
We are using the e-portfolio 4.1 version for Moodle,
“My Portfolio” in Exabis, let us users upload files,

Figure 2. E-portfolio Mahoodle model,

Figure 3. E-portfolio Exabis inside Moodle

In figures 2 and 3, images of two models of e-
portfolios that have been made using Mahoodle and
Exabis + Moodle respectively have been presented.

With respect Figure 2 we have included different
sections to help to the students to configure their e-
portfolio. The selected model is in such a way that
fits the needs of the course, although students can
add more paragraphs to make visible their portfolio
and can display more information of the minimum
required for the course. In the left side appear the
icons to introduce the profile and curriculum, a
place to put files and a place to keep a journal.
In the center the icons that allow you to organize
personalized portfolio and the right side is the place
to share (links to discussion groups) set the privacy
level of each part of the portfolio.

In Figure 3 different pictures called categories
where each of them gives access to different com-
petencies are observed. It is possible to access to
multiple frames and assign different categories. In
this particular case, we have chosen three categories
for storing information, one of one is for the student
profile, there is also access to a table that is used for
notes and drafts and also there is network access.

The Exabis platform is simpler than Mahara
however is easier to import and export materials

Mathematics and Computers in Science and Industry

ISBN: 978-1-61804-247-7 77



from Moodle.

6. EXPERIENCES IN USING E-PORTFOLIO

In our experience with students from the Univer-
sitat Politècnica de Catalunya has been taken into
account that the learning activities for the devel-
opment of an electronic portfolio are setting learn-
ing objectives, data collection, peer review, feed-
back from peers, reflection, and sharing of materi-
als. These activities include gathering knowledge,
organization, reorganization, presentation, sharing,
application, knowledge accumulation and manage-
ment.

During the year 2012-13 started a pilot imple-
mentation of the e-portfolio in the student test using
Mahoodle management system within the Athena
Labs platform This project is developing and testing
with a selected few number of student participation.
In the year 2013-14 the pilot has expanded to the
use of Exabis + Moodle. With this assay we can
compare advantages and disadvantages according
with Mahara or Exabis was used.

The academic results obtained by the students
who have participated in this pilot have been better
than those of other students. However, the small
number of students who have participated not allow
to extrapolate results. The next academic year 2014-
15 will launch this pilot but in this case the assay
will involve all students enrolled in the first year
of undergraduate degrees in Industrial Technology,
Chemical Engineering and Materials Engineering.

The study has been performed on the portfolio
to be used in the subject of algebra can be applied
to other materials, but the structure of the portfolio
must be adapted to the subject. In fact, during the
academic year 2011-12, we conducted a pilot study
for the subject of drawing, but in this case the online
application used to be Google Sites. Participants
were chosen from among students of the School of
Architecture of Barcelona of Universitat Politècnica
de Catalunya, studying the subject of drawing I
corresponding to the first year of studies. The pi-
lot test was conducted in two groups called M13
and T21 with a share of 82.19% and 92.14% of
students, respectively. The procedure followed was
to integrate an e-portfolio in their academic activ-
ities distinguishing traditional teaching of distance
teaching. Students also introduce its curriculum and

Figure 4. Source: ETSAB, Drawing Course I, year 2011-12

the work, should develop a short summary including
both text and images summarizing the results of the
activities. The instrument used as we discussed was
the Google Sites platform.

7. CONCLUSION

As a conclusion we show some advantages of
using portfolio

a) Promotes global formative assessment
b) Integrate generic and specific skills
c) It allows the student to demonstrate the depth

of their learning,
d) Provides opportunities to reflect on their learn-

ing and how far they have come
e) Learning to learn and take more responsibility

in their learning process
f) Provides opportunities and evidence to evaluate

teaching
g) Facilitates horizontal and vertical coordination

of content (feedback from colleagues, depart-
ment, etc.).

Through our experiences we can conclude that
the e-portfolio through Mahoodle is a good tool to
link teachers with students and vice versa, and to
optimize this tool is necessary to improve the inter-
connection between Mahara and Moodle platforms,
and also Exabis and Moodle.

In order to enable students to actively use the e-
portfolio is necessary for teachers to prepare guide-
lines and provide a reference template.

Moreover teachers must prepare and plan the
course comprehensively in order to coordinate the
different tasks carried out in the classroom with the
work of the e-portfolio.

Mathematics and Computers in Science and Industry

ISBN: 978-1-61804-247-7 78



REFERENCES
[1] I. Asshaari, H. Othman, N. Razali, N.M. Tawil, F.H.M. Ariff,

Comparison between Level of Students’ Responses toward
Cooperative Learning in Mathematics Engineering Courses
at UKM. Wseas Transactions on Advances in Engineering
Education, 8, (2), (2011), pp. 53-61.

[2] M.A. Bairral, R.T. dos Santos, E-Portfolio Improving Learning
in Mathematics Pre-Service Teacher. Digital Education Review,
21. (2012), pp. 1-12.

[3] E. Barberà, G. Bautista, A. Espasa, T. Guasch, Portfo-
lio electrónico: desarrollo de competencias profesionales
en la red.(2006). http://www.uoc.edu/rusc/3/2/dt/esp/barbera

bautista espasa guasch.pdf
[4] R. Barragán, El portafolio, metodologa de evaluación y apren-

dizaje de cara al nuevo espacio Europeo de Educación superior.
Una experiencia práctica en la Universidad de Sevilla. Revista
Latinoamericana de Tecnologı́a Educativa, 4 (1),(2005), pp.
121139.

[5] H. Barrett, Create Your Own Electronic Portfolio (using off-the-
shelf software). Learning and Leading with Technology, (2000).

[6] H. Barrett, Balancing the Two Faces of ePortfolios. Educação,
Formação & Tecnologias, 3 (1), (2010), pp. 6-14.

[7] D. Bri, M. Garcı́a, H. Coll, J. LLoret, A Study of Virtual
Learning Environments. Wseas Transactions on Advances in
Engineering Education, 6, (1), (2009), pp. 33-43.

[8] G.M. Brandes, N. Boskic, E-portfolios: From description to
analysis. International Review of Research in Open and Dis-
tance Learning, 9, (2),(2008), pp. 1-17.

[9] F. Campos Sánchez, F. Abarca Álvarez, (2014) La rúbrica
como herramienta de enseñanza, aprendizaje y evaluación del
urbanismo. Innovaggogia 2014.

[10] S.C. Cismas, Effective Foreign Language Portfolios in En-
gineering Education . Wseas Transactions on Advances in
Engineering Education 6, (11), (2009), pp. 383-398.

[11] R. C. Costa, The use of the e-portfolios in the student’s learning
at the Federal e Institute of Education, Science and Technology
of Maranhão/Campus Codó. Seropédica, Rio de Janeiro,
UFRRJ/PPGEA (Master Dissertation in Education). (2009).
http://www.ia.ufrrj.br/ppgea/dissertacao/Ronaldo%20Campelo%
20da%20Costa.pdf

[12] M.I. Garcia-Planas, J.L. Domı́nguez, “Introducción a la teorı́a
de matrices positivas. Aplicaciones. Ed. Iniciativa Digital
Politècnica, Barcelona, (2013).

[13] S. Jones, (2008). E-portfolios and how they can support Per-
sonalisation. Improving learning through technology. Becta UK
(2008).

[14] M. Kimball, (2002) “The Web Portfolio Guide: Creating Elec-
tronic Portfolios for the We”, Longman.

[15] D.C. Lay, Linear Algebra and Its Applications. Addison-
Wesley, (1994).

[16] C. Mccowan, W. Harper, K. Hauville, (2005). Student E-
Portfolio: The Successful Implementation of an E-Portfolio
across a Major Australian University. Australian Journal of
Career Development. 14, (2), pp. 40-51.

[17] A. Pitarch, A. Álvarez, J. Monferrer, El ePEL: la gestión del
aprendizaje a lo largo de la vida. Portafolios electrónicos y Ed-
ucación Superior en España.http://www.um.es/ead/Red U/m3/.
(2009).

Mathematics and Computers in Science and Industry

ISBN: 978-1-61804-247-7 79




