












































 

THE 3D DOCUMENTATION OF PROJECTED WOODEN WINDOWS (THE ROSHANS) 

IN THE OLD CITY OF JEDDAH (SAUDI ARABIA) USING IMAGE-BASED TECHNIQUES 
 

 

 

A. ALITANY
 a, 

*, E. REDONDO
 a
, A. ADAS

 b 

 

 
a
 Dept. EGAI ,  Expresió Gráfica Arquitectónica I ETS Arquitectura Barcelona-UPC, Barcelona, Spain 

ayman.arch@gmail.com  

ernesto.redondo@upc.edu 

 
b
 Faculty of Environmental Design, King Abdul Aziz University- KAU, Jeddah , Saudi Arabia 

aaadas@kau.edu.sa  
 

 

 

 

 

KEY WORDS: Image-based 3D modelling, Architectural Heritage Documentation, The Roshan, The Historical city of Jeddah 

 

 

ABSTRACT: 

 

The Roshan represents one of the most characteristic aspects of traditional architecture in Hejaz (Saudi Arabia) and a frequent 

feature in most of the Historical Jeddah’s heritage buildings. The old city has witnessed continued degradation recently, which has 

caused the loss its traditional architecture and hundreds of these projected wooden windows. Documentation is a major step towards 

heritage preservation, whether threatened by man-made or natural factors. However, due to the absence of specialists and experts an 

architectural database of the Roshans does not exist. Surveying these architectural elements is a very laborious and difficult process 

when using conventional methodologies including the laser sensors approach mainly due to the onsite limitations. Establishing an 

architectural database of the Roshans is the main objective in this research paper, based on the continuous development of data 

capture and modelling methodologies that allows the accurate recording of even the most complex and intricate details and patterns 

which are typically found in Roshans. Recent advances in image based techniques (digital close-range photogrammetry and 

computer vision) such as the semi-automated solutions of Dense Stereo Matching (DSM) and 3D modelling software has offered an 

accurate, inexpensive and practical solution to surveying, documenting and reconstructing these architectural heritage features. In 

this paper the application of these methods is tested and evaluated on the Roshans in the old city of Jeddah.   

 

 

                                                                 

*  Corresponding author.  

1. INTRODUCTION 

The Roshan is clearly the most visual element that is 

characteristic of most, if not all, of historical Jeddah’s heritage 

buildings. Throughout the years the historical city of Jeddah has 

been subject to continued degradation with many aspects of its 

architectural heritage being threatened by man-made and natural 

factors. Indeed, during the last fifty years Jeddah has lost many 

of its historical buildings as well as many of the valuable 

Roshan’s elements. These features are slowly disappearing 

without any records, primarily due to the absence of specialists 

and experts in architectural documentation and surveying.  

 

Nowadays, these wooden elements remain in numerous 

buildings hanging on the facades. Thus, documentation is a 

major step towards the preservation of these wooden elements. 

However, surveying these architectural elements is very 

laborious and presents many practical and logistical problems 

when using conventional measurement such as 3D laser sensors 

methods, due to site obstacles and the complexity of Roshans; 

indeed, these features are scattered on various building with 

variety in shapes and levels which makes traditional methods of 

surveying incredibly difficult (Figure 1).  

 

In recent history, 3D modelling techniques have been rapidly 

advancing with part of the focus on developing these 

technologies for applications such as architectural heritage 

documentation. The ability to capture accurate details and the 

degree of automation vary widely from one approach to another. 

For example, image-based modelling techniques have been 

successfully used for many years (Remondino and El-Hakim, 

2006). Photogrammetry and computer vision are generally used 

to capture basic shapes and details from high-resolution digital 

images. Recent advances technology have allowed semi-

automated and automated solutions based on Dense Stereo 

Matching (DSM) (Furukawa and Ponce, 2007; Hirschmuller, 

2008) and 3D modelling software’s commercially availability 

offer accurate solution to obtain 3D point clouds and textured 

models. This methodology provides a cheap and practical 

solution to surveying, allowing a quick and cost effective 

method in documenting and reconstructing the architectural 

heritage elements which has enjoyed many impressive results in 

the literature (Remondino and Menna, 2008; Hullo et al., 2009; 

Alby et al., 2009;). Using these approaches in order to create a 

3D database of architectural heritage is the main objective in 

this research work. Thus, we propose an appropriate 

ISPRS Annals of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume II-5/W1, 2013
XXIV International CIPA Symposium, 2 – 6 September 2013, Strasbourg, France

This contribution has been peer-reviewed. The double-blind peer-review was conducted on the basis of the full paper. 7



 

 

methodology developed from the image-based 3D modelling 

techniques that allow accurate, fast, cost effective means with a 

high level of mobility and flexibility for recording all complex 

and intricate details and patterns which are typically found in 

Roshan and other historically important wooden features.  

 

To these ends the following paper is divided into six sections. 

First, section two provides some general information about the 

historical city of Jeddah, including the provisions already in 

place to preserve buildings of historic value and some of the 

problems that have contributed to the degradation of these 

buildings. This is followed by section three which discusses the 

structural components and description of the typical Roshan 

found in the historical city of Jeddah. Section four then turns to 

the surveying methodology in the application of digital close-

range photogrammetry and DSM technology which were tested 

and evaluated on several Roshans and their ornamented parts. 

Section five comes in the form of an accuracy report on the 

project and the methodology employed where Photomodeler 

Scanner
©

 (PMS
©

) and Rhinoceros
©

 software for 3D modelling 

process were considered. PMS
©

 is a program that helps extract 

measurement and from images. By using a digital camera as an 

input device, the software allows to capture accurate detail in 

short time. Section six provides a conclusion on this research 

project.  

 

 
Figure1. Examples of different types of Roshans in the 

Historical City of Jeddah. 

 

2. THE HISTORICAL CITY OF JEDDAH 

The Historical City of Jeddah (Al-Balad [the village]) is located 

on the eastern shore of the Red Sea, almost halfway among the 

northern and southern borders of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. 

Jeddah is classified as one of the most important historical sites 

in the Middle East in Hejaz region in Saudi Arabia as it is still 

preserves a coherent unity and a specific urban character. 

Jeddah’s city centre still contains the multi-story houses built of 

coral stone and plaster adorned with teak doorways and 

projected latticework windows that typified the architecture in 

ports on both sides of the Red Sea until the 19th century. The 

Old City of Jeddah is characterized by a dense urban pattern 

and narrow alleys with compact blocks exploiting the largest 

part of the plots covering an area of about 1 km
2
. Most of the 

structures making up the dense city are less than 200 years old 

and generally consist of three and four-storey houses. The 

National Antiquities Regulation has been in place since 1980 

and guarantees state protection of buildings classified as 

historically valuable. The work of Robert Matthew constitutes 

the basis of the current building regulations enforced in the old 

city which includes a complete listing of the old city houses and 

a three level tier classification of the traditional buildings based 

on their architectural and historic significance (Matthew, 1972). 

Class A buildings were deemed of national significance, class B 

of regional and class C has having local significance. Despite 

this classification system the regulation has apparently failed to 

protect many of the historic buildings in Jeddah. Out of 557 

historically important buildings (Figure 2), now only 312 

remain including many tower houses with over 1500 Roshans 

which are likely to disappear if the current neglect continues. 

This problem is exacerbated with the challenges presented by 

the harsh Red Sea weather and general passage of time. 

 

3. THE ROSHAN  

3.1 Description 

The Roshan characterizes traditional architecture in Hejaz, in 

western Saudi Arabia, and considered as its emblem, the 

Roshan is clearly the most visual element that makes up most if 

not all Historical Jeddah’s heritage buildings. The term Roshan 

can be traced as far back as 1100 AD and in North Africa, 

Egypt and Yemen has come to be known as Mashrabiya. The 

Roshan is a large projecting three-sided wooden structure on a 

building’s façade, with a recognizable latticed component. A 

typical Roshan is about 2.4-2.8 m in width, 0.4 - 0.6 m in depth, 

and 2.7-3.5m in height although this can vary considerably. 

 

 
Figure 2. 1) The location of Jeddah city in Saudi Arabia, 2) 

satellite image showing the limits of the historical city of Jeddah 

property and buffer zone, 3) Robert Matthew’s classification of 

Historical buildings. 

 

However, due to the weight of the wood used, they are 

constrained to a projection depth of an average of 0.6 m, which 

is their most constant dimension. On the inside, combing the 

projection depth with the wall thickness, the Roshan is usually 

wide enough for two people to sleep, about 1.2-1.4m, and large 

enough for a person to stand at around 2.4-2.7m internal height 

(Jomah, 1992; Angawi,1995). 

ISPRS Annals of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume II-5/W1, 2013
XXIV International CIPA Symposium, 2 – 6 September 2013, Strasbourg, France

This contribution has been peer-reviewed. The double-blind peer-review was conducted on the basis of the full paper. 8



 

 

3.2 Types and parts 

The Roshan appear in many shapes and sizes with different 

levels of heights on the façades of historical buildings. Among 

the different types there are many similarities and differences, 

depending on the variance in the Roshans assembled parts. 

Some of parts are standard in all Roshans while others elements 

are additional and optional making one Roshan different from 

another. However at the same time each part has a function, and 

its presence or absence can affect the Roshans performance. 

Given the huge diversity in the types and features of Roshans 

we propose a new classification method; specifically focusing 

on the annotated shapes and parts for these architectural 

wooden structures in the Old City of Jeddah according to the 

matrix of three dimensions criteria: 1) shape complexity; 2) 

layout arrangement; and 3) height level on the façade. Despite 

this variation, all types of Roshans are ultimately composed out 

of similar main componants so the absence or presence of other 

secondary parts distinguishes the Roshan's type. Many parts can 

be observed in a typical Roshan, and can generally can be 

divided into three main structural assembled elements, from 

bottom to top, into” Base” the lower part, “Body” the middle, 

and “Head” the upper part (Figure 3). These three parts can be 

simple or complex.  

 

 
Figure 3.Exploded view of the Roshan’s parts and components. 

 

4. SURVEYING METHODOLOGY  

4.1 Description 

In the initial stages of this project, two aspects were considered: 

first, the selection of a suitable method that best fits according 

to current state of art of image-based approaches and 3D 

modelling techniques in the existing architectural heritage 

documentation; second, appreciating the variety and complexity 

of the Roshan element. Thus we divided the surveying and 

modelling procedures into three scales: 1) Main structural parts: 

base, body and head that defined the entire mass. On this scale 

we used the semi-automated digital close-range 

photogrammetry method using a calibrated camera; 2) Complex 

detailed sub-components, which are related to the main parts, 

adorned and ornamented, using DSM (Dense Stereo Matching 

approach). These two procedures are offered in several 

commercial solutions. In this project, the Photomodeler 

Scanner
©

 (PMS
©

) software has been tested on the Roshans and 

is inexpensive, flexible and an accurate solution to get textured 

models and 3D point clouds; 3) Analysis, interpretation and 

combining parts using Rhinoceros
©

 3D modelling software. In 

(Figure 4) the full process is described in schematic form.  

 

 
 

Figure 4. Schematic diagram of surveying and modelling 

process.  

 

Furthermore it is important to note that the surveying and 

modelling methods were based on the Roshans construction and 

assembling process, and architectural knowledge. During that 

general strategy, in several cases, we adopted equipments and 

techniques assistance: scissor left (15m height), sketches 

drawings and manual reference measurements. In addition, the 

process was reinforced by the geo-referencing for control points 

supporting images orientation and data acquisition process.  

 

4.2 Main Structural Parts 

We started by detecting the control points that form the 

structured parts of the Roshans and defined the relevant profiles 

extracted in semi-automatic or manually method by using 

Photomodeler Scanner
©

 (PMS
©

), a digital photogrammetry 

application.  A points-based approach from 3-8 images covered 

the Roshan total shape and we followed the 3x3 CIPA rules. 

NIKON D3100 digital camera with focal lengths 18 and 35 mm 

were used in this research and had to be calibrated through 

reference to a calibration grid. All important control points on 

the Roshan had to appear in at least every three adjacent images 

ISPRS Annals of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume II-5/W1, 2013
XXIV International CIPA Symposium, 2 – 6 September 2013, Strasbourg, France

This contribution has been peer-reviewed. The double-blind peer-review was conducted on the basis of the full paper. 9



 

 

taken. PMS
©

 required reference points marked in two or more 

of these images. In addition, the process was reinforced by 

using control points that supported image data acquisition and 

the orientation process; especially for scaling or in identifying 

the thickness of interior components of the Roshan. The 

combination of this data allowed the definition of profiles from 

the generated baselines from edges and the surfaces while 

allowing classification of the relative importance of the parts in 

these wooden elements. 

 

 
 

Figure 5. Extraction process of points and edges in PMS
©
. 

 

4.3 Complex parts 

We used the DSM as a set of tools for extracting and 

manipulating a dense pattern of point clouds from photographs, 

which allows accurate measurement for ornamented objects 

while also being flexible and cheap compared to 3D laser 

scanner technology. PMS
©

 is capable of performing modelling 

and measuring tasks with the additional attribute to scan photo 

pairs to produce point clouds and mesh surfaces. Our DSM 

experiment is presented by describing a complete process from 

acquisition images until the final result.
 
First of all, before the 

capturing images, to obtain a high level of accuracy, the camera 

calibration process was required. By photographing the 

calibration sheet, the camera defects can be managed and 

calculated through PMS
©

. The accuracy of the final results is 

related to the corrected basic parameters of the camera (focal 

length, sensor resolution, optical distortions, point coordinates). 

Once the calibration process was complete, we started to 

capture a pair of images of the ornamented objects with low 

angle; in this case good skills for photographs were needed. In 

some cases, to ensure a total coverage of the object, we used 

multi stereo pairs in order to model the entire structure (Figure 

6). It is recommended to use the camera with a fixed (non-

zoom) lens in good lighting conditions while using coded 

targets to speed up the DMS process. In addition these codes 

can be used as reference measurements which assist the 

orientation process and project validity. Moreover, it is essential 

to take additional sets in order to avoid errors during the 

acquisition process. In surveyed details we used the NIKON 

D3100 digital camera with focal lengths 18 mm. Thereafter, in 

PMS
©

, we applied the inverse distortion equations on selected 

set of images. Then, the idealized images are prepared for 

matching. Manually, we marked spread points on the object 

such as the main edges and corners and the coded targets were 

recognized in automatic mode. Subsequently, matching was 

processed by adjusting a number of parameters. As result, the 

3D point cloud is created. The best stereo pairs were chosen to 

apply DSM separately for each part. After the post processing 

step, we merged all the point clouds in the merge option.  Then 

we were able to adjust our model using triangle decimation, 

filling holes in the mesh, smoothing mesh and removing useless 

points. Finally, the 3D results can be exported into many 

standard 3D formats (DXF, 3Ds, IGS) as well as 2D ortho-

images. The duration of a single stereo pair process from data 

acquisition to exporting 3D result require less than one hour 

using PC or laptops with the creation of a 3D model not exceed 

10 to 15 minutes for processing. 

 

 
 

Figure 6. The results in PMS
© 

from one and multi stereo pairs. 

 

4.4 3D Surface Modelling and merging process 

The modelling system and management of the 3D extracted data 

from images as well as their interpretation of this data is 

performed with Rhinoceros
©

, an educational application allows 

the generation of complex surfaces. This edits and translates 

NURBS (Non-Uniform Rational B -Splines) curves, surfaces, 

and solids with no limits regarding complexity, degree or size. 

The software also supports polygon modelling, meshes and 

point clouds that allow the creation of NURBS surfaces for 

ornamented pats.  This method is relatively easy to use and 

works with many formats, which is useful for the merging and 

integration of the different parts of the model. Accurate 

positions of the Roshans corners points and its major structural 

elements were defined based on the generated 3D data of the 

control points and targets in PMS
©

 with topographic support 

and measured dimensions. In this way different surfaces were 

generated. Merging partial components was also performed on 

Rhinoceros
©

 due to the various advantages outlined above and 

based on the criteria and standards Roshan composition. This 

manual process is not easy because we had to combine different 

ISPRS Annals of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume II-5/W1, 2013
XXIV International CIPA Symposium, 2 – 6 September 2013, Strasbourg, France

This contribution has been peer-reviewed. The double-blind peer-review was conducted on the basis of the full paper. 10



 

 

types of 3D models and images with different resolutions. This 

requires removing the redundant parts of various objects and 

merging models based on initial reference points, which then 

exports the results to a visual simulation application that allows 

the appearance of the Roshan model to be shown. 

 

 
 

Figure 7. Modelling process in Rhinoceoros
© 

software. 

 

5. ACCURACY ASSESSMENT 

Generally, in order to ensure a good accuracy, we used the 

manual measurements and the distance between coded targets 

on site as reference points for scaling and orientation for the 

main structural shapes and ornamented details. In PMS
©

, the 

quality of the acquired models were assessed by the residual 

values between the image coordinates marked on the images 

and the image coordinates calculated through the calibration of 

the cameras . According to the guidelines of PMS
©

, for an 

accurate photogrammetric project the RMS residual value 

should be less than 1.0 pixel. In reviewing the acquisition 

process and analyzing several generated models of Roshans in 

PMS
©

, data was semi-automatically interpreted to define the 

outlines and edges. In Figure 8, the table shows the RMS 

residual values which represent the accuracy achieved in one of 

our examples. The largest acceptable value is 0.4 pixels and 

manually we defined an error at 0.8mm. By using DSM in 

ornamental motifs, the generated mesh surface has 466,912 

vertices and 932,643 polygons (Figure 9).   

 

 
 

Figure 8.Table of RMS residual values in points-based project. 

 

Furthermore the error compared to the actual measurement 

(0.367mm) was deemed acceptable. From another aspect, in 

some ornamented details the models can be noisy, due to many 

reasons such as an inaccurate calibration process and picking 

the wrong radius value. To obtain more precise results, these 

problems must first be resolved.   

 

 

For visualization and analysis, the texture map is strongly 

recommended. Images with good lighting and shadow 

conditions can offer this information and can be improved by 

using image editing applications that improve brightness and 

contrast and add depth to the map. 

 

 
 

Figure 9. DSM project, table shows maximum residual error. 

 

 

6. CONCLUSION  

In this part of the investigation we have presented the 

application image-based 3D modelling approach, digital 

photogrammetry and DSM techniques by using 

photogrammetric and 3D modelling software (PMS
©

 and 

Rhinoceros
©

) for the documentation of the Roshans elements 

which are considered the most important architectural heritage 

elements in Jeddah as well as the traditional architecture in 

Hejaz as a whole. In this paper, we have demonstrated that the 

stage of data acquisition is easy to process for the Roshans; few 

recommendations are needed and it does not require a high level 

of knowledge in photogrammetry.  

 

The proposed methodology is presented in three steps for 3D 

reconstruction of the Roshans: first, main structural parts 

modelling by using photogrammetry; second, a complex 

ornamented details using DSM approach; and finally, the 

surface modelling and merging processes. These solutions are 

perfectly feasible, accurate, inexpensive, flexible and fast 

despite the logistical difficulties on site and the Roshans 

complexity, ornamental details and intricacies of location. The 

length of the entire process depends on the complexity of the 

Roshan. It takes 2-3 hours to create a complete model of a 

normal Roshan. 
 

The results demonstrate the capability of close-range 

photogrammetry in accurate 3D modelling. The obtained 

precision in the 3D models corresponds perfectly which is 

required for any further work such as GIS, reconstruction using 

CAD/CAM technology, BIM and using Virtual Reality (VR) or 

Augmented Reality (AR) for visualization and educational 

purposes (Figure 10). To conclude the application and 

integration of different measurement and 3D modelling 

techniques are useful in effective cultural heritage preservation 

and documentation. 

 

ISPRS Annals of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume II-5/W1, 2013
XXIV International CIPA Symposium, 2 – 6 September 2013, Strasbourg, France

This contribution has been peer-reviewed. The double-blind peer-review was conducted on the basis of the full paper. 11



 

 

 
 

Figure 10.The Using of Augmented Reality (AR) technology. 

 

 
 

Figure 11.Final 3D textured models  

 

7. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS  

We would like to thank: 

-The Municipality of historical Jeddah, Saudi Arabia;  

-Department of Architecture in the Faculty of Environmental 

Design in King Abdulaziz University (KAU), Jeddah, Saudi 

Arabia.  

8. REFERENCES  

References from Books: 

Guidi, G., Remondino, F., 2012: 3D modeling from real data. In 

"Modeling and Simulation in Engineering", C. Alexandru (Ed.), 

ISBN 978-953-51-0012-6, DOI: 10.5772/30323, InTech 

Publisher (298 pages). 

References from Other Literature: 

Alby E., Smigiel E., Assali P., Grussenmeyer P. and 

Kauffmann-Smigiel I., 2009. Low Cost Solutions for Dense 

Point Clouds of Small Objects: Photomodeler Scanner vs. 

David Laserscanner. 22nd CIPA Symposium 2009, Kyoto, 

Japan. 

 

Angawi, S.M., 1995 "The Roshan a Main Feature of the Hedjaz 

Architecture" Colored Glass and Mushrabiyyah in the Muslim 

World. Cario: Research Centre for IslamicHistory, Art and 

Culture, 1995.27-52. 

 

Furukawa, Y., Ponce, J., 2007. Accurate, dense, and robust 

multi view stereopsis. In Proc. Int’1 Conf. on Computer Vision 

and Pattern Recognition, IEEE, 2007, pp. 1-8. 

 

Hirschmuller, H. (2008). Stereo processing by semi-global 

matching and mutual information. IEEE Trans. Patt. Anal. 

Mach. Intell., 30, 328-341. 

 

Hullo, J.-F, Grussenmeyer, P., Fares, S., 2009. Photogrammetry 

and dense stereo matching approach applied the documentation 

of the cultural heritage of Kilwa (Saudi Arabia). 22nd CIPA 

Symposium 2009, Kyoto, Japan, 6p. 

 

Jomah, H.A., 1992. The TraditionalProcess of Producing a 

House in Arabia During the 18th and 19th Centuries, A Case 

study of Hedjaz, Ph.D. Thesis,University of Edinburgh 

(unpublished). 

 

Matthew, R.1972, Jeddah Master Plan Report, Existing 

Conditions Ministry of Interior (Municipal Affairs), Riyadh. 

 

Remondino, F., Menna, F., 2008, Image-based surface 

measurement for close-range heritage documentation, The Int. 

Arch.of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial  

Information Sciences, Beijing, Vol. XXXVII-B Part B5, pp. 

199-206. 

 

Remondino F., El-Hakim, S.: Image-based 3d modelling: a 

review. The Photogrammetric Record, 2006, 21(115): 269-291.  

 

 

References from websites:  

Eos Systems Inc. PhotoModeler software. 

http://www.photomodeler.com/products/photomodeler.htm, 

(April 2012).  

 

 

 

 

 

ISPRS Annals of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, Volume II-5/W1, 2013
XXIV International CIPA Symposium, 2 – 6 September 2013, Strasbourg, France

This contribution has been peer-reviewed. The double-blind peer-review was conducted on the basis of the full paper. 12


