












































Microsoft Word - TBT_ Fortering the reduction of assortative mixing or homophily into the class EngFull V1.1


FOSTERING THE REDUCTION OF ASSORTATIVE MIXING OR 
HOMOPHILY INTO THE CLASS 

Jaime Meza1, Oswaldo Ortiz2, Ester Simó1, Monica Vaca Cardenas3, Sonia 
Román2, Josep Monguet1 

1Universitat Politécnica de Catalunya  (SPAIN)  
2Universidad de las Fuerzas Armadas - ESPE (ECUADOR) 

3Kansas State University (UNITED STATES) 
 

Abstract.  

Human societies from the outset have been associated according to race, beliefs, religion, social level, 
and the like. These behaviors continue even today in the classroom at primary, middle, and superior 
levels. However, the growth of ICT offers educational researchers new ways to explore methods of 
team formation that have been proven to be efficient in the field of serious games through the use of 
computer networks. The selection process of team members in serious games with the use of 
computer networks is carried out according to their performance in the area of the game without 
distinction of social variables. 

The use of serious games in education has been discussed in multiple research studies, which state 
that its application in teaching and learning processes are changing the way of teaching. This article 
presents an exploratory analysis of the team formation process based on collaboration with ICT tools 
of collective intelligence labelled The best team (TBT). The process and its ICT tool combine the 
paradigms of creativity in swarming, collective intelligence, serious games, and social computing in 
order to capture the participants’ emotions and evaluate contributions. 

Based on the results, we consider that the use of new forms of teaching and learning based on the 
emerging paradigms is necessary. Therefore, TBT is a tool that could become an effective way to 
encourage the formation of work groups by evaluating objective variable of performance of its 
members in collaborative works. 

Keywords: collective intelligence, ICT, education, group formation.  

1 INTRODUCTION 

We live in families, we participate and work in teams, committees, and we develop a lot of our daily 
tasks in groups. From eating or exercising, sharing with friends, or collaborating, all of these scenarios 
include dynamic group behavior. In addition, businesses are conducted in groups, with two or more 
people, who have the expectation of some future negotiation [11]. McGrath emphasizes that groups 
are the social aggregates that imply the knowledge and potential of mutual interaction, so when talking 
about groups, complex systems must be kept in mind. Groups are complex systems, since they need 
many characteristics in order to define their behavior. [2] sustain that the process and activity cycle, 
reproduce and adjust the dynamic links and coordinate networks among others, these behaviors have 
motivated a century of research dedicated to the study of these phenomena, which have yielded 
abundant results on specific characteristics and processes in groups. [11] also emphasizes that the 
treatment of groups is not a simple but rather highly complex conformation, since it has many 
characteristics taken from the general theory of complex systems, the handling of complexity and the 
theory of chaos. 

The first investigations into the conformation of the groups refer us back to the 1920s and highlight the 
relationship between certain social groups and their own social environment, stimulated undoubtedly 
by the methodological orientations of the time. A large proportion of psychological studies on social 
groups are provided by behavioral theory and learning theory. The processes of team formation 
mainly emphasize four aspects: Motivational basis, organizational structure, emergence of value 
systems, and production of differential effects on individuals. In relation to the motivation that pushes 
individuals to group together, their personal qualities, goals or attitudes are considered.  

We have to emphasizes that the interaction of individuals through a certain period of time gives rise to 
the appearance of habitual behaviors that generate patterns of groups behavior. The same ones that 



are influenced in the execution of collective tasks, that determines the characteristics of the leadership 
in a group with certain ways of doing and behaving that become norms, breaking the initial 
subjectivism in which each one faces the others from their individual characteristics and abilities. 

The Artificial Intelligence emerge how a computational field with the aims of support the making 
decision processes. Several researchers have presented the team formation proposals using artificial 
intelligence paradigms. [14] presented a framework based on agreement technologies and multi-agent 
systems, their concluded that the framework could be used by special educational and distance 
education.  [9]   proposed a model for  group formation using collective trust, their model select the 
“best” fitted group for a task,  moreover also presents one heuristic to find the best possible group 
since in practice considering all the possibilities is hardly an option. [9]  also point out that that this 
notion of collective trust is much more accurate in capturing the complexity of interactions between 
users than any individual based method.  [1] developed computer-aided policy that facilitates the 
automatic generation of near optimal teams based on collective intelligence, coalition structure 
generation, and Bayesian learning. The proposal was tested using simulations in hypothetic classroom 
scenarios that show that the policy is capable of converging towards the optimal solution as long as 
students do not have great difficulties evaluating others. They conclude that the simulations have 
shown that, as long as students do not have great difficulties classifying others, the policy is capable 
of improving the quality of team structures in a few iterations and gradually converging towards the 
optimal solution.  

Some others researcher has studied the useful of Collective Intelligence in the team formation 
process. [3] address the team formation problem for generalized tasks where a set of experts is to be 
discovered from an expertise social network that can collaborate effectively to accomplish a given 
task. In the other hand [8] presented a reflexive paper where they analyze the decision-making 
process developed by the ' wisdom of crowds'. They conclude it is very difficult to achieve the wisdom 
of crowds in environments where observational correlation is manifested. Instead, the group’s decision 
often follows the high correlation information source, even when only a minority of the group uses this 
information. 

The previous paragraphs have shown that exists a lot of methods have been developed by 
researchers from different knowledge currents, however, the mix of human collective intelligence and 
computation intelligence in the state of art are scarce, therefore in this study we propose a first 
approach of team formation groups using, the collective intelligence, psychological individual profiles 
and the ICT tool how media..  

2 PROPOSAL MODEL 

With the general idea of encourage the formation of work groups by evaluating objective variable of 
performance of its members focused on problem solving , a prototype of ICT tool and refining process 
has been designed, developed and formally presented in this section (Fig.1). The proposal model 
allows teachers, students and groups, actively participate in the process of team formation focus on 
the reduction of assortative mixing or homophily into the class.  

 

Figure 1.Team formation model 



The proposed model tries to resolve two fundamental aspects in the teams formation, in first place the 
leader selection, and after that the team members selection. In the next paragraph, the process is brief 
summarized. 

The model is split into four sub-processes (Section 2.1). It's combines both the individual profiles and 
performance.  The individual profiles are measured through a set of psychological tests (Table 3) 
according to sub process presented in Fig 2a. This tries to reveal some individual patterns that will be 
analyzed by the leader's team in the member selection sub process (Fig. 2c). The individual 
performance and leader selection is developed according to results from ideas management and 
assessments process (Fig. 2b). The process presented in Fig. 2b, was adapted from the work 
presented by [13]. Finally, the "Team members selection process" allow to the author of proposal that 
gotten one position in the Top (n), become a leader. This leader should be selecting the members for 
develop his project according to Fig 2c. 

a. Individual profiles pick up subprocess 
 

b.Individual profiles pick up subprocess 
 

 
c.Team members selection subprocess 

 

Figure 2.Sub-processes of team formation model 

2.1 Model sub-processes 

2.1.1 Prepare challenge & team formation rules 

The expert (s) define an area of general interest (For instance : Educational Projects ) where it is 
required to seek for possible problem research areas as well as determine the allocated time for the 
fulfillment of each of the challenge stages.  The area of general interest should be defined in a 
question mode, for instance: What is the future the higher education in Ecuador? Where are the best 
places for to play soccer in Ecuador? Whose are the main causes for low performance in the sports?. 
Furthermore, the expert must set up parameters about the number of member by team, time for each 
stage, rubrics (Table 3) & evaluations scales (Table 4) for each proposal, psychological tests for 
measure the individual profiles (Table 3),  and the numbers of teams in the class. 

0

TEAM MEMBERS SELECTION PROCESS

Choose candidate NO

Yes

Individual 
profile 

End

Start

Students
proposal

Analyzes contributions 
& individual profile

Good option?

Team 
updated

Write down 
motivations for 

selection

Team 
complete?

Write down 
motivations for 

rejection

Candidates 
available?

Time 
available?

Yes No

Yes

NO

NO



Table 1. Recommended rubrics for evaluation 

Rubric Description 

Novelty The thing is new, it exists, it is known or used for a short time. 
Added Value The proposal generates added value or contributes to the solution of the problem 

like never before. 
Innovation The presented novelty can become a reality. 
Inspirer The proposed content inspires new ideas and it can extend the discussion topic. 
Appropriate It is suitable for the solution of the analyzed problem. 
Complete The content is complete and it can be easily understood. 

 
Table 2. Recommended emotional evaluation scale 

Emotion Description Value

Dissapointment I feel a little bad.  The proposal is disappointing. 3 
Rage It's terrible. It is the worst proposal I have ever listened about. 1 
Anger There is no effort. It is bad. I do not think it helps to anything. 2 
Sadness It might be better with a little more effort. 4 
Joy I really like it. It makes me happy and I think it could be put into practice. 5 
Admiration It's the best proposal I have ever read. It is excellent. 6 

Table 3. Recommended psychological tests 

Test Description 

Personality 
Questionnaire 
HSPQ 

It measures fourteen first order and four second order personality traits. The 
fourteen scales point to dimensions whose functionally independent nature have 
been established through factorial inquiry, yet each is more than a factorial scale, 
represents a construct that has been shown to have general value as a 
psychologically significant structure within the personality, as well We must 
understand the strength of the superego (G-scale), dominance (E), emotional 
stability or strength of the self (C) or suggestion of temperament (F). 

Kolb Learning 
Styles Test 

It measures the style of learning, is the result of the way people perceive and then 
process what they have perceived, that is, describing how they learn, how they 
incorporate knowledge, and how they use this information in problem solving, 
style Learning that each person uses depends on their inherited intellectual 
characteristics, their physical experience and social interaction, is based on a 
categorization of four learning styles: "convergent", "divergent", "assimilator" and 
"usher". 

Lynn O'Brien 
Learning 
Channel Test 

It allows individuals to identify a preference for "channel" to assimilate knowledge 
and the one that scores the most is the one that predominates. 

Reading the Mind 
in the Eyes test  

Test develop by [5], for to  measure of adult  mentalising. This test has been 
applied in several experience related with collective intelligence measure applied 
for getting   the level of social sensitivity [6][16][4][16]. In this test, a participant is 
presented with a series of 35 photographs of the eye-region of the face of different 
actors and actresses, and is asked to choose which of four words best describes 
what the person in the photograph is thinking or feeling.  

Team Equilibrium 
(TE) 

TE is a model that can be used as a basis to develop tools that helps teams for 
self-analysis. Its proposed framework is based on six thinking hats proposed by 
(de Bono, 1985) with aim to face a situation and solve a problem. Each hat should 
be applied during the solving problem process because it represent a different 
way to think and thus can be considered as a thinking direction[7]. 

2.1.2 Collective proposals refination 

Propose research topic.- Each one of the participants are enlisted in the suggested challenge and 
during the assigned time to the challenge, they propose possible topics that present potential 
problems within the context of the challenge. Each participant in this process can propose as well as 
to make comments and vote for their preferences on the proposals submitted by other participants, 
encouraging a constant feedback. 



Ideas.- In one or more topics of interest, even in those proposed by the same participant, solution 
ideas are prosed to the selected topics.  The design of the proposal includes: a title of the solution, a 
short explanation on how to do it, besides, if required, a short essay of ideas, as well as videos and 
annexes that support the proposal could be included. 

Feedback.- When the phase of ideas is finished, participants come with the first iteration of 
quantitative refinement. Each participant makes a vote (I like it / I do not like it) on each one of the 
ideas proposed as a solution, except on the own ones.  They can also comment and provide feedback 
on the proposals of solutions to improve them. Comments include a brief description and, if necessary, 
a report that includes videos, images, etc. As a result of this process, a ranking of preferences of ideas 
is generated. The ideas that go to the next stage are classified according to number of teams by the 
class. We have to point out that in the case that one student have more than one proposal in the list of 
ranking, the platform only select the first. 

Evaluation.- The ideas that exceeded the preference ranking, come to be valued by the / the expert (s) 
as well as the participants as well as the proponent of the idea. The rating scale is done according to a 
set of rubrics. Each item is evaluated by the emotion caused on the evaluator (participant / expert) in 
accordance to the scale criteria defined.  

Winners proposal.- Upon completion of the period of time assigned for the assessment, the final 
ranking of solution proposals is generated, for the team members selection and the  subsequent 
application. 

The main interfaces of collective proposals refination subprocess are presented in Appendix I. Fig. 3. 

2.1.3 Individual profiles pick up 

Choosing psychological test.- The student have to selecting one by one the psychological tests 
available. 

Fill up the test.- During the time assigned each student must to filling up the selected test. The test 
filled up will be show to team leader for the team member selection. 

2.1.4 Team members selection process 

Choose candidate.- Choose available candidate from the list, the list only present a code without any 
signal about the member identification (Appendix I. Fig 4a). 

Analyzes contributions & individual profile.- Reading and analyzing: Proposal topic, ideas and vote 
criteria, additionally the individual profile. (Appendix I. Fig 4b). 

Write down motivations for selection/Rejection.- Selecting or rejecting if the analyzed member is 
adequate or no adequate for your team. Only when you choose a member his/her personal 
information is presented. 

3 EMPIRICAL EXPERIENCE & RESULTS 

3.1 Empirical experience settings 

 

In this section, the empirical evidence of TBT application through a web tool (Appendix I) is described. 
TBT was used by one group of student from the University of the Armed Forces of Ecuador ESPE  in 
the academic year 2016-2017 in the months of November and December of 2016. The number of 
students were 24 (18 Masculine,  6 Feminine) the average of age was 20 years age. The students had 
to resolve the challenge addressed by the question "What is the best solution to improve some issues 
into the physical training field in Ecuador?" .Therefore they had to execute the list of task presented in 
Table 4. 

Table 4. List of task applied with the proposal model 

Task Content Executer Start Finish 
Prepare challenge & 
team formation rules 

Challenge.- What is the best solution to 
improve some issues into the physical 
training field in Ecuador?" 
Rubrics.- According Table 1. 

Expert Nov-15 Nov-20 



Evaluations scales.- According Table 2 
Psychological tests.- According Table 3. 
Numbers of teams.- Six teams, therefore 
also the top list is six.  

     
Individual profiles pick up Student of class 
Choosing 
psychological test 

Selecting one by one the psychological 
tests available. 

 Nov-21 Nov-28 

Fill up the test Filling up the selected test  Nov-21 Nov-28 
Collective proposals refination Student of class 
Propose research 
topic 

Have to search for possible topics of 
interest in the area of challenge that may 
require a solution (eg feeding in infants, 
sports development in early childhood, etc.). 
To execute this task each of you will 
propose at least one topic of interest 
(several of your interests are 
recommended) and will present your 
comments in several and vote according to 
your preferences (I like or dislike) 

 Nov-21 Nov-23 

Ideas A list of top topics has been generated 
according to the preferences of student's 
votes. In one or several topics of interest 
even in those proposed by the same 
participant, ideas are proposed for solving 
the topic selected or how to apply general 
topic to our local context. Ex: If you are 
talking about creative classrooms, propose 
possible options on how to apply it locally. 
The design of the proposal includes a title of 
the solution, a short explanation of how to 
do it, besides requiring a brief essay of the 
ideas, as well as videos that support the 
proposed solution to the problem identified 
in the topic of interest selected 

 Nov-24 Nov-25 

Feedback After the ideas, the participants proceed 
with the first iteration of quantitative and 
qualitative refinement (comments to 
improve the idea). Each participant makes a 
vote (I like / do not like) about each of the 
suggested solution ideas except yours; The 
result of this process generates a ranking of 
ideas preferences. The ideas that go to the 
next stage are classified according to a Top 
N (N is the number of teams for the class) 

 Nov-26 Nov-26 

Evaluation Ideas that surpassed the top N of 
preference, proceeds to be valued by the 
expert (s) as well as of the participants still 
the proponent of the idea. The rating scale 
is made according to a set of rubrics defined 
previously. 

 Nov-27 Nov-28 

Winners proposal The Top N of proposals will be presented. 
The team leader will be the owner of each 
proposal; therefore, they should be starting 
the team members selection in the assigned 
date. 

 Nov-29 Nov-29 

Team members selection process Team Leader 
Choose candidate Choose available candidate from the list, 

the list only present a code without any 
signal about the member identification. 

 Dic-05 Dic-05 



Analyzes 
contributions & 
individual profile 

Reading and analyzing: Proposal topic, 
ideas and vote criteria, additionally the 
individual profile. 

 Dic-05 Dic-05 

Write down 
motivations for 
selection/Rejection 

Selecting or rejecting if the analyzed 
member is adequate or no adequate for 
your team. 

 Dic-05 Dic-05 

3.2 Results 

Table 5. Group selection results. 

Id Proposal Gender Team Profile Interpretation Team members 
selection criteria M W 

1 High performance 
improves overall 
development 

2 2 The learning channel that 
predominates is visual, followed by 
the auditory, all belong to a 
Divergent - concrete learning style, 
the same ones that have the ability 
to separate a whole into parts but 
being precise and real. With varying 
personality types, while in second-
order personality, they mostly 
belong to an introverted trait and few 
of the members are anxious traits. 

The interests of the 
members in the 
proposals submitted 
and in their voting were 
related to the high-
performance 
processes. 

2 APP for physical 
training 

3 1 The learning channel is diverse 
(Visual, Auditory, Kinesthetic), so 
that the leader must use the 
necessary tools to consolidate his 
team. Its main objective is 
innovation. 

Selection according to 
the individual profiles, 
focused mainly in 
relation to creativity, 
optimism and 
management ability. 

3 Disc- Recreational 
golf for hearing 
impaired 

3 1 The group has a predominant 
learning channel such as the visual, 
accompanied by a divergent thought 
reflective, with the ability to use 
different senses. In most members 
Their personality varies, belong to a 
group of calm individuals, few of 
them are affected by their emotions 
and their environment. 

Combined the 
individual profiles with 
emphasis on optimism 
and research capacity, 
as well as collaboration 
in the process of 
refining ideas. 

4 Working small space 4 0 With 50% visual learning channel 
and 50% kinesthetic learning 
channel, mostly their type of thinking 
is divergent concrete, few of them 
are the same adapters that have the 
ability to change, modify or adjust 
things, in His personality there are 
variety, stable, little expressive, 
among others. 

The interests of the 
members in the 
proposals presented 
and in their votes were 
related to the proposal. 

5 Women's football 
with integrated 
method 

2 2 Channels of different learning, they 
make their thoughts vary, with 
different personality traits. 

Similar Interests in the 
proposals presented. 

6 Women's Soccer 
with Men's 
Schedules 

4 0 It has diverse learning channels, 
they make their thoughts vary, with a 
different personality trait 

Similar Interests in the 
proposals presented. 

4 CONCLUSIONS 
 

The objective of the presented work is to share the progress on a research program, which purpose is 
to provide a process, tools and resources for fostering the reduction of assortative mixing or homophily 



into the class in the teams formation process. The teams formation has a very broad and open 
conceptual framework and more theoretical and empirical research is necessary to generalize the 
application of the model. 

The application of TBT has shown evidence on the usefulness of the model in the reduction of 
assortative mixing or homophily into the class. The usefulness of the model is considered because the 
evaluation according to the contributions, preferences and individual member's profiles, presents a 
new field for evaluation in the educational area, that combine the individual & collective human 
intelligence and the computational intelligence for making the best decision. 

Although the students analyzed have personal interests and their main objective is to satisfy their own 
needs not the needs of their team, we have to remember  the link between body, mind and spirit would 
help in the formation of a whole human being, using emotional intelligence strategies, collaborative 
work and ICT’s, essential components for his or her formation. In this sense, future research should 
cover this fields, additionally combine the result of team with a collective intelligence measure, that 
allow analyzed in deep the affectivity of model with quantitative results. 

The proposed model and the corresponding web tool are the result of a creative combination of 
theoretical and practical perspectives. From this point, with a consistent model, it will be possible to 
continue with the development of new features oriented to make recommendations on the continuous 
improvement to the state of art in the field of reduction of assortative mixing or homophily into the 
class, that combine the collective human intelligence and computational intelligence. 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS  

We thank the Department of Human and Social Sciences of the University of the Armed Forces ESPE 
(ECUADOR). 

REFERENCES  

[1] Alberola, J. M., Val, E., Sanchez-anguix, V., & Julian, V. (2013). Simulating a Collective 
Intelligence Approach to Student Team Formation. Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013, 6, 
161–170. 

[2] Arrow, H., McGrath, J. E., & Berdahl, J. L. (2000). Groups as Complex System. In I. E. 0002 (16 
de mayo de 2000) SAGE Publications (Ed.), Small Groups as Complex Systems: Formation, 
Coordination, Development, and Adaptation (p. 56,57). 

[3] Awal, G. K., & Bharadwaj, K. K. (2014). Team formation in social networks based on collective 
intelligence - An evolutionary approach. Applied Intelligence, 41(2), 627–648. 
http://doi.org/10.1007/s10489-014-0528-y 

[4] Barlow, J. B., & Dennis, A. R. (2014). Not as Smart as We Think : A Study of Collective 
Intelligence in Virtual Groups. In Collective Intelligence 2014 (pp. 1–5). 

[5] Baron-Cohen, S., Wheelwright, S., Hill, J., Raste, Y., & Plumb, I. (2001). The “Reading the Mind in 
the Eyes” Test revised version: a study with normal adults, and adults with Asperger syndrome or 
high-functioning autism. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, and Allied Disciplines, 42(2), 
241–51. http://doi.org/10.1111/1469-7610.00715 

[6] Engel, D., Woolley, A. W., Jing, L. X., Chabris, C. F., & Malone, T. W. (2014). Reading the mind in 
the eyes or reading between the lines? Theory of mind predicts collective intelligence equally well 
online and face-to-face. PLoS ONE, 9(12), 1–16. http://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0115212 

[7] Ferruzca, M., Rodrigues, J., Monguet, J. M., & Trejo, A. (2013). Team Equilibrium and Innovation 
Performance. IEEE, 30–36. http://doi.org/978-1-4799-1542-2 

[8] Kao, A. B., & Couzin, I. D. (2014). Decision accuracy in complex environments is often maximized 
by small group sizes. Proceedings. Biological Sciences / The Royal Society, 281(1784), 
20133305. http://doi.org/10.1098/rspb.2013.3305 

[9] Largillier, T., & Vassileva, J. (2012). Using Collective Trust for Group Formation. Springer-Verlag 
Berlin Heidelberg, 137–144. 



[10] Laur
shar
Scie

[11] McG
Inter
Jers

[12] McG
Futu
http:

[13] Mez
Colle
Educ
Augu
Inter

[14] Paja
Team

[15] Woo
perfo
http:

[16] Woo
colle
330(

APPEN

ra Guerra, Fr
ring knowled
ence, 3, 335–

Grath, J. E. (1
raction and P
sey. 

Grath, J. E., A
ure. Persona
://doi.org/10.

za, J., Ortiz, O
ective Creati
cation, and O
ust 31 -- Sep
rnational Pub

ares, S., Torr
mwork based

olley, A. W., A
ormance. Cu
://doi.org/10.

olley, A. W., C
ective intellig
(6004), 686–

NDIX I. We

Figu

rancisca Grim
ge in virtual 

–340. 

1983). Group
Performance

Arrow, H., & 
lity and Soci
1207/S1532

O., Vaca-Car
vity. In G. Vi

Online Traini
ptember 2, 20
blishing. http

reño, A., & E
d on Agreem

Aggarwal, I.,
urrent Directi
1177/096372

Chabris, C. F
ence factor i

–8. http://doi.o

eb tool inte

ure 3. Main in

mon, Mirella 
groups Laura

ps and Huma
(pp. 5–6). IL

Berdahl, J. L
al Psycholog
7957PSPR0

rdenas, M., R
ncenti, A. Bu
ng: Third Inte
016, Revised
://doi.org/10.

sparcia, S. (2
ment Technol

 & Malone, T
ons in Psych
2141559954

F., Pentland,
n the perform
org/10.1126/

erfaces 

nterfaces of c

Herrera, J. M
ra. AWERPro

an Behavior.
LLinois: Pren

L. (2000). Th
gy Review, 4
0401_8 

Roman, S., &
ucciero, M. H
ernational C
d Selected P
.1007/978-3-

2011). A Nov
logies, 21–30

T. W. (2015)
hological Sci
43 

, A., Hashmi,
mance of hu
/science.119

collective pro

M. (2013). Be
ocedia Inform

In D. A. Jos
ntice - Hall, In

e Study of G
4(1), 95–105.

& Monguet, J
Helfert, & M. 
onference, e

Papers (pp. 1
-319-49625-2

vel Teaching
0. 

. Collective i
ence, 24(6), 

, N., & Malon
man groups.

93147 

oposals refin

ehavioral an
mation Techn

ephson (Ed.
nc.; Englewo

Groups: Past,
 

J. M. (2017). 
Glowatz (Ed

eLEOT 2016,
45–152). Ch
2_18 

g-Learning St

ntelligence a
420–424. 

ne, T. W. (20
 Science (Ne

nation subpro

alysis mode
nology & Com

.), Groups: 
ood Cliffs, Ne

, Present, an

CIR: Foster
ds.), E-Learn
, Dublin, Irela
ham: Springe

Strategy for 

and group 

010). Evidenc
ew York, N.Y

ocess 

l for 
mputer 

ew 

nd 

ing 
ing, E-
and, 
er 

ce for a 
Y.), 

 



Fi

b. Ana

igure 4. Main

a. Choosing

alyzing, selec

n interfaces o

g candidates

cting or rejec

of team mem

s for analyze

cting team me

mbers selecti

embers 

on subproceess 

 


