













































A Convergence of Traditions: Saint Lawrence Chapel, by Avanto Architects 
 

 

Abstract: 

Debates on the actuality of modern architecture by new contributions could be considered by critics as 
a deviation from its essence. In such a context, some works by Finnish studies exhibited at the Museum 
of Finnish Architecture in Spring, 2015 provide fresh approaches with their proposals and interest us 
here to reconsider architectural modernity with alterative readings. Project ideas are fused and 
converge towards new proposals in a process of continuity, from which only the concrete buildings 
experience, with enlightening phenomenal qualities, redeem us. We concentrate on a chapel by Avanto 
Architects in which interests from the second generation of modern architecture and the masters of 
Nordic Architecture can be appreciated. 

 

Keywords: architectural competitions, modernity and representation, nordic architecture.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  



The work of seven Finnish teams was exhibited in the National Museum of Finnish 
Architecture during the Spring of 2015, under the heading Suomi Seven: Emerging Architects 
from Finland, reconsidering continuities of Modern Movement, scale, new housing types, 
collective services buildings –schools or churches- amongst other issues.1 We choose the 
Chapel of Saint Lawrence by Avanto Architects for detailed consideration.  

 

Modernity and postmodern complexities. 

Whilst searching authenticity in Nordic Architecture, Nils-Ole Lund recalled the neglect of 
gestural subtleties after Gunnar Asplund’s death in 1940, favouring settings, clear 
constructions and final consistency: such in the case of Sigurd Lewerentz. 2  Modern 
Architectural matters seemed difficult to explain, since functionalist, organic, vernacular or 
Critical Regionalism values were recovered, together with the constructivist avant-garde or 
Merzbau/Dada themes.3 Since tradition and individual talent do not combine well, some 
authors suggested a revision of the previous order, differentiating evaluations of sincere 
expression, technical excellence or the exhibition of significant emotion. 

The limits of the relevant spurred spatial and personal experiences, routes in haptic or 
space-time behaviour and local realizations during the 1980s. Given the conflict between 
universality and traditional cultures, a pragmatic reasoning for Critical Regionalism was 
given by K. Frampton, as response to perceptions by Paul Ricoeur.4 Our concern here is a 
sensitivity that could turn discourse into a path, rather than into a theory, as Giancarlo De 
Carlo and Bernard Rudofsky suggested in 1951 referring to spontaneous architecture, in 
sharp contrast with  foreign, internationalist ideas, subjected to scrutiny by Colin St. John 
Wilson in figures such as Lewerentz (1885-1975) and Ludwig Mies van der Rohe (1886-
1969), and in two Modern traditions (the disciples of Peter Behrens and Theodor Fischer), 
with respective attitudes towards environment and heritage.5 

Tradition and history were treated with precision by Juhani Pallasmaa, as complex 
phenomena, questioning dialectically modern attitudes owing to the convergence on them 
of diverse sources of architectural production.6 The users’ experience, uniting body, work 
and perceptive space, was appropriate, linked to the act of proper erecting, poetical and full 
of sacral character, according to phenomenologists. The profiles of Mies and Lewerentz in 
the perspectives submitted for the competition project, under the motto Polku, path, as well 

                                                        

1  Suomi Seven: Emerging Architects from Finland, Museum of Finnish Architecture exhibition, Helsinki, 
24.3.2015–17.5.2015. 
2 Nils-Ole Lund, Nordic Architecture (Aarhus: The Danish Architectural Press, 2008), 11. 
3  Vilhelm Helander and Simo Rista, Modern Architecture in Finland (Helsinki: Kiryjayhtymä, 1987), 46-52. 
Malcolm Quantrill, Finnish Architecture and the Modernist Tradition (London: E& FN SPON, 1995), 181-228. See 
chapters 8 and 9. 
4 Kenneth Frampton, Modern Architecture. A critical history (London: Thames and Hudson, 1985), 313- 27. Paul 
Ricoeur, “Universal Civilization and National Cultures” in History and Truth (Evanston: Northwestern University 
Press, 1965). 
5  Colin St. John Wilson, Sigurd Lewerentz 1885-1975. The dilemma of classicism (London: Architectural 
Associaton, 1989). Colin St. John Wilson, The Other tradition of modern architecture: the uncompleted Project 
(London: Academy Editions, 1995). 
6 Juhani Pallasmaa, “Tradition and Modernity: The Feasibility of Regional Architecture in Postmodern Society” 
en Encounters. Architectural Essays (Helsinki: Rakennustieto, 2012), 264-78. “The First Modernism was a 
utopian, idealistic, purist and demagogic movement, which drew its artistic strength from an innocent faith in a 
future to be brought about by new architecture and art…The Second Modern architecture is premised on a 
realistic view of culture unblinded by illusions… incompleteness, process, and imperfection are part of the new 
expression”. 



as their likely influence, make us cautious owing to the exceptionality of the first and the 
proliferation of the second. Could we relate these works? 

 

Immediate context and other referents 

Saint Lawrence Chapel lies next to the cemetery near the homonymous stone church in 
Vantaa, one of the oldest in Finland. The ground and underground plans show a white 
reinforced concrete structure, harmonized by the plastered and White Paint, and in contrast 
with the slate that hides an underfloor heating system (Figure 1). Light wooden benches 
with clear design smooth the distinction between floors and walls, and roof lights reflect on 
glass ornaments, with brilliant flashes of light, simple and effective. 

The bell-tower dominates the external image, at the South-West intersection (Figure 2). 
Blind walls towards North and East exhibit notable parallels, such as the Path of the Seven 
Wells by Lewerentz and the compact volume of the Resurrection Chapel. The bell-tower 
focusses and regulates the plan: a diagonal trace pointing at it defines concentric L-shaped 
walls, and, together with auxiliary courts, do generate chapels of varied function and size, 
as the little Urn Chamber or the Main Chapel, all lit from the courtyards, with Access from 
Sunset and exit towards South –towards the cemetery tombs, thus establishing specific 
domains for the ritual precinct and that of final rest. Observing with detail, these volumes 
nested in L-sequences exhibit walls that continue up to the rooftop, protecting from adverse 
weather conditions and gathering reflected roof-light.  

Harmonious proportions, spread by Aulis Blomstedt in Finland, exhibit here a field of forces 
from the access until the graveyard exit, and the emergence from the underground towards 
light at the main level, already perceptible from initial sketches. A central block of services, 
at the underground and main level – the only perceived from the street-, allows tangential 
routes and location for the mechanism to rise catafalques with a careful transition from the 
underground upwards, contrasting darkness and glow with the patina produced on the 
peripheral filter and the copper protecting roofs. The Section West-East shows the 
connecting staircase between levels and pouring light on the walls, accommodated to place 
and materials, since the stone ribbons in gardens and courts were extracted on site (Figure 
3). A foreshortening produced of the main structural walls can be seen from the cemetery 
in direction East -West, towards the graveyard. They recall Saint Marks backside enclosure 
at Björkhagen, breaking the idea of elevation or façade on both sides. 

 

The paths of Lewerentz  

Lewerentz accessed, through Fischer, to the ideas of Bund für Heitmatschutz, in favour of a 
total, natural environment, though built and industrialized, with a syncretic fusion of the 
simple-humble-practical. A sort of redemption aimed to “discover in the past forgotten 
organic, semantic potentials relevant to the perceived present and future needs of humanity”in 
which he invoked “the authority of the classical and the vernacular, presented as something 
new”, searching personal building processes, more than form.7 Precocious in progress and 
distance towards the past, the sketches and plans for the Chapel of the Holy Cross in 
Enskede (1930), with Asplund, or the cemeteries of Enköping (1930-32) and Djursholm 
(1932-33) still astonish by their modernity, even when compared with recent works of 
refined rationalism: once again the alluded convergence.  

                                                        

7 Caroline Constant, The Woodland Cemetery: Toward a Spiritual Landscape (Stockholm: Byggförlaget, 1994), 21-
28. 



After differences with the Authorities for the Stockholm Cemeteries for incomprehension of 
the Resurrection Chapel, he was called back to design the chapel of St. Birgitta, a 
crematorium and the twin chapels of St. Knut and St. Gertrud at Malmö (1939-43). A unitary 
front fuse the variety of constructions behind these two buildings (Figure 4). A comparison 
of figures 2 and 4 lets us see an element of surprise in porticoes and patios and irregular 
rhythms fostered by canopies over the threashold. Roof pitches contrast sharply with the 
crematorium behind them, evoking the sketches and initial ideas produced in 1930 for the 
Chapel of the Holy Cross in Stockholm, signed with Asplund, who finished it, transcended in 
the first stages of these works, as well as the 1923 themes for the Malmö Cemetery Great 
Chapel (superbly drawn by Arthur von Schmalensee). Its parallels with the Resurrection 
Chapel place us in front of elementary volumes and austere proportions, to works like the 
Church of Corpus Christi by Rudolf Schwarz in Aquisgrán (1928), an author that Mies 
discovered in 1926 and whose impact is still of some consequence at the Carr Chapel for the 
Illinois Institute of Technology (1952): memorable austerity, as in the work that concerns 
us here. 

Saint Knut and Saint Gertrud would be different without the alignment of columns and trees 
that unify the setting, imposing sights at awkard angles and paths between the porticoes. 
The diversity in the West elevation lets understand the chapels’s freedom included within 
Saint Lawrence’s frame, rather than a miesian affinity of their plan with its courts (fFigures 
4 and 1). 

Such structure was further developed in the compacity of mature works by Lewerentz: Saint 
Marks, Björkhagen (1952-56) and Saint Peter’s at Klippan (1962- 66), especially the latter. 
Its structural singularity was compared by Colin St. John Wilson with Hosios Loukás, near 
Corinth, since symbol and structure are fused, though in different forms. A little steel girder 
(shaped as a cross, by supporting it on an only column) upholds all the roof beams. Surprise 
and quiet recollection are moving and transporting, rather than lurking, but without 
presenting such structure as unicum. As García Mansilla pointed, it becomes difficult to talk 
about elevations and separate the resulting structures from the environment; photographs 
made at Villa Adriana show his lack of interest on forms, instead of integrated atmospheres 
of architecture and greenery, constructive ressources or columns like his works to come.8 
The mere contemplation of the adjoint plans, next to those of Saint Lawrence shows how 
much of the efforts from the silent masters for an authentic architecture remains in the 
Nordic tradition, underlining that it is inseparable from design and building activity (Figure 
5).  

The walk to the school followed by the children in the courtyard of St. Marks at Björkhagen 
is a passage, rather than a cluster, as vividly described by Henrietta Palmer:  

“The fact that Lewerentz provides the church with two entrances -one for the mass, opening 
directly from the outside landscape to the church interior, like the entrance of a medieval 
countryside church, and one for everyday use, connecting the courtyard and the porch with 
the ceremonial space only through the church hall- demonstrates the contemporary desire 
for simultaneously seeing the church as a space for everyday activity as well as a direct and 
dramatic high religious experience”.9 

 

Lessons from Mies, elusive mediator 

                                                        

8 Luis Moreno García- Mansilla, ‘La capella della Resurrezione” in N. Flora, P. Giardello y G. Postiglione, Sigurd 
Lewerentz 1885-1975 (Milano: Electa Ed., 2001), 392-94. 
9 Henrietta Palmer, “Suecia: las últimas iglesias”, DPA n. 26 (2010), 19. 



Mies’ silhouette in Saint Lawrence Main Chapel, at the crossing of routes from the main 
entrance and exit to the graveyard, has no easy explanation. Initial sketches by Avanto 
Architects and lighting from patios add misgivings to possible comparisons (Figure 6). Mies 
rooted universal referents for modernity, avoiding it as mere style. His explicit involvement 
on spiritual matters (Philosophy and Culture, in his own words), since he discovered the 
weekly Die Zukunft (The Future) at the atelier of Albert Schneider, widened after building 
Dr. Riehl’s house and meeting his circle, Jaeger’s work or that of Heraclitus; hence his 
dialectic and poetic sense, manifested when he published “Bauen”.10 

Hence, researchers on Mies differ, even on shocking issues: A. Culquhoun states that his 
main interests were “the techniques of idealization and mediation by graphic 
representation…His criteria were ideal and visual, not constructive; not even “visual-
constructive”. 11  Whilst K. Frampton sees his work as epitome of tectonic values and 
monumentalized technique.              

“Here "representation" does not imply that something merely stands in for something else 
as if it were a replacement or substitute that enjoyed a less authentic, more indirect kind of 
existence. On the contrary, what is represented is itself present in the only way available to 
it”, propitiating the essential nature of our making in the construction of our world.12 Mies 
overcomes Boullée’s distinction between architecture and building, fusing them as 
Baukunst: “The bau’, he would explain, ‘is the clear building construction; while the kunst is 
the refinement of that and not anything more. Architecture begins when two bricks are put 
carefully together’13. 

An organic, structural order is unavoidable to turn form into a consequence of structure and 
not into a reason for construction. For Mies, structure is a philosophical whole, from top to 
bottom, to the very last detail, working on its possibilities and ambiguities:” I discovered by 
working with actual glass models that the important thing is the play of reflections and not 
the effect of light and shadows as in ordinary buildings”.14 Such reflections are clues to follow. 
Concerning the Concrete Office Building, he observed: “The materials: concrete, steel and 
glass…Reinforced concrete structures are skeletons by nature. No gingerbread. No fortress. 
Columns and girders eliminate bearing walls. This is skin and bone constructions”.15 

Saint Lawrence’s main plan is more compact than Mies’ concrete and brick villas (1923 and 
1924). Any similarity vanishes in the interior-exterior relation to South and Sunset. The 
atrium at the concrete villa seems alluded at the entrance of Saint Lawrence, even next to 
water pools, though the diagonal visuals between horizontal plans, characteristic of Mies in 
this period, have their counterpoint on the gaze to ceilings and rooflights, and thus is shown 
on initial sketches, or the cout-house studies in the 1930s decade. As a matter of fact, the 
1923 and 1929 milestones are full of intermediate experiments that allow an interpretation 

                                                        

10 Emilio Lledó Iñigo, El concepto poiesis en la filosofía griega (Madrid: CSIC, Instituto Luis Vives de Filosofía, 
1961). Poiesis originally meant making, constructing, building, later differentiated and sublimated. During the 
recent Seminar on the 30th anniversary of the reconstruction of the Barcelona Pavilion, Fritz Neumeyer 
ascertained the interest of Mies on jaeger’s work, up to months before departing to America.  
“Form is not the goal, but the result of our work. (…) It is our specific concern to liberate building activity from 
aesthetic speculators, and make building again what alone it should be, namely BUILDING (BAUEN). “Bauen”, G, 
n. 2 (1923), 1. 
11 Alan Colquhoun, La arquitectura moderna, una historia desapasionada. (Barcelona: Gustavo Gili, 2005), 179. 
12 Hans Georg Gadamer, The Relevance of the Beautiful and Other Essays (Cambridge University Press, 1986), 35. 
13 Peter Carter, Mies van der Rohe trabajando (London: Phaidon Press, 2006), 7. 
14 Ibid, 18. 
15 G, n. 1 (1923).  
 



of Mies’ work. The year 1923, ebullient with avant-gardes, led to objective, sachlich 
attitudes.16 Voices in favour of a sensitive-conceptual treatment of functions were silenced. 
Goals would be social and technical. Categories used by Johnson for the Mies exhibition 
(1947) and by Richard Padovan can be updated for an initial framework.17 

First, the Schinkel tradition provides the Romantic Classicism freedom dispersing the house 
as varied pavilions and pergolas, into a place with shared tensions. An honest programme, 
relating interior and landscape, is seen by Schulze and Neumeyer as a “principle of 
continuity”, linking architecture and nature or designed garden. Accordingly, Navarro-
Baldeweg interpreted this spatial interpenetrability or permeability between inside and 
outside, as relation between subject and object; perpendicular to the object, to the picture/ 
architecture, offering resistence to the subject and determining routes and images. 

Second. The influence of avant-gardes, connected with a second reading of continuity in 
Wright houses; that would be combined to fluid American spaces and to folding or sling 
walls and planes, transparencies and De Stijls counter-constructions, with reminiscence of 
constructivism, suprematism and Dada. 

And third, a structural sense of building and detailing (from the work bu Hendrik P. Berlage 
in 1912), and since 1926 onwards, with asymmetric spaces, new materials and minimum 
structure.   

However, the indifferentiated openings towards the four directions of space as in the Brick 
House, or a pseudo-pyramid shaped structure of levels do not exist in Saint Lawrence. Its 
translucid quality, conditioned by the need of light (closed to North and East, with 
directional walls) and by weather brings us close to the Court-House Studies, the sequence 
of proposals for the House Hubbe or Projects as the German Pavilion in Brussels (1934) 
and the Museum for a Small city (1940-43), as support for a supposed miesian character of 
this Chapel, through the inseparable themes of pavilion, route and courts, leading, –if we 
followed the Smithsons– to several aggregation modes (Figure 7). 

“Architectural form”, “interior” and “vital intensity” were close for Mies in 1927, enhancing 
an intellectual system matured from the trascendental year 1926 and his Greek classical 
references. In this sense, the sentence “life is neither static, nor dynamic, but embraces both 
concepts” in the draft of the letter “On Form in Architecture”, 1927, preserved in the MoMA 
is of great significance. In a previous letter to the Weissenhof technicians he was quite 
explicit: by stating that “Building for me is an intellectual, creative activity, not in the details, 
but in what is essential”, a search for Architecture’s real task, discerning between 
standardization and rationalization. 18

 
The structural skeleton with intentions of 

“habitability” and “use”, trascending flexibility, unveils a rational synthesis of building and 
free use, understandable from the variations in plan for the residential block in Stuttgart-
Weissenhof and the exhibition pavilions; the Glass Room and Linoleum, 1927 and Cafe 
Samt & Seide. Exploration of new materials is added to Building defined in expositive 
pavilions that unite a defined idea of construction, an exhibition that unveils the place on 
which it is settled, pointing a route, thus initiating new architectural ideas. 

                                                        

16 Richard Padovan, Towards universality. Le Corbusier, Mies and De Stijl. (London: Routledge, 2002), 100. 
17 Cristina Gastón Guirao, Mies: el Proyecto como revelación del lugar (Barcelona: Fundación Caja de 
Arquitectos 2005. Enrique Colomés Montañés, Material, espacio y color en Mies van der Rohe. Café Samt & 
Seide: Hacia una Propuesta Estructural. PhD Thesis Universidad Politécnica de Madrid, 2014. José Altés 
Bustelo, “La Casa con patio en Mies van der Rohe”, Proyecto, progreso, arquitectura, n.  8 (2013): 42-57. 
18 Richard Pommer y Christian F. Otto, Weisenhof 1927 and the Modern Movement in Architecture. (Chicago/ 
Londres: University of Chicago Press, 1991). Mies’ letter to Stuttgart Technical Services, 1926. 



In 1929, two years prior to converting the Modern Movement into the International Style, 
wealth is shown as emptiness, and values -recognized three years before by Mies in 
Schwarz, Guardini and Whitehead, were turned into thunderous silence owing to its 
functional futility. There is no such radicality in Saint Lawrence, where everything seems 
to be in search of a measured modesty. 

The German Pavilion at the Barcelona International Exhibition (1929), built with 
permanent sumptuous materials (Steel, glass, marbles, onyx…), did not last much. Its 
travertine base integrated the ensemble, anchoring it in place, but the real movement to 
follow was suggested by the position of the water pool, with perspective angles and a 
labyrinth of reflections, described by Nicolau Rubió i Tudurí, who represented it with 
closed doors, whilst Terence Riley, and Detlef Mertins disregard them: 

 “The Pavilion only encloses space and even thus in a geometric and not a real or 
physical way, ... each chamber is only closed imperfectly, on three sides, by three 
walls.... These walls are quite often large and continuous glass panels... Some of these 
panels, of a dark and neutral tone, reflect the objects and people, in such a way that 
what we see through the glass is confused with what we see reflected there. Some 
rooms do not have roof: they are real semi-courtyards, where the space is only limited 
by three walls and by the horizontal water surface in a pool, but where it is retained by 
its geometry.”19. 

Reflecting on the unfinished and changing drawings, Cristina Gastón-Guirao reminds 
Mies’ will reinforce the main episodes of the Pavillion route by means of visual landmarks, 
finally reduced to one, Kolbe’s statue in the North Court, aligned with the visual axis, still 
reminiscent amongst the House Hubbe sketches (Figure 8).20 The 1.10x1.10 m. modules for 
the pavement adjust its elements, position and relative value. A no lesser aspect is the 
function of glass surfaces, either on shadow or light, and their tone (darker or lighter) that 
one can relate to the Stuttgart Glass Room or the Tugendhat House, observing a closer 
sensitivity to Dada, than to Neoplasticism or suprematists, as A. Behne described, 1919, 
with prophetic emphasis:  

“The Dadaists enacted the New Man by adopting fictional personae to parody social 
structures and conventions, often shocking their audiences in the streets and in the press, 
as well as in the gallery. Intternalizing contradiction, chaos, flux and chance, Dada saw 
itself as ‘at one with the times, it is a child of the present epoch which one may curse, but 
cannot deny”.21 

A setting to remain empty, that cannot be filled, “it does not enclose but already closed 
space”.22 Hence its labyrinthic or enigmatic character, described by por Navarro-Baldeweg 
in, 1999; Alison and Peter Smithson in 2001, and Schulze-Windhorst in 2017. 23  Even 
though, paradoxically, “movement was a capital factor for the concept of form and space 

                                                        

19 Nicolau Rubió i Tudurí, “Le pavillon d’Allemagne à l’Exposition de Barcelona”, Cahiers d’art, VIII-IX, 1929. 
20 Gastón, op. cit., 61. 
21 Adolf  Behne, Die Wiederkehr der Kunst (Leipzig: Kurt Wolff, 1919), 63. 
22 José Quetglas, Der Gläserne Schrecken. Imagenes del Pabellón de Alemania. (Montreal: Les Éditions Section b, 
1991), 60. 
23 Juan Navarro Baldeweg, “El límite de los principios en la arquitectura de Mies van der Rohe” en La habitación 
vacante (Valencia: Pre-textos; Girona: Col.legi d’Arquitectectes de Catalunya, 1999). 
Franz Schulze, Edward Windhorst, Ludwig Mies van der Rohe: Una biografía crítica (Barcelona: Ed. Reverté, 2017). 
 

https://www.amazon.es/s/ref=dp_byline_sr_ebooks_1?ie=UTF8&text=Franz+Schulze&search-alias=digital-text&field-author=Franz+Schulze&sort=relevancerank
https://www.amazon.es/s/ref=dp_byline_sr_ebooks_2?ie=UTF8&text=Edward+Windhorst&search-alias=digital-text&field-author=Edward+Windhorst&sort=relevancerank


in the Barcelona Pavilion”.24 It was and still is such, for those who experiment it in a 
significative way, as described by Detlef Mertins “a stopping place on the road to 
becoming”.25 

Several attitudes from different avant-gardes do coexist: Van Doesburg’s simultaneity and 
interpenetrability (a term that will be dealt with later), mixed in the Glass Room with ideas 
from Richter, el Lissitzky’s Proun and the treatment of materials by Moholy-Nagy. The 
sentences where Mies stops in Bergson’s Evolution créatrice point at the continuous 
change of life and the tendency of particular manifestations to remain behind. The 
following passage is significant for our purposes:  

“They are therefore relatively stable, and counterfeit immobility so well that we treat each of 
them as a thing rather than as a progress, forgetting that the very permanence of their form 
is only the outline of a movement”.  

But what Mies highlights in the book is here quite relevant:  

“This love, in which some have seen the great mystery of life, may possibly deliver us life’s 
secret… It allows us a glimpse of the fact that the living being is above all a thoroughfare, 
and that the essence of life is in the movement by which life is transmitted”.26  

As figures show, the eye can transform visual perception into a battlfield for ideas. The 
representative side of such architecture of silence can only be found in the link between 
life and space-time existence. The mineral quality of pure onyx wall is counterpoint of the 
translucent glass next to it: sumptuous and different materials limit a unique space, but 
they would be irrelevant without diversity and movement. 

Everything is more simple and direct in Saint Lawrence: the exterior image is 
complemented inside with ordered passages within a clear space and apparently open plan, 
where the finishes offer empathy to users. The South façade, link of Chapel and graveyard, 
hardly shows disparities in the walls’ sequence, when looked at from the East, confused 
within a view that gives primacy to the bell-tower. But from the West, with the last lights of 
day, one can perceive a subtle foreshortening of spaces within walls, clearly differentiated 
on plan. This apparent freedom can be followed in the works by the authors previously 
mentioned. And, as we have seen, both approaches -that of Lewerentz and Mies- are fused. 

Mies’ sketches for the interiors of Gericke and Hubbe Houses, still reminiscent of the 
constructions for Barcelona and Brno, exhibit transparencies later elaborated. Respect for 
exterior spaces is shown in notes written by Mies van der Rohe in 1933, preserved at LoC.  
When he states: «¿What would concrete, What would steel be without mirror glass?” he is 
informing us that he built and designed for the glass industry. When this conference is 
contrasted with an initial draft, we can see a significant evolution from a general statement 
(“Only now we can articulate space freely, open it up and connect it to the landscape, thereby 
filling the spatial needs of modern man”), changing later to a more specific and tectonic 

                                                        

24 Franz Schulze, Mies van der Rohe. Una biografía crítica (Madrid: H. Blume & MOMA, 1986), 162-63. Sentence 
not included in the new and revised edition, Schulze and Windhorst, op. cit. 
25 Detlef Mertins, “Architectures of Becoming: Mies van der Rohe and the Avant-Garde” in Mies in Berlin, ed. T. 
Riley y B. Bergdoll (New York: The Museum of Modern Art, 2001), 132-33. 
26 Ibid. 
 

https://www.amazon.es/s/ref=dp_byline_sr_ebooks_2?ie=UTF8&text=Edward+Windhorst&search-alias=digital-text&field-author=Edward+Windhorst&sort=relevancerank


attitude (‘Now it becomes clear again what a wall is, what an opening, what is floor and what 
ceiling”).27  

Comparing the following isolated volumes, only bound by shared referential spaces, as in 
the clusters by Lewerentz and the series of variations for House Hubbe, the Pavilions of 
Germany in  Brussels (1934) already studied in this journal , or the Museum for a Small City 
(1942), the possibilities of combination between defined volumes –or their negatives– and 
the spaces between courts, it becomes evident that a search for a minimum structure is 
under way from 1926 onwards, and we must stress with I. de Solà-Morales that it is not 
minimalist.28 Only from here a does it seem appropriate a new reading of Saint Lawrence 
(Figure 9). 

 

The Other paths by Avanto Architects 

Even though Avanto Architects could be alien to this plot, their work is produced in a context 
where both characters from Polku are of interest. Mies will no longer speak about the will 
of the epoch, but about values and requirements, after discovering Rudolf Schwarz’s 
thought and work as pathfinder in 1926; his pivotal manual guides through simple 
archetypes: when illustrated with built works, we can reflect on the act of erecting, 
surrounded by sacrality, by changing its domain forever and allow the building experience 
to follow a procession or route.29 When contrasted with specific examples, they share the 
competition project motto for Saint Lawrence (Path, Polku), especially the one named last 
and the transition between the two final ones: The Sacred (closed) Ring; Heilige Familie 
Kirche, Oberhausen (1955-58); The Open Ring: St. Michael, Frankfurt (1952-56); The 
Sacred Departure (Bright Chalice), St. Bonifatius, Aachen-Forst (1959-64); The Sacred Path 
(the Path): Fronleichnamkirche, Aachen (1929-30). 

In such context, we should not reject the masters’ task in considering the relations between 
architecture and nature, altered by construction, especially the role played by Aulis 
Blomstedt, mentor of Aarno Ruusuvuori and Pietilä, at the School of Architecture in Helsinki 
or by Nils Erik Wickberg, editor of Arkkitehti, who insisted on the relevance of cultural 
phenomena, like architectural imagination.30 It would had consequences in the work by 
Leiviskä, Helander and Pallasmaa. 

The passage from Classicism to Romanticism and later funcionalist change tends to ignore 
the spatial richness of some architecture, such as the late German Baroque and its 
consequences.  ¿How could we explain Vuoksenniska, works by Timo and Tuomo 
Suomalainen, by R. Pietilä o J. Leiviskä that widened the spectrum of the Finnish tradition? 
We shall pause briefly with the latter: the Temppleiaukio/ Taivallahti Church, a happy 
ending in 1961 after a sequence of competitions, would correspond literally to Schwarz’s 
Bright Chalice, open to light and of difficult construction, unless the ceiling is solved: the 
Suomalainen brothers understood this situation by extending the topography and character 
of the place; without avant-garde collages, the rock cuttings were sufficiently expressive.  

                                                        

27 Fritz Neumeyer, La palabra sin artificio (Madrid: El Croquis, 1995), 476. (13th March 1933, handwritten text 
kept in LoC.).  
28 Laura Lizondo Sevilla, José Santatecla Fayos, & Nuria Salvador Luján. "Mies in Brussels 1934. Synthesis of an 
Unbuilt Exhibition Architecture" VLC arquitectura. Research Journal, v. 3 n.1 (2016): 29-53.  
29 Rudolf Schwarz, Vom Bau der Kirche (Heilderberg: Verlag Lambert Schneider, 1938). See Samuel Joseph 
Drago, Vom Bau der Kirche. Formulazioni teoriche e strategie compositive di Rudolf Schwarz, PhD thesis 
Universität Politécnica de Catalunya, 2015. 
30 G. Griffiths, “Finlandia: el sur y los símbolos de enculturación”, DPA n. 26 (2010). R. Connah, R., “Persona 
obscura: releyendo a Reima Pietilä”, DPA n. 26 (2010),  78-85.  



The project for the parish church of Malmi (1967) by Pietilä, was the literal image of a “rock” 
in section and elevation, expressing both a limit site and an emergence to light in elevation 
and section. It could have been an extension of the achievements in Dipoli, and even though 
forgotten until Mica Moraine, official residence of the president of Finland at Mäntyniemi, 
its spaces below ground and Merzbau leanings are remembered. A relatively recent project 
by Avanto Architects, that is, the expressive volume of Löyly, with a different social 
programme, but sharing the location on a physical border, updates technologies and 
traditions (Figure 10).                                              

To understand the challenge faced by Avanto Architects two churches in Vantaa can be 
considered to contrast the approach: firstly, the synthesis by J. Leiviskä for the Myyrmäki 
Church and Parish Centre, 1980-84, an inspired work where the interest for De Stijl and late 
German Baroque ideas are fused in spaces and intermediate plans, in a complex 
interpenetration and sequence of volumes. It appeals to imagination, surrendered to the 
ambiguous and incontrollable, since rational laws are useless to elude an existential 
experience. The railway line on its North boundary imposed a limit, where roof-lighting and 
height resulted on several plans generously lit and free-falling towards Southern light, 
accommodating an extensive programme in an elongated building, that suggests an 
interactive vibration of spaces and levels. 

In second place, the Hämeenkylä Church, by Jokela and Kareoja, 1992 sets a tense 
composition between the body of the bell-tower and the Church brick wall, with a fortress-
like appearance, to which a staircase provides access in a ceremonial procession from the 
acess at the bottom of the stairs, the church threashold, the parish centre and, finally, the 
Church. We can see the solution provided for Saint Lawrence much better by comparing 
these contexts and the requirement of a difference, with interior brightness and placid 
movement in that unavoidable path that the chapel represents. 

And, as a conclusion, the hybrid character of contemporary proposals, with allusions to 
masters from the Modern movement and commitment to remains of local traditions, is 
offered as a great opportunity. The convergence of diverse traditions remains in the 
excellent memory of Finnish architects, and their sense in optimizing an enduring path. Let 
this be a respectful homage to them all, in the centenary of their great country’s birth.  

 

  



BIBLIOGRAPHY 

 

Altés Bustelo, J. “La Casa con patio en Mies van der Rohe”. Proyecto, progreso, arquitectura, 
n.  8 (2013): 42-57. 

Behne, A. Die Wiederkehr der Kunst. Leipzig: Kurt Wolff, 1919. 

Carter, P. Mies van der Rohe trabajando”. London: Phaidon Press, 2006.  

Colomés Montañés, E. Material, espacio y color en Mies van der Rohe. Café Samt & Seide: Hacia 
una Propuesta Estructural. PhD Thesis Universidad Politécnica de Madrid, 2014. 

Connah, R. “Persona obscura: releyendo a Reima Pietilä”. DPA, n. 26 (2010): 78-85. 

Constant, C. The Woodland Cemetery: Toward a Spiritual Landscape. Stockholm: 
Byggförlaget, 1994. 

Colquhoun, A. La arquitectura moderna, una historia desapasionada. Barcelona Gustavo Gili, 
2002. 

Drago, S.J. Vom Bau der Kirche. Formulazioni teoriche e strategie compositive di Rudolf 
Schwarz. PhD Thesis Universitat Politécnica de Catalunya, 2015. 

Flora, N., Giardello P. and G. Postiglione. Sigurd Lewerentz 1885-1975. Milano: Electa Ed., 
2001. 

Gastón Guirao, C. Mies: el Proyecto como revelación del lugar. Barcelona: Fundación Caja de 
Arquitectos, 2005. 

Frampton, K. Modern Architecture. A critical history. London: Thames and Hudson, 1985. 

Gadamer, H.G. The Relevance of the Beautiful and Other Essays. Cambridge University Press, 
1986. 

Griffiths, G.“Finlandia: el sur y los símbolos de enculturación”. DPA, n. 26 (2010). 

Helander, V. and Rista, S. Suomalainen Rakennustaide - Modern Architecture in Finland. 
Helsinki: Kiryjayhtymä, 1987.  

Lizondo Sevilla, Laura, José Santatecla Fayos, & Nuria Salvador Luján. "Mies in Brussels 
1934. Synthesis of an Unbuilt Exhibition Architecture" VLC arquitectura. Research Journal, 
v. 3 n.1 (2016): 29-53. 

Lledó Iñigo, E. El concepto poiesis en la filosofía griega. Madrid: CSIC, Instituto Luis Vives de 
Filosofia, 1961.  

Lund, N.O. Nordic Architecture. Aarhus: The Danish Architectural Press, 2008. 

Navarro Baldeweg, J. “El límite de los principios en la arquitectura de Mies van der Rohe”. In La 
habitación vacante. Valencia: Pre-textos; Girona: Col.legi d’Arquitectectes de Catalunya, 1999. 

Neumeyer, F. La palabra sin artificio. Madrid: El Croquis, 1995. 

Padovan, R. Towards universality. Le Corbusier, Mies and De Stijl. London: Routledge, 2002. 

Pallasmaa, J. “Tradition and Modernity: The Feasibility of Regional Architecture in Postmodern 
Society”. In Encounters. Architectural Essays. Helsinki: Rakennustieto, 2012. 

Palmer, H. “Suecia: las últimas iglesias”. DPA, n. 26 (2010). 

Pommer, R. and Otto, C.F. Weisenhof 1927 and the Modern Movement in Architecture. 
Chicago/ Londres: University of Chicago Press, 1991. 



Quantrill, M. Finnish Architecture and the Modernist Tradition. London: E& FN SPON, 1995. 

Quetglas, J. Der Gläserne Schrecken. Imagenes del Pabellón de Alemania. Montréal: Les 
Éditions Section b, 1991.  

Ricoeur, P. “Universal Civilization National Cultures”. In History and Truth. Evanston: 
Northwestern University Press, 1965. 

Rubió i Tudurí, N. “Le pavillon d’Allemagne à l’Exposition de Barcelona”. Cahiers d’art, VIII-
IX, 1929. 

Schwarz, R. Vom Bau der Kirche. Heidelberg: Verlag Lambert Schneider, 1938.  

Schulze, F. Mies van der Rohe. Una biografía crítica. Madrid: H. Blume & MOMA, 1986.  

Schulze, F. and Windhorst, E. Ludwig Mies van der Rohe: Una biografía crítica. Barcelona: Ed. 
Reverté, 2017. 

St. John Wilson, C. Sigurd Lewerentz 1885-1975. The dilemma of classicism. London: 
Architectural Associaton, 1989. 

St. John Wilson, C. The Other tradition of modern architecture: the uncompleted Project. 
London: Academy Editions, 1995. 

  
 
 
LIST OF FIGURES 

Figura 1. Saint Lawrence Chapel. Avanto Architects. Main and basement plans.       

Figura 2. Saint Lawrence Chapel. Avanto Architects. Main entrance. Foto Kuvio.    

Figura 3. Saint Lawrence Chapel. Avanto Architects. Competition Project. East-West Section. 

Figura 4.  St. Knut y St. Gertrud Churches. Malmö. Sigurd Lewerentz. West elevation.  

Figura 5a. Saint Mark’s Church, Björkhagen. Sigurd Lewerentz.   

Figura 5b. St. Peter’s Church, Klippan. Sigurd Lewerentz. 

Figura 6a. Competition drawing with Mies’ image in St. Lawrence Main Chapel. Avanto 
Architects. 

Figura 6b. St. Lawrence Main Chapel. Avanto Architects. Foto Tuomas Uusheimo. 

Figura 7. Variations on the House Hubbe. Ludwig Mies van der Rohe. 

Figura 8. Reflections on the rebuilt Barcelona Pavilion. Ludwig Mies van der Rohe. 

Figura 9. Variations on the plan for the IIT Chapel. Ludwig Mies van der Rohe.    

Figure 10a. Section of unbuilt Project for Malmi Church. R. and R. Pietilä, 1967. 

Figure 10b. Myyrmäki Parish Centre. Section. Juha Leiviskä, 1980-84. 

Figura 10c. Löyly Sauna. Avanto Architects, 2016. Foto  Tuomas Uusheimo.   

 

IMAGE SOURCES 

1, 3, 6a: Avanto Architects.2. Foto Kuvio, 4, 5a, 5b: The Swedish Centre for Architecture and 
Designs collections. 6b, 10c: Photos by Tuomas Uusheimo. 7: Cristina Gastón Guirao, 2005. 8: 
Photo by the author. 9: Ed. Reverté. 10a, 10b: Museum of Finnish Architecture 

https://www.amazon.es/s/ref=dp_byline_sr_ebooks_1?ie=UTF8&text=Franz+Schulze&search-alias=digital-text&field-author=Franz+Schulze&sort=relevancerank
https://www.amazon.es/s/ref=dp_byline_sr_ebooks_2?ie=UTF8&text=Edward+Windhorst&search-alias=digital-text&field-author=Edward+Windhorst&sort=relevancerank

	A Convergence of Traditions: Saint Lawrence Chapel, by Avanto Architects
	Abstract:
	Keywords: architectural competitions, modernity and representation, nordic architecture.
	Lizondo Sevilla, Laura, José Santatecla Fayos, & Nuria Salvador Luján. "Mies in Brussels 1934. Synthesis of an Unbuilt Exhibition Architecture" VLC arquitectura. Research Journal, v. 3 n.1 (2016): 29-53.


