












































Microsoft Word - Informal interactions in 3D education Citizenship participation and assessment of virtual urban proposals CHB-


Informal interactions in 3D education: Citizenship 
participation and assessment of virtual urban proposals 

David Fonsecaa, � 

fonsi@salle.url.edu 

Francesc Vallsb 

f.valls@upc.edu 

Ernest Redondob 

ernesto.redondo@upc.edu 

Sergi Villagrasaa 

sergiv@salle.url.edu 

aLa Salle Barcelona Campus, Ramon Llull University, Barcelona, Spain 

bExpressió Gràfica Arquitectònica I, Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya, Barcelona, 

Spain 

�Corresponding author at: La Salle Barcelona Campus, Ramon Llull University, C/ 

Quatre Camins 2, 08022 Barcelona, Spain. Tel.: +34 932902430. 

Abstract 

The main focus of this study was the inclusion of informal methods in the educational 

frameworks of architectural and urban design. The project used is based on the 3D 

representation of virtual models of new urban proposals in order to re-organize a local 

market in Tonalá, Mexico. Starting from a formal course, where the students had to 

develop solutions to real architecture and urban problems, a second phase was designed, 

based on feedback in an informal environment by the end-users (citizens and 

professionals). The key objectives of the experiment were to show students to connect 

and receive feedback through technology, evaluate how these interactions can define 

new informal ways of learning, and discuss how this informal data can be incorporated 

into an academic curriculum. The results confirm how the informal interaction 

constitutes a great contribution in the improvement of student’s skills, even considering 

that the incorporation of informal data into their evaluation still remains challenging. 

Keywords: Formal and informal learning; 3D education; Urban planning;Academic 

motivation; User experience; Qualitative assessment 

1 Introduction 
Information Technology (IT) represents a set of tools and applications that allow 

the incorporation and strengthening of new educational strategies, many of which have 



been defined in new teaching frameworks in the last two decades (Dede, 2000). In 

recent years, the use of ITs has spread to all levels of our society. The affordability of 

prices and the popularity of devices and applications have enabled its ubiquitous 

presence in leisure, relationships, work activities and of course teaching. The adaptation 

of contents and applications in this area has emerged as an interesting field of study to 

assess the degree of motivation, satisfaction and usability of students (Redondo, 

Sánchez, Fonseca & Navarro, 2014), and their academic improvement (Fonseca, Martí, 

Redondo, Navarro & Sánchez, 2014). To evaluate these premises, the standard approach 

is to start from formal educational approaches and quantitative studies, but as has been 

recently demonstrated (Fonseca, Redondo & Villagrasa, 2014), qualitative approaches 

are equally valid and allow a more accurate characterization of the teaching 

experiences, especially when these involve IT. 

On the other hand, informal learning is a potential tool to evaluate the 

citizens’ response and is typically associated with other fields of science, technology, 

engineering, and mathematics (STEM) education (Gray, Nicosia, & Jordan, 2012; 

Mueller, Tippins, & Bryan, 2012), and a basic skill to be developed specially in the 

education of future urban planners, architects, or building engineers. The importance of 

informal learning lies in the fact that 70% of a person’s learning is done informally, 

either at work or at school (Marsick, Watkins, Callahan, & Volpe, 2006). While the 

veracity of this rule can be discussed, it cannot be disputed that the designs of architects, 

urban or building engineers will be used by the citizens, and the citizens’ response and 

evaluation will be essential to develop successful projects and proposals. As 

students’progress from high school to college and graduate schools, the role of informal 

learning becomes increasingly important because learning can happen anywhere at any 

time (a key concept in the learning process of architecture students, because architecture 

is everywhere). As Banks et al. (2007) propose, our students acquire knowledge as a 

result of interactions between connected partners. 

New technology implementations in the teaching field have been 

largelyextended to all types of levels and educational frameworks. In recent years, in 

addition to technology use in the classroom, new areas of research are opened to assess 

and recognize more effective and satisfactory teaching methods, such as: gamification 

strategies, Project Based Learning (PBL), Scenario Centered Curriculum (SCC), and the 

recognition of capabilities that provide the non-formal and informal education. The use 

of IT in learning methods, especially at the level of graduate or postgraduate degrees in 

frameworks related to Architecture, Urban Planning and Design, or Building 

Engineering, is defined in the new academic plans. It is important that the student 



should be able to get competencies and skills related to active and collaborative 

learning, and digital information management, all of them using roles and PBL 

exercises. All of these methods are prepared for a quicker and more effective 

capacitation of the student compared to classic educational methods. 

For all these reasons, it is necessary to propose new educational methods that 

complete the actual PBL and SCC systems, increasing the student motivation, and their 

involvement and performance. The interest of educators in using these technologies in 

the teaching process supposes greater engagement and an increase in the students 

comprehension of content (Kreijns, Acker, Vermeulen, & Buuren, 2013; Roca & 

Gagné, 2008; Shen, Liu, & Wang, 2013), leading to an improvement in academic 

results. 

Not until recently, research has begun to quantify the huge impacts of informal 

experiences outside the classroom on motivation and achievement. Architecture, Civil 

and Urban design education should not be solely located in a closed environment 

(classrooms), but just the opposite, it should also take place outside the classroom on 

the streets, squares, etc. (Medeiros, 2011). In these open places knowledge is often built 

via collaboration, and people act as learners and teachers alike (Bell & et al., 2009). 

Recognizing that learning occurs across such a wide range of settings can lead to new 

significance to such simple and everyday actions as a walking to the bus stop, a jog in 

the park, or even a conversation over dinner, because in all these situations the 

architecture and/or design is around the student. Given this understanding, landscape 

architects, civil and building engineers or urban designers have a particularly interesting 

and exciting responsibility to help the public become interested, informed, and 

fascinated with their proposals (Scheerens, 2009). 

We can affirm that in the last years, more attention has been given to the idea of 

active participation of communities and individuals (the end-users) in the development 

of policies, programs or proposals that affect their lives (Foroughi, 2013; Fung & 

Wright, 2003; Hall & Clover, 2005; Schugurensky, 2004). As will be discussed further 

in the paper, a successful informal learning space is a topic in need of further research, 

but especially useful for a student, as in our case, who will be in direct contact with the 

needs of today’s society, and therefore needs to improve his or her training exploring 

the behavior of end users. 

The present study has two main objectives. First, we analyze the implementation 

process, the difficulties of use, and the degree of students’satisfaction when using an 

advanced visualization technology with personal mobile devices – we proposed the use 

of Virtual and Augmented Reality (VR/AR) and Digital Sketching using Hybrid Models 



(DS/HM). Secondly, we will investigate the informal data from end-users, who have 

interacted with the 3D student’s proposals and will discuss if the proposals of the 

students have been designed successfully. We will employ a qualitative analysis to 

obtain the most relevant aspects of the experience that should be improved both in 

future interactions of students, architects or engineers, and in any new technological 

implementations within a teaching framework. Analyzing the results of these objectives 

will lead to a better understanding of how to implement new teaching methods with 

mobile technologies and how to manage hybrid approaches between formal and 

informal education in our educational sector. 

2 Literature review 
2.1 Informal education: citizenship role in architecture, 
building or urban design 

The User eXperience (UX), and the usability of a product or project have been 

handled normally as tools for testing the quality of every utility or system (Nielsen, 

2012). Based on the results that the product obtained of the interaction with end-users, 

developers get valuable information. This feedback allows a better adjustment, 

redesigning and improving a system based on the opinion and typology of the end-

users. Historically this process has been used in the design of web environments, 

consumer products such as appliances and all kinds of technology, especially those 

related to areas such as leisure and social relations (Nielsen, 2000). However we can 

affirm that it has great potential if adapted appropriately to education, since based on the 

behavior and emotions of end-users of a proposal, the designers of those (students) may 

improve in future projects. 

Usually most studies are designed in a regulated manner, i.e. within an 

educational environment and a formal student training. However, in recent decades, 

there have been studies and research that emphasize the importance of other forms of 

education away from schools, regardless of the level (Harrop & Turpin, 2013; Jamieson, 

Dane, & Lippman, 2005; La Belle, 1982). Learning processes are not only confined in 

regulated areas but also non-formal or informal ways are present throughout a person’s 

lifetime. To do so initially we must clearly differentiate between all types of education 

currently defined (Coombs, Prosser, & Ahmed, 1973): 

• 

Formal education: Learning typically provided by an education or a training 

institution, structured and leading to certification. Formal learning is intentional from 

the learner’s perspective: the hierarchically-structured, chronologically-

graded ‘education system’, running from primary school through university and 



including, in addition to general academic studies, a variety of specialized programs and 

institution for full-time technical and professional training. 

• 

Non formal: Any organized educational activity outside the established formal 

system – either operating separately or as an important feature of some broader 

activity – that is intended to serve identifiable learning users and learning objectives. 

• 

Informal: Learning resulting from daily life activities related to work, family or 

leisure. It is not structured (in terms of learning objectives, learning time or learning 

support) and typically does not lead to certification. In this case, each individual 

acquires attitudes, values, skills and knowledge from daily experience and the 

educational influence and resources in his or her environment. 

In base of these definitions, the architectural education allows incorporating (in 

a complementary way) non-formal educational elements, such as specialized courses, as 

well as informal education. In the education of a future architect or of a similar 

profession (such as a building engineer, civil engineer, or interior designer), the 

acquisition of knowledge informally is vital, because the development of a professional 

project always has a huge influence based on experience. Along this line, one of the 

great forgotten issues in urban design has been the project perception of the end-users 

(Fraser & Miss, 2012). This review not only determines the success or failure of a 

project, but also informally influences the education of both future architects and active 

professionals (Bilandzic, 2013; Hawkinson, 2013; Rios, 2014). 

It would be difficult to compile the number of functional projects based on their 

design that have become architectural failures or that have generated controversy once 

finished (Benévolo, 1997; Frampton, 1981; Pampinella, 2000). As listed below, not 

even the great architects and their works have been free of bad user experiences, from 

structural problems or other minor problems that affect the end-user. The perception and 

assimilation of criticism continues to be an example of informal education, better or 

worse incorporated into new professional projects (Schugurensky & Myers, 2008). We 

have new interesting opportunities based on informal civic democracy to engage both 

students and citizens in the design of our new society’s cities and urban projects: 

• 

7 buildings with structural problems that cause problems in the environment or 

in its habitability (Taylor-Foster, 2013). 

• 



Examples of dangerous constructions for users and/or with building problems 

(Luna Corento, 2013): 

• 

Constitution Bridge, Venice and Zubizuri Bridge, Bilbao. Santiago Calatrava. 

• 

City of Culture, Santiago de Compostela, Peter Eisenman 

• 

Nous Encants, Barcelona, Fermín Vázquez 

•• 

Farnsworth House, Mies van der Rohe. This weekend retreat was never 

inhabited apart from the budget problems between client and architect; it is remarkable 

due to environmental comfort issues (Craven, 2013). 

• 

Ville Savoye, Le Corbusier (Bobhate, 2011). From the onset of its construction, 

the building had severe problems with the weather, both from water and wind, being 

widely documented in the correspondence between the residents and the architect (Al 

Shawa, 2011; Sully, 2009). 

• 

Paving tiles in Paseo de Gracia, Terradas Architects. The design of the new 

pavement meets aesthetic, a comprehensive study of materials and their adaptation to 

the Mediterranean climate, but has also been criticized for its roughness and possible 

problems that can cause treading with heels (Mateos & Quelart, 2014). 

• 

Olympic Stadium, Montreal. Roger Taillibert. This building is famous because 

its cost (more than 20 years to be paid, Wright, 1978), and its structural problems (in 

study its possible demolition because its underuse, Roult & Lefebvre, 2010), being 

initially a groundbreaking building with the tallest inclined tower in the world (Lazzari, 

Majowiecki, Vitaliani, & Saetta, 2009). 

• 

The disease of modern buildings: the semicircular lipoatrophy. Referenced and 

related buildings for the first time in 1974 (Gschwandtner & Münzberger, 1974; 

Romanillos, 2007). 

• 

… 



As Biggs proposed (1999), the evaluation and control of the quality of education 

and development of students is a key concept in the implementation of technologies in 

classrooms: teaching and assessment practices must be aligned with the aims of 

teaching. In this sense one of the most standardized examples of aligned teaching is the 

work using SCC and PBL, which in fields of Civil, Urban and Building engineering, 

where the project is restricted as explained in this paper, are perfectly suited. However, 

the experience shows a high rate of very subjective assessments (same project for 

different architect or end-user can switch seamlessly to failure). For this reason, it is 

common to find courses and professionals very reluctant to implement self-evaluative 

systems and/or clarify the evaluation of Teaching/Learning Activities (TLAs), as well as 

to take into account the opinion of the citizenship in their proposals (one of the main 

reasons why informal learning in our educational field is being difficult to incorporate). 

The justification of a subjective evaluation system is based on the negative effects that 

explicit quantitative assessment have on the student, where this can be spent to follow a 

strategy that will help students not to pass but to learn. It is not the only case of some 

difficulties in the integration of informal learning in the schedule of the subjects 

(Werquin, 2008), there are other factors as for example the response time of the users, 

the relevance, the validity of the responses, etc. 

In conclusion, it seems to be clear the need to incorporate an informal approach 

to education of areas whose projects are to be used by the public is essential. The views 

of users are not only basic but provide information that the student should be able to 

assimilate in their education to improve the acquisition of skills and competencies 

described in their academic plans. However, as we will later see it is not an easy task, 

and the results need a complicated and time consuming process of interpretation which 

impairs effective incorporation into semi-evaluation processes currently used. 

2.2 New learning strategies: Good practices and SCC 
Designing an educational experiment does not always work successfully. 

Involving new technologies and the use of multiple devices is not always synonym of 

an effective user experience (Rodriguez-Izquierdo, 2010; Fonseca, Redondo, & 

Villagrasa, 2014). A good design to motivate and improve students’learning can be 

transformed into just the opposite. Any “Good Educational Practice” must have 

different parameters for monitoring and evaluating each exercise, environment and 

student (Fonseca, Martí, Redondo, Navarro, & Sánchez, 2014). And on the opposite 

side there is the students’ work. As a practical exercise it can perfectly meet all 

evaluable and pre-established criteria in technology and performance, but it would be 

necessary to check whether the proposal is also functional and usable (Sánchez, 



Redondo & Fonseca, 2012). This is an essential step which is usually forgotten in the 

teaching faculties, mainly due to lack of time (Fonseca, Villagrasa, Valls, Redondo, 

Climent & Vicent, 2014), and in which we focus our case study. 

The interest, necessity, and urgency of implementing new technologies in 

education and universities is a relatively new situation (Rogers, 2000). However, 

technological innovation, which is intended to improve the student learning process, 

must be capable of providing support to address difficulties that could arise with the 

student in the use of and interaction with technological elements. These elements must 

not obstruct the auto-learning process, which is altered by this technology, and the 

students must be motivated with the new educational methodology. It is not unusual for 

the faculty to be the first line of resistance against technological innovations in teaching. 

There is a natural reticence in the academic field about the use of technologies that are 

associated with leisure or personal relationships, such as mobile devices (Fonseca  

Redondo & Villagrasa, 2014). 

Another major deterrent to implementing IT in teaching is the administrative 

environment: professors must be trained (Georgina & Olson, 2007) and must be capable 

of giving full-time support to students, the success of which is dependent on the 

professors’ willingness and ability to devote the time required for the training, 

modification, and update of the related content. To incorporate a new IT-based 

methodology into a specific teaching environment, some recommendations for avoiding 

student rejection must be considered. The literature defines so-called “good educational 

practices” that are primarily focused on virtual rooms, distance education (or e-

learning), and semi-present teaching (Moreira, Santos & Vargas, 2010). From the 

specific characteristics that shape these practices, four points can be extrapolated, as 

indicated by the following principal objectives: 

• 

Promotion of professor–student relationships: More effective feedback process. 

• 

Dynamic development among students: Collaborative techniques. 

• 

Contribution to better task realization by heterogeneous learning methods. 

• 

Applying teaching/learning methods based on teaching innovation and new IT 

technologies. 



According to different authors (Massy & Zemsky, 1995; Phang & Kankanhalli, 

2008), any methodology that promotes the inclusion of IT in teaching must have the 

following objectives, based on four main categories (social, cultural and personal aids): 

• 

Personal production help: applications that allow both the professors and 

students to carry out tasks faster and more efficiently (i.e., calculation sheets or text 

processers, draw programs). 

• 

Content improvement: the use of tools that allow for the notification and 

modification of content rapidly and efficiently (i.e., e-mail, digital content, video, 

multimedia resources) without changing the basic teaching method. 

• 

Paradigm change: at this level, the teacher reconfigures the teaching activity and 

learning activities to utilize the new incorporated technologies and methodologies to 

improve the educational tasks. 

Examples of educational methodologies that have implemented the two first 

objectives are common, but examples that incorporate the third objective are much less 

common. In this direction, we can find examples that are incorporating quite successful 

teaching strategies based on SCC, game design for task tracking (also known as 

gamification) and taking into account courses and activities that could encompass as 

non-formal or informal tasks. 

In contrast to traditional programs (passive and focused on subject matter) a 

SCC offers an experience equivalent to learning a trade: learners must face a well-

planned series of real situations (scenarios) in a significant and motivating role. Within 

these scenarios, they must carry out precisely those tasks, activities and reasoning 

processes that are best suited for building the desired skills (Higueras, 2013). This way, 

learners facing a problem on their own notice why certain skills are useful. This type of 

program is the most common exercise that the civil and building engineering students 

are doing using a PBL system. The SCC are defined as the following: 

• 

Scenario: Simulation of an authentic situation that can motivate providing a 

coherent context for individual and collective learning. 

• 

Sequence of planned tasks. Framed within the scenario, this allows the student 

to practice the key behaviors targeted in the training and, as a result, learn them. 



• 

Structured suite of complementary learning resources: This includes work 

procedures, models to be used, job aids, workplace tools, glossaries, etc. 

• 

Access to a mentor: Online or in person, to obtain feedback and help precisely 

when it is necessary to reinforce learning. 

In civil engineering, urban design and construction education, students are 

accustomed to using SCC and PBL strategies in the learning process. However the 3D 

visualization and comprehension are skills and abilities which are marked in their 

learning, where virtual and environmental systems are being the ones that are showing 

better adaptation to such content. Additionally, we can find studies that have reflected 

the role of gamification and game-based learning (as a sub-model of PBL) in 

assessment within virtual environments (Wood, Teräs, & Reiners, 2013), an example of 

systems that can improve the assessment while increasing efficiency and providing new 

opportunities for educators to use motivation and ubiquitous systems (Villagrasa, 

Fonseca, & Durán, 2014). 

The combination of 3D models with urban information (specifically when this 

information can be viewed and managed ubiquitously) will allow students the 

acquisition of skills related to historical knowledge, project development, and urban 

planning. Future architects and planners should be able to manage the SCC proposed 

from early stages, since in this particular field it is very difficult to work with 

abstractions and simplified models. The use of ICTs in education has the clear objective 

to promote an enhanced learning (TEL), which in multiple forms (assistance and semi-

assistance), generates on one hand much more motivation and academic improvement 

of students and on the other hand teachers have greater ease of monitoring and 

evaluation. Literature on use of explicit, pedagogical strategies dedicated to enhance 

creative problem solving is relatively scarce (Retalis & Sloep, 2011). 

Thus, there is an open research and development issue on learning strategies that 

could effectively promote creativity and innovation. The design-oriented pedagogy for 

TEL (for example using exercises based on PBL) allows the students using 

collaborative environments to create and discuss new spatial proposals, improving both 

general and specific skills in the border of formal and informal educational 

environments Learning to collaborate and connect through technology is an essential 

skill that future societies will expect from its people (Binkley et al., 2011). 



2.3 Information technologies: Enhancing the student 
motivation and new assessment methods 
2.3.1 Mobile learning and education 

Mobile Learning (ML), early works addressed from a scientific point of view 

are COMTEXT (Kristoffersen & Ljungberg, 1999), understood as a virtual environment 

for learning using mobile devices. Other experiences (Lehner & Nosekabel, 2002), 

extend the same idea in a virtual university based on the use of Internet and mobile 

devices, by developing a ML platform called WELcome. However we could simplify its 

definition as one of the new learning strategies that is based on the use of mobile 

devices in education, profiting from their graphical power, applications and 

connectivity. These devices and their applications are what allows us to say that we are 

in front of the new sketchbooks, because due to their increasing usability and resolution 

we are able to draw freehanded (Fig. 1). 

 
Fig. 1 Digital Sketching using tablet-pc. 

Moreover, promoting offsite collaborative work, students using mobile devices 

such as smartphones or tablets have greater capability not only to share and exchange 

their work between them and with their teachers, but also to search and access all kinds 

of support information much more quickly, making the sketching activity, the 

continuous self-learning and the contextual training, a more enriching experience than 

the classic system of lectures. 

The evolution of mobile technologies and the increased power and 

sophistication of mobile phones, which have led to the advent of smartphones and 

tablets in the last ten years, have created a new body of research on the use and 

optimization of these devices in ubiquitous training, allowing for both onsite and virtual 

collaborative work with faculty members and students (Lu, 2012; Parsons, 2012). The 

increasingly advanced but easy-to-navigate applications directly generate a greater 

utility perception from the user and a better attitude about using this technology (Kuo & 



Yen, 2009); these premises represent one starting point for a more consistent inclusion 

of these technologies in teaching. 

We can define the generic ML concept, with the following principal 

characteristics: the interaction between the user and content, the contribution of media 

to immersive environments, the incorporation of communication technologies, the use 

of new contexts for education, and the awareness that sharing and recording the process 

of learning is possible. This definition includes technology because it involves the 

provision of collaborative tools, such as blogs and wikis (Moran, Seaman, & Tinti-

Kane, 2011), mobile-device interactions (e.g., iPhones, Android mobile phones, Wiis, 

iPods), new virtual simulation training environments (e.g., Second Life, VR, AR), and 

connectivity tools for searching locations (e.g., 2D codes, Google Maps). 

The collaborative training tools between teachers and students can be 

strengthened when they use familiar technological resources where students can 

demonstrate their receptiveness. The integration of mobile devices with multimedia 

applications provides students with immediate access to information (unlike traditional 

methods) and expands their experience beyond the academic environment. 

2.3.2 Digital Sketching: the new travelogue of architects 
We can define the Digital Sketching (DS), as those drawn on mobile devices 

using pointers or gestures that mimic traditional techniques and require the same skills 

than traditional freehand drawing (Fig. 2) (Redondo, 2010). These methods and systems 

support many more editing possibilities and make easier to share the work on the 

network, especially if compared to traditional travel sketchbooks. The union of these 

devices with the specific characteristics of digital drawing allows us to affirm that we 

are in front of the natural evolution of said travel sketchbooks and the on-site sketches 

or the sketches in the early stages of the project, which represent a large qualitative leap 

in the advance of architectural drawing. 

 
Fig. 2 Examples of Digital Sketching using mobile devices. 



In this direction, and based on several previous experiences in architectural 

teaching (Redondo & Santana, 2010), it has been shown that this type of drawing over 

digital interactive boards is a suitable tool for the teaching of traditional drawing and 

that its use in combination with IT improves the graphics skills and the 

students’ academic performance. Generalizing the working definition, it could be said 

that we are in front of a hybrid drawing technique, and could be defined as the work 

with files in different formats that are juxtaposed in the same representational level. 

Another way to define these systems would be that they are the methods through which 

a drawing or graphic can be generated using elements of different nature, or what is the 

same, strategies and methodologies where perception and geometry, art and technique, 

manual and mechanical are blended. In short, the artistic and technical–geometrical 

components are put together in as single system, not juxtaposed but sharing the same 

digital platform (Fig 3). 

 
Fig. 3 Examples on Hybrid models and representation. 

While the various groups of tools discussed give support to all kinds of 

problems in any environment, hybrid drawings have mainly focused on solving the 

representation of architectural designs (Leggitt, 2009; Uddin, 1999; Yaman, 2009). 

Thanks to this clear approach we can say that in view of the weakness in the perceptual 

training of students and their natural acceptance of computer resources (Bennett, Maton, 

& Kervin, 2008; Prensky, 2001), these systems can be a helpful shortcut in their training 

and spatial comprehension. Likewise, it is clear that hybrid approaches applied on 



teaching strategies, especially when related to graphical topics, can be a solution to both 

improve students’motivation and ease their learning process. 

2.3.3 Hybrid visualization methods: from VR to AR 
One visualization technology that is gaining attention and is being incorporated 

into every field is Augmented Reality (AR). Its creators (Milgram & Takemura, 1994) 

define AR as a VR variation in which the user can see the real world with virtual objects 

mixed or superimposed upon it. In contrast to VR, AR does not replace the real 

environment; rather, AR uses the real environment as a background. AR and VR share 

common features, including immersion, navigation, and interaction (Dunleavy, Dede, & 

Mitchell, 2008). However, AR has two main advantages over VR. First, AR allows for 

collaborative experiences in a real scene: users can work with computer-generated 

objects as if they were real objects in a real environment, in real time. Second, AR 

allows for tangible interactions: by superimposing virtual objects onto a real 

environment through markers, the user can modify and manipulate the scale, position, 

and location of virtual objects. AR technology, by providing new interaction 

possibilities, promotes active student participation in its own knowledge construction. 

This concrete superposition capability between virtual models and reality makes 

this technology an interesting resource in any type of teaching in which improving 

students’ spatial comprehension may be required. In education, however, AR might be 

considered a new tool, and further studies are necessary, with particular attention paid to 

the user experience and learning process. Concretely, the entertainment capability of 

these technologies can increase interest in less interesting classes, including classes in 

which the content is presented with no interaction with the student, which could lead to 

demotivation and loss of interest (Chen & Wang, 2008; Di Serio, Ibáñez, & Kloos, 

2012). 

One of the main objectives of the present study is performed within the context 

of the use of AR in architecture and urban design instruction to improve 

students’ spatial comprehension, a topic that few studies have investigated (Broll et al., 

2004; Malawi & Srinivasan, 2004; Piekarski & Thomas, 2001; Tonn, Petzold, Bimber, 

Grundhöfer, & Donath, 2008). The integration must be accurate and at the right scale to 

achieve the hypothetical situation and size matching in an actual scene. If a student can 

control these parameters and avoid possible mistakes, he/she will achieve an 

improvement in spatial capacity for analyzing any type of architectural figure using a 

familiar technology, such as his/her own mobile device (e.g., laptop or telephone) and 

can work collaboratively in knowledge creation and generation with his/her classmates 

and the faculty. At this point the importance of evaluation that students receive by 



citizens and their proposals arises. And this view is especially important since they will 

be users who interact with the proposals in the event that these are implemented, and 

therefore use, or suffer the generated design. 

In architectural education, the visual component is one of the more relevant 

aspects that a student works and studies with (Boeykens, Santana-Quintero, & 

Neuckermans, 2008). Spatial information is represented in a number of ways, ranging 

from traditional methods, such as printed plans and physical models (working from 2D 

to 3D), to modern methods, which we call as“hybrid” since they are designed with the 

aim of visualize in the most optimal way any architectural or urban proposal. 

Focusing on the specific case of AR, and the introduction of this technology in 

different areas of the architectural education framework, is easy find examples in 

design, excavation, staking, inspection, coordination, urbanism, landscape design, 

rehabilitation, tourism and supervision of tasks (Hawkinson, 2013; Shin & Dunston, 

2008; Sánchez & Borro, 2007; Tonn et al., 2008). New platforms and paradigms 

emerged to propel AR development in smartphones, such as Junaio, Layar and 

Wikitude, all of them in order to improve potential problems. All of these companies 

embraced a new concept that consisted in creating AR browsers with a number of 

features that allowed developers to produce AR content according to a specific set of 

rules and, finally, enabled end-users to view computer generated elements superimposed 

on the live camera view of common smartphones. These AR browsers are compatible 

with most mobile operating systems, such as Android, the iOS, or Symbian. 

A framework in which this technology could potentially be used in more 

interesting ways is the representation and management of territory, because real scenes 

could be “completed” with virtual information. This method would facilitate a greater 

awareness and better understanding of the environment, especially if used in the 

architectural educational framework, for example with the visualization of 3D complex 

models (Redondo, Sánchez,  Fonseca, & Peredo,  2013; Redondo, Fonseca, Sánchez & 

Navarro, 2014). 

3 Case of study 
3.1 Location and project design 

The city of Tonalá is located a few kilometers from Guadalajara, Mexico. It is 

an urban area whose traditional activity has always been the industry and handcraft of 

pottery and its street markets. These street markets are commonly known as “Tianguis”; 

the most famous one takes place on Sundays and Wednesdays because of its size and 

the variety of products sold. This market chaotically occupies much of the streets of the 



city. The Municipality of Tonalá is trying to regulate these markets and at the same time 

trying to improve the infrastructure of the city, with special emphasis on the sidewalks 

and signage of their streets. 

As we can see in Fig. 4, the aim of these objectives is not only to improve the 

urban landscape but also remove architectural barriers. Citizen participation in these 

processes are not common and a challenge in our particular case. The city of Tonalá has 

neither previous experience in UX projects nor a high level of implementation of 

advanced devices for mobile visualization and interaction. In this case, in addition to the 

evaluation of the use of IT in the design phase and the visualization of new proposals in 

an education environment, we aimed to harness the structure of the University of 

Guadalajara to engage students and faculty of the Tonalá High Schools, as well as 

professionals of architecture and urbanism, and at the same time local merchants in the 

evaluation process of the students proposals for an informal feedback. 

 
Fig. 4 Tianguis location in Tonalá. Urban-rehabilitation project. 

The PBL is designed from two distinct approaches: the completion of a formal 

exercise and informal evaluation of the proposal by users. By performing the proposed 

PBL, students not only have been evaluated according to their acquisition of skills and 

competencies but first approached the review of their work by their future end users (the 

society in which they will project), as pre-established main objective. 

The formal exercise is designed for inclusion in the workshop “Computer 

Systems applied to the Graphic Analysis of Architecture” (from 24 h February 2014), 

and was developed in the Master in Processes and Graphic Expression of the Urban and 



Architectural Project of the CUAAD (Centro Universitario de Arte, Arquitectura y 

Diseño, CUAAD) of the University of Guadalajara in Jalisco, México. The main 

objective that this workshop developed was the following: initial evaluation of the 

technological profile of the student. The objective was to evaluate the real possibility of 

exercising, (because it is necessary that students have both the technology, time and 

motivation necessary for a successful experience). In order to achieve this, we have 

designed two phases: 

• 

Basic exercises using AR: This phase is intended to train students in all 

necessary techniques, allowing them to coordinate and display the 3D models in real 

space contexts. 

• 

Qualitative evaluation on the use of AR (using the Bipolar Laddering 

Assessment, BLA, which we will discuss in the next section). 

In addition to the informal evaluation of proposals, explanatory posters were 

positioned in the location corresponding to the position developed. Thus, users with 

available camera devices have been able to visualize and evaluate qualitatively AR 

models such proposals. In the results section will discuss in more detail this part of the 

project. The data presented in this informal stage is still preliminary. While it did 

already provide as discussed below useful information for students, the goal is to 

continue until mid-2015 to get the most responses. We must recall that citizens use the 

QR (Quick Response) that allows the evaluation of proposals in their location (the QR 

links to a survey with questions related to AR and the student proposals). 

The initial workshop is part of the first phase (formal education), and had these 

following objectives: modeling new street furniture (points of sale of the“Tianguis”), 

reorganization of the streets and their new urban design using DS through digital 

drawing on tablets, and conducting the evaluation and visualization of proposals using 

AR and VR-Objects over mobile devices. VR-Objects and interactive panoramas are 

representations generated by juxtaposition of multiple renders that make up a SkyCube 

or SkyDome. They are managed by a HTML file, in the first case creating a panoramic 

view around the observer, and in the second orbiting around a point. These files are 

downloaded into a smartphone or tablet, in addition to being orbited with a finger, 

leveraging the capabilities of the accelerometers to simulate the rotation of the viewer in 

a real setting (in our case incorporated in the virtual model as circular panoramic image 

in PNG format). 



The first part of the workshop consisted on a 5-h session where the subject and 

the work system was presented, initial surveys about the students profiles were 

conducted, and the project site was visited. In the second session, with the guidance of 

tutorials and the lecturer, the different technologies that would be used (DS and AR) 

were explained and tested using mobile devices (smartphones and tablets, both Android 

and iOS) using markers or geo-referenced positioning. In the third session, groups of 

two were defined that had to propose the design of a new hawker stand and the draft of 

a new paving and remodeling of the streets in the area of study. The fourth session was 

dedicated to export the virtual models to the AR applications and the geo-referenced 

interactive panoramas created with VR-Objects, testing the visualization of all elements 

in the CUAAD premises. Notably, since the models were not fully developed in the 

initial phase, they lacked definition about their structural framework or massing, but 

were useful as a first visualization approach (Fig. 5). The last session was dedicated to 

the public, presentation of the results and the final survey using BLA methodology. 

 
Fig. 5 Test of prototypes visualization using AR. 

For the proposal, the objects/images were generated in Artlantis and its 

visualization configuration was done with iVisit 3D Builder. After this steps, by placing 

the files as a shared resource using Dropbox, the users could download the files in their 

devices to visualize them with the iVisit 3D Player. One of the main features of the 

viewer is that it allows to geo-reference the panorama according to its heading, and 



download it with a QR core in its precise location, facilitating a better understanding of 

the model. 

The AR visualization tests were carried out with the AR-media Plugin for 

SketchUp and its viewer ARplayer, both for Android and iOS devices. The generation 

of interactive panoramas and VR-Objects were done from the educational version of 

Artlantis and the export module iVisit 3D Builder to be able to visualize the models in 

the iVisit 3D application for Android and iOS (Fig. 6). 

 
Fig. 6 Process of generation of interactive panoramas ready for mobile devices. 

On the other hand, the DS application used was the educational version of 

SketchBook on iPad 2 tablets (see examples in Fig. 7). The final presentation of the 

course was the creation of a panel, triptych or report that explained the urban design 

project and point of sale proposal that at the same time described the creative process. 

For this purpose, the students had to illustrate their work and the design process through 

DS, AR and VR-Objects, including an explanation of the process. All the information 

had to be stored in a link identified with a QR code. 



 
Fig. 7 DS in mobile devices. 

Educational evaluation is certainly a field in continuous development and 

constant new proposals. Based on the initial user profile survey results, and given the 

availability of students’ use of tablets during the course (at least one per group), these 

devices allowed study sketches, intuitive photomontages and freehand sketches on the 

project site. The purpose of this work was to assess the substitution of the traditional 

travel notebooks with mobile devices capable to fulfill these needs. Of the 30 students 

of the group, 27 got a passing grade and 4 of them passed with honors because they 

were able to generate all the work requested, with good architectural quality and 

presentation. 

3.2 Educational assessment: qualitative formal and informal 
approach 

As previously stated, one of the key issues in the current university teaching is 

the management of student motivation. The change in the educational systems of the 

past decade (which involved a reduction in the number of hours of teaching classes), 

along with a reduction in the number of university students has caused a shift in the 

teaching paradigm, currently focused on how to improve the ability and skills of the 

students. 

• 

The proposal presented in this article, evaluation is if anything even more 

complex, as we aim to involve three distinct approaches: The Teachers evaluation 

(formal education). In this field, we are migrating from traditional systems based on 

tests to testing new models that assess the degree of acquisition of competencies and 



skills described in each case. The evaluation through rubrics and their adaptation to the 

student tracking systems are currently a challenge regarding their implementation. 

• 

The evaluation of the technological proposals and their adaptation to students 

(UX study). For any given assessment of both technological or not, discussions arise 

whether the best approach is quantitative work, qualitative or mixed (which fuses both), 

the generation of statistical analysis of responses, indicators, correlation studies, etc. 

• 

The evaluation of the end-uses (informal feedback). The study by SCC and PBL 

generates a huge amount of subjective and difficult to parameterize information, but 

nevertheless provides a quality assessment on the work done by the student. 

In our case, as we have stated previously, we propose the use of AR and DS as 

working platforms and presentation of planning proposals. To this objective we will 

design various assessment tasks in order to parameterize the experience at the highest 

level possible. This process is necessary for future iterations to more clearly define in a 

teaching methodology that integrates formal and informal aspects. Initially students will 

do a quantitative test to assess their technological profile. After the practical part, we 

have generated rubrics for teacher evaluation, a qualitative test for the evaluation of the 

usability of the technology used, and finally (and in order to incorporate the informal 

evaluation of the project), we have interviewed a number of random users about 

whether their valuations affect the educational experience of students, but in the case of 

this first proposal without being quantified formally. 

Qualitative methods have been traditionally linked to the social sciences 

because of their association with human factors and user experience (UX). User 

research techniques have been historically related to the Human–Computer Interaction. 

The user approach in this discipline is mainly focused on the study of behavioral goals 

in work settings. In consequence, the task becomes the pivotal point of user-centered 

analysis and evaluation techniques (e.g. usability testing). The qualitative studies are 

inspired by experimental psychology and the hypothetical-deductive paradigm, and 

employ samples of users who are relatively limited. 

Nevertheless, the Socratic paradigm from postmodern psychology is also 

applicable and useful in these usability studies because it targets details related to the 

UX with high reliability and uncovers subtle information about the product or 

technology studied (Pifarré & Tomico, 2007). This migration from the hypothetical-

deductive paradigm to the Socratic paradigm was inspired by the paradigm shift in 



clinical psychology away from constructivism and toward other post-modern schools of 

psychotherapy. This psychological model defends the subjective treatment of the user, 

unlike the objective hypothetical-deductive model (Guidano, 1989). 

Starting from the Socratic paradigm basis, the BLA system (Bipolar Laddering) 

has been designed. BLA method could be defined as a psychological exploration 

technique, which points out the key factors of user experience. The main goal of this 

system is to ascertain which concrete characteristic of the product entails 

users’ frustration, confidence or gratitude (between many others). The BLA method 

works on positive and negative poles to define the strengths and weaknesses of the 

product. Once the element is obtained the laddering technique is going to be applied to 

define the relevant details of the product. 

The object of a laddering interview is to uncover how product attributes, usage 

consequences, and personal values are linked in a person’s mind. The characteristics 

obtained through laddering application will define what specific factors make consider 

an element as strength or as a weakness. BLA performing consists in three steps: 

• 

Elicitation of the elements: The implementation of the test starts from a blank 

template for the positive elements (strengths) and another exactly the same for the 

negative elements (weaknesses). 

• 

Marking of elements: Once the list of positive and negative elements is 

completed, the interviewer will ask the user to mark each one from 0 (lowest possible 

level of satisfaction) to 10 (maximum level of satisfaction). 

• 

Elements definition: The interviewer reads out the elements of both lists to the 

user and asks for a justification of each one of the elements performing laddering 

technique. Why is it a positive element? Why this mark? 

Once the element has been defined, the interviewer asks to the user for a 

solution of the problem he just describes in the case of negative elements or an 

improvement in the case of positive elements. 

For informal assessment of citizenship, which is performed independently from 

the link via QR code generated by the panels and / or from personal interviews with 

tutors of the project, the following three questions where: 

• 

Do you think that the RA is useful? 



• 

On basis of the difficulty of using what could it be used for? 

• 

Rate the proposed Tiangui displayed. 

The questions are designed to assess the users’ reaction to visual technology that 

had not been previously used. It also seeks to establish a relationship between the use of 

technology as a vehicle that allows a better expression of the proposals and urban 

designs. All this to conclude evaluating proposals from student’s free-form. This aspect 

is key as end-users ignore formal compliance with the expectations set in the workshop, 

and simply assess directly whether proposals may or may not fulfill their ultimate goal: 

the redevelopment of the market. As we will see later, users have provided key 

information not considered in the design phase, which allows students to establish new 

design criteria that must be considered on future projects. 

4 Results 
4.1 User profile and motivation 

A total of 15 students participated in the study (9 males and 6 females, mean 

age = 28.75 years, SD = 7.01 years). All students previously took drawing, design, and 

2D and 3D modeling courses. At the beginning of the course, the students were asked to 

estimate their degree of knowledge, usability, and interest in technologies generally and 

specifically in the use of informatics devices and mobile technology, the Internet, and 

social networks. To design the pre-test, or technological profile test, a structured test 

was used with the Intranet Moodle system of the university. All of the questions were 

scored on a five-point Likert scale (1 = never or strongly disagree, 5 = always or 

strongly agree). In addition, questions were formulated to obtain the degree 

of knowledge and expectations of using AR prior to the experiment. The basis of this 

form is found in previous studies that suggest that higher interaction, usage, or interest 

levels produce better learning effects . Additionally, demographic questions were asked, 

including age, gender, and grade. 

The User Profile Test provided a first approach to the main interests and the 

student’s working style. We descriptively highlighted the following items: all students 

(100%) connect online at home and at the university, mainly using laptops (100%) and 

mobile devices (72.73%). The connection types used are ADSL/Cable at home and 

university (100%), and Wi-Fi (63.64%). The most commonly used services are mainly 

e-mail (100%), search engines (90.91%), download services (81.82%), and queries form 

blogs and social networks related with studies or professional services (81,9%). A total 



of 91% of the students have a smartphone (compared to of 9% have a simple 

mobile phone with no multimedia applications), and these students are more 

accustomed to working on portable laptops (72.7%) than on desktop computers 

(36.3%). 54.5% of students have a tablet device. 

We can resume the principal statistics obtained from the most directly related 

study questions (using a Likert scale of 5 points), that in general, the students are heavy 

technology consumers, both in usage and in interest. They perceive the incorporation of 

AR into architectural teaching as a complex tool (M = 2.58, SD = 1.31), and the students 

lack clear forecasts of how can it affect, help, or improve the visualization and 

presentation of architectural projects. In the other hand, they are motivated in its use 

(M = 4.67, SD = 0.90), and with the hypothesis of a great utility (M = 4.33, SD = 1.07), 

very close of the traditional methods (M = 4.75, SD = 0.62). 

4.2 Qualitative final assessment 
As stated previously, to evaluate the degree of adaptation to and satisfaction 

with the proposed method, as well as the advantages of working with a mixed system of 

data collection, students were invited to voluntarily participate in the study. For the 

qualitative study (using BLA), we randomly selected a balanced sample of 10 students 

(5 men and 5 women) who agreed to participate. 

Studying the data collected using the BLA system (the final qualitative test), we 

will highlight the motivation of the students using new technologies in the visualization 

of architectural projects (MI: 40%, Av: 9.50), the usefulness of the knowledge acquired 

and their application to real projects (MI: 50%, Av: 9.00), and the usability of the 

proposed systems and especially the use of the“photomontage” as a creative tool (MI: 

30%, Av: 9.33). In short, the enhancements to the methods for presenting architectural 

projects should not be modified in the redesign process or further exercises (Table 1). 

Table 1 Positive Common (PC) and Particular (PP) elements. 

# Description Av. score (Av) Mention index (MI) (%) 

1PC IT useful for real projects 9.00 50 

2PC Motivation using IT 9.50 40 

3PC Usability of photomontages 9.33 30 

4PC Usability of the applications 8.67 30 

5PC Quality of AR in final presentation 8.50 20 

6PC AR Uses 8.00 20 



# Description Av. score (Av) Mention index (MI) (%) 

1PP Teachers 10.00 10 

2PP Usability of mobile devices 9.00 10 

3PP IT education 9.00 10 

4PP Digital drawing 9.00 10 

In terms of the main negative comments, students clearly identified a lack of 

time in the first phase of explanation, identifying the need of more detailed tutorials in 

order to clarify the options of the applications used (MI: 40%, Av: 3.75), and problems 

with the size of the group and the work in pairs (MI: 40%, Av: 3.75), ideas discussed 

from the students because of they are more comfortable working individually and with 

the need for quick access to the faculty for questions (Table 2). Technically, these 

would be the main aspects to modify in future iterations of the proposed method: the 

creation of on-line tutorials to guide the explanation of the applications and reduce the 

student/teacher ratio with the possibility of working individually. 

Table 2 Negative Common (NC) and Particular (NP) elements. 

# Description Av. MI (%) 

1NC Lack of time in the initial explanation 4.00 40 

2NC Workgroups 3.75 40 

3NC Accessibility to last generation hardware 5.00 20 

4NC More accessibility to software 4.50 20 

5NC Problems reading help files 4.50 20 

1NP Tutorials with low detail 6.00 10 

2NP More time to practice 4.00 10 

3NP Difficulties to read AR marks outside 4.00 10 

4NP Schedule of the workshop 3.00 10 

5NP Problems with the deadlines 2.00 10 

Table 3 shows the features in proposals for improvements, both for positive and 

negative elements mentioned in the previous steps. 

Table 3 Proposed Common Improvements (CI), and Particular Improvements (PI), for both positive and 

negative elements and for common and particular items. 

Description Mention index (%) 



Description Mention index (%) 

1CI More time to practice 80 

2CI More time of previous explanation 50 

3CI Use better examples 50 

4CI More research about shadows 40 

5CI Use more devices 30 

6CI Explanation of more tools and APPs 30 

7CI Reduce the students by group 30 

8CI Offer loan service of equipment 30 

9CI Highlight key ideas 30 

10CI Define video/on-line tutorials 20 

11CI Improve the equipment of the classroom 20 

1PI Improve the student’s following 10 

2PI Reduce the 3D explanation 10 

3PI More exercises 10 

4PI Annual Subject 10 

5PI More explanation of design concepts 10 

6PI More time in the exam 10 

7PI More teachers in the subject 10 

8PI Practice more simple 10 

The lack of the integration of results and the study of their relationship, at this 

phase we can draw an important point that has reflected by the qualitative approach: the 

students do not reduce the investment of time (as we could expect, without the need of 

print or perform classical physical mock-ups), because they required more hours of 

explanation, practice and debugging to create the final projects. 

4.3 Informal citizenship feedback 
To evaluate the end-users’ feedback based on their subjective criteria 

visualizing the student’s proposals, a qualitative approach was used. The users were 

invited to voluntarily participate in the study and share their opinion. The first set of 

users who tested the display was composed of a total of 24 people. We have identified 

four main subgroups, users related to architecture (students and professionals N1: 6), 



commercials (N2: 4), workers with no architecture skills (N3: 7), students and teachers 

from high school (N4: 7). The most talked about aspects (positive and negative) 

mentioned (related to the first question of this survey) were: 

• 

Mention Index 45.83% (+, positive aspect): Users who first saw operation of 

AR and were highly impressed. Highlights included citations of 71.4% of students and 

57.1% of employed persons, and that none of the merchants in the market discussed the 

technology used. 

• 

29.16% (−, negative aspect): The users understood that these proposal would be 

best suited to a wider environment (like a square) and for stationary use (static, without 

displacement). The mobile “tianguis”proposed do not adapt to the urbanization of 

Tonalá and produce serious problems of its installation and displacement. This has been 

cited by 75% of traders, reflecting the understanding of the problem as something close 

to their daily work. The other subgroups have cited this aspect below over-age, 

highlighting the 28.5% of students. 

• 

29.16% (−): Selection of materials used in the proposals was criticized, 

considering that the more traditional would be better adapted to the market rate, instead 

of other cutting edge materials. The group with a higher rate in this commentary was the 

people related to architecture (50%). 

• 

24.33% (+): Users understood AR as a very useful and applicable technology in 

other areas especially on issues related to architecture, leisure, tourism and generally 

displaying heritage. In this section, the group that has commented on this aspect was 

those related to the field of architecture with a total of 33.3%. 

• 

16.6% (−): Little display space for products and / or too much unexploited 

volume. 75% of traders have criticized the proposals due to a reduction in the useful 

area of commercial stands compare to the current system, something that directly affects 

their operation. 

The results indicate on one hand a high degree of uncertainty on the part of end 

users in the difficulty of use and global consensus on its usefulness. About 45% did not 

have a position on the difficulty of using the AR because they had not been used or 

worked with it before. The average perceived difficulty in the use of this technology is 



in an intermediate area (Av: 3.25, SD: 1.23), a result obtained from a scale from 5: user 

1: high difficulty. However 100% believe the proposed work used by students as very 

useful, emphasizing as the most repeated comments those that positioned experience 

and technology as especially useful for: 

• 

Visualization and better understanding of architectural projects, 

• 

Improved cost in the project presentation phase to avoid costly models and 

printed presentations, 

• 

Educate the public and students in the use of interactive methods, which allows 

a better adaptation of the learning pace. 

4.4 Discussion 
The basic purposes of this study was to determine whether the use of friendly 

technology, such as mobile devices, and new interactive and collaborative methods to 

visualize architectural and urban models improves the motivation and academic 

performance of students based on formal practice and the informal data of the 

citizenship. The results indicate that AR is a good system to visualize both simple and 

complex 3D models. The experience was welcomed by the students, who appreciated 

using the new methodology applied to architecture education and especially if these 

types of exercises helped to improve their academic performance. 

In the discussion of the proposed method, we evaluate the incorporation of AR 

in architecture and urban education based on three main variables: usefulness, level of 

improvement of project presentations, and difficulty of use. For this purpose, we 

compare the means of those variables in the pre-test (where all data are related to 

student perception with no knowledge of the technology) and the final assessment of the 

proposals by students and end-users (where the student had worked with AR and 

evaluates its performance, and the citizenship have interacted with the students 

proposals, Table 4). 

Table 4 AR main method variables. 

AR-variables PRE-test levels perceived POST-assessment real levels 

Mean Students Citizenship Final average 

Useful 4.33 4.50 5.00 4.75 

Improv. Arq. project 4.67 4.45 4.50 4.47 



AR-variables PRE-test levels perceived POST-assessment real levels 

Mean Students Citizenship Final average 

Usability 2.58 3.56 3.20 3.38 

Our findings show positive aspects: students evaluate AR as an easier to use 

technology (M = 3.56) than was initially expected (M = 2.91), which improved student 

participation and motivation as observed in the different academic sessions and led to an 

improvement in students’ academic performance. Also, the level of Perceived utility 

(M = 4.75) and the results related to whether AR is a good system for architectural 

visualization (M = 4.47) were equivalents to the values obtained in the PRE-Test, and 

with a very high average which indicates that the proposed method and technological 

application tested generates high expectations for both professional users who 

developed (the students), and those who have used (citizens). 

Other results that were extracted from the final interviews on the experience 

shows us some problems, or perhaps rather “information”, both referring to the 

technological part of the proposals. We find problems related to the connection between 

technologies and formats. The need for various applications complicates the workflow 

and generates incompatibilities for proper allocation of materials and colors for 

effective visualization. Also, users have commented that 3D models shake excessively 

when displayed on mobile device screens, the model size is limited by the method of 

scaling within AR applications, and the small screen size of the devices (those situations 

are the main problems when observing small objects and architectural details). 

The implemented case study, as a differential factor the similar case studies in 

the field of architectural design and teaching, provide the analysis of informal learning. 

Thanks to the information provided by end users who have evaluated the proposals of 

the students, we have identified a number of factors to change or improve to increase its 

functionality. However we have identified a number of limitations when implementing 

this type of informal interactions integrated into the curriculum of student: long time of 

evaluation, heterogeneous users, users’ technological access problems and finally 

clarification of the most important aspects to evaluate in each proposal. These 

difficulties limit the integration of the informal education field for students of 

architecture or urban design, but certainly endorse the information obtained, 

highlighting the necessity to create new opportunities for the recognition of the role 

informal education today. 

5 Conclusions 



As mentioned initially, this study focused on three main objectives: to educate 

students to connect and receive feedback through technology, evaluate how these 

interactions can define a new informal way of learning, and discuss how this informal 

data can be incorporated into an academic curriculum. The selected proposal has 

focused on one of the most important aspects in the formation of architectural and town 

planning in order to assess these objectives: the visual presentation of proposals and the 

evaluation by end-users. Our Proposal involves the use of mobile devices for viewing 

different composite models that combine VR, AR, and DS Hybrid Models. In the final 

stage, a thorough collection of informal data from citizens who interacted with the 

students’ 3D proposals has been done. A qualitative approach was also developed to 

asses both the formal and informal learning of the students in order gain a better 

comprehension of students and citizens opinion on the projects. Analyzing the results of 

these objectives will lead to a better understanding of how to implement new teaching 

methods with mobile technologies and how manage hybrid approaches between formal 

and informal education in our educational sector. 

The need to identify and measure the public opinion of society is fundamental in 

all sorts of training and practice, especially if the recipient of the product is the citizen 

(Brooker, 2013). Their input can be transformed into new usable content in the 

education of any person, which has been defined as informal learning. Elections, 

protests, letters to editors, etc., are nothing more than ways of expression that allow 

citizens to share their opinion. Methods have been revolutionized with the rise of ICT: 

use of blogs, personal pages, movements’ crowdfunding or support, etc. We can be 

certain that we are moving from Education Systems to Learning societies (CISCO, 

2010), where the social, economic and environmental challenges of the 21st century 

demand citizens with a broad perspective and the capacity and passion to engage with 

the world’s problems both in their countries and abroad. 

Focused on our case study, the space is the core of architecture, building and 

urban design. It is necessary to conceive and think about architectural space surrounding 

us by decoding its nature and discovering messages in its built forms. Critical questions 

arise at this point: How do architects, students and citizens perceive and conceptualize 

architectural space? How do all characters understand and decode space? How do they 

think and talk about space? 

On the one hand, the students’ results in the final assessment and the analysis of 

their final marks have demonstrated that by combining an attractive technology and 

user-machine interaction that involves AR/VR/DS/HM, students feel more motivated, 

have increased graphic competencies and spatial skills in shorter learning periods, and 



attain strongly improved academic performance. The results of the present study were in 

line with our assumptions that the use of mobile devices in the classroom, motivation, 

and academic achievement are highly correlated. However, the difficulty of generating 

content and the visualization of optimal models and details are complex factors that 

suggest some difficulties in implementing this technology in other subjects related to 

architectural education. The first objective of the proposal has been demonstrated once 

the results on the degree of motivation and formal appear. Following previous studies 

(see Section 2), it is clear that regardless of the sample (in our case very small), the 

involvement of the use of ICT for the development of real projects in educational fields 

generated positive feedback from students that resulted in better work and improved 

academic in results. 

In a second stage, we have designed a first approach to recognize the informal 

learning that the citizenship can contribute in the education of architecture, building or 

urban design students. In this educational framework, the opinion of the end-user can 

help in the education and experience of the future urban planner or architect to avoid 

falling into typical errors as we have illustrated throughout the paper. The massive 

deployment of new technologies such as mobile type smartphone or tablets, increasing 

high-speed connections and free Wi-Fi, and new systems capable of linking additional 

information using two-dimensional codes are allowing citizens no longer users 

becoming liabilities 3.0 users: users with interactive capabilities to collaborate on the 

design and evaluation of the final products of any professional. 

As seen in the results section, the information obtained informally has detected 

errors in the conceptualization of urban projects and other more specific errors of the 

studied proposals, such as the lack of exhibition space, the materials used, and their 

mobility, etc. Preliminary results (even using a small sample of citizens), demonstrate 

the importance of this type of informal interactions and how ICT helps in these 

processes. One of the most successful –and itself a challenge – aspects, has been the 

inclusion in the evaluation of groups usually excluded – in this case traders –. The 

feedback has been vital as the excellent formal proposals made “ex-ante” by students, 

received comments that suggested that if implemented would result in utter failures. 

Without doubt, the incorporation of informal assessment into the student 

feedback is one of the key points (Cullen, Batterbury, Foresti, Lyons, & Stern, 2000). 

As García-Peñalvo, Griffiths, Johnson, Sharples, and Sherlock (2014)state: “… a major 

barrier is observed when introducing such solutions in the day-to-day professional 

activities, and the validation of informal learning becomes an extension of the 

management processes of the formal educational processes …”. These professional and 



educational challenges shape a future where it is necessary to propose and evaluate 

methods for measuring informal responses in the curricular student records (European 

Guidelines, 2009; García-Peñalvo, Colomo-Palacios, & Lytras, 2012). In this regard 

ICT is postulated as the ideal medium to drive this process (Hague, 2009); however we 

are still a long way from improving connectivity, cost and usability of devices and 

applications so that these methods are actually possible for citizens (both in developed 

and developing countries). 

Probably, a good way to get the cooperation of citizens and increase their 

involvement into the informal field of education is through games. The gamification of 

any task not only leads to increased motivation of the participant, but allows a faster 

response of the user’s opinion. In this sense, the designers of educational programs 

intended to incorporate the informal response into educational activities, need to pay 

attention when designing an interactive game so it is easy, usable, attractive, and allows 

citizens (our customers), to access it from various kinds of devices and at all times 

(García-Peñalvo, Johnson, Ribeiro Minovic & Conde-González, 2014). 

In conclusion, working with a collaborative interface, interactive discussions of 

all projects, and the capacity to generate physical and digital expositions are activities 

that have resulted in an active student, with significant improvements in spatial, 

research, and interaction skills. One of the highlights of the experience has been the 

change in perspective that was generated once the student was aware of how their work 

was perceived publicly. We can say that casual interactions obtained in the teaching 

methodology demonstrate how they can complement the knowledge and skills of 

students outside the established formal system. However their effective integration into 

the curriculum of the student remains challenging. In this sense the lack of control and 

monitoring, temporary programming and parameterization of the response in headings 

or quantifiable aspects work objectives for future projects or exercises to continue the 

experience described in this article are craving. 

Likewise, AR technology applied in architecture, urban or building construction 

education offers an opportunity to visualize different stages of a constructive process “in 

situ”, helping to improve the understanding of the process. This aspect allows the 

verification and comparison of different scenarios and virtual proposals prior to real 

construction. In addition, this technology could replace real interventions. To achieve 

this goal, it is important to study the ability to view different models with the same 

marker to show different layers, models, textures, and lighting. Furthermore, it will be 

necessary to establish systems that allow fluid exchanges between applications and the 



prevention of problems involving formats, versions, or loss of information, as occurred 

with colors and materials in the present study. 

Finally, we would like to indicate that this educational research project falls 

under the Interest Group for Logistics and Teaching in Architecture (GILDA), an inter-

university group centered in the architectural framework assigned to the ICE (Institute 

of Education Sciences at the Polytechnic University of Catalonia – UPC), specialized in 

the field of teaching technology disciplines. The authors represent teachers of Visual 

Communication Architectural Graphic Expression Representation (EGAI/II) together 

with the “Informatics Tools”subjects of architecture at the Universidad Ramon Llull 

(URL) and usability experts in educational research. This project was made possible by 

the Fundamental Research Project Not Oriented of the VI National Plan for Scientific 

Research, Development and Technological Innovation 2008–2011, Government of 

Spain, N° EDU-2012-37247/EDUC, titled: “E-learning 3.0 in the teaching of 

architecture. Case studies of educational research for the foreseeable future”. 

 

References  
Al Shawa, B. (2011): The Darker Side of Villa Savoye. Misfits’ Architecture. Retrieved 2014-

12-10. <http://misfitsarchitecture.com/2011/09/03/the-darker-side-of-villa-savoye/>. 

Banks, J., Au, K., Ball, A., Bell, P., Gordon, E., Gutierrez, K., & Heath, S., et al. (2007). 

Learning in and out of school in diverse environments (Consensus Report), Learning in 

Informal and Formal Environment (LIFE) Center. Retrieved from 

<http://www.ibparticipation.org/pdf/LearningInDiverseEnvironments.pdf>. 

Bell P., et al., (Eds.), Learning science in informal environments: People, places, and 

pursuits, 2009, National Academies Press; Washington, DC. 

Benévolo L., Historia de la Arquitectura moderna, 1997, Gustavo Gili; Barcelona. 

Bennett S., Maton K. and Kervin L., The ‘digital natives’ debate: A critical review of the 

evidence, British Journal of Educational Technology 39, 2008,775–

786, http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-8535.2007.00793.x. 

Biggs J., What the student does: Teaching for enhanced learning, Higher Education Research 

& Development 18 (1), 1999,57–75, <http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/0729436990180105>. 

Bilandzic, M. (2013). Towards Hybrid Informal Learning Spaces: Designing for Digital 

Encounters in Physical Environments, PhD Final Seminar, 2013. 

<http://es.slideshare.net/kavasmlikon/towards-hybrid-informal-learning-spaces-

designing-for-digital-encounters-in-physical-environments>. 



Binkley, M., Erstad, O., Herman, J., Raizen, S., Ripley, M. & Rumble, M. (2011). Defining 

21st century skills. In P. Griffin, B. McGaw, & E. Care (Eds.),Assessment and teaching 

of 21st century skills (pp. 17–66), New York: Springer. 

Bobhate, P. (2011). Villa Savoye – An architectural wonder or a thermal disaster. 

In Proceedings of Conference: People and Buildings held at the offices of Arup UK, 

23rd September 2011. London. Retrieved 2014-12-10. 

<http://nceub.commoncense.info/uploads/MC2011_MC22.pdf>. 

Boeykens, S., Santana-Quintero, M., & Neuckermans, H. (2008). Improving Architectural 

Design Analysis using 3D Modeling and Visualization techniques. In M. Ioannides, A. 

Addison, A. Georgopoulos, & L. Kalisperis (Eds.), Digital heritage: Proceedings of the 

14th international conference on virtual systems and multimedia pages (pp. 67–73). 

Limassol, Cyprus. 

Broll W., Lindt I., Ohlenburg J., Wittkämper M., Yuan C., Novotny T., et al.,ARTHUR: A 

collaborative augmented environment for architectural design and urban 

planning, Journal of Virtual Reality and Broadcasting 1 (1),2004, 102–

109, http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/0144929X.2012.661548. 

Brooker, R. G. (2013). Public opinion in the 21st century draft, Alverno College Todd 

Schaefer, Central Washington University. Retrieved 14/04/2015: 

<http://www.uky.edu/AS/PoliSci/Peffley/pdf/473Measuring%20Public%20Opinion.pdf

>. 

Chen R. and Wang X., An empirical study on tangible augmented reality learning space for 

design skill transfer, Tsinghua Science & Technology 13, 2008,13–18. 

CISCO (2010), The Learning Society, Retrieved 14/04/2015: 

<https://www.cisco.com/web/about/citizenship/socio-

economic/docs/LearningSociety_WhitePaper.pdf>. 

Coombs P.H., Prosser C. and Ahmed M., New paths to learning for rural children and youth. 

International council for educational development, 1973, John Hopkins Press; New 

York. 

Craven, J. (2013). Trouble in Paradise. The troubled story of the glass wallwd Farnsworth 

House. Retrieved 2014-12-15. 

<http://tweedlandthegentlemansclub.blogspot.com.es/2013/05/trouble-in-paradise-

troubled-story-of.html>. 

Cullen, J., Batterbury, S., Foresti, M., Lyons, C., & Stern, E. (2000). Informal learning and 

widening participation prepared for the department for education and employment. The 



Tavistock Institute. DfEE Research Report No. 191. Department for Education and 

Employment. 

Dede C., Emerging influences of information technology on school curriculum,Journal of 

Curriculum Studies 32 (2), 2000, 282–303. 

Di Serio Á., Ibáñez M.B. and Kloos C.D., Impact of an augmented reality system on 

students’ motivation for a visual art course, Computers & Education 2012, 1–11. 

Dunleavy M., Dede C. and Mitchell R., Affordances and limitations of immersive 

participatory augmented reality simulations for teaching and learning,Journal of Science 

Education and Technology 18, 2008, 7–22. 

European Guidelines (2009). European guidelines for validating non-formal and informal 

learning. European Centre for the Development of Vocational Training. Luxembourg: 

Office for Official Publications of the European Communities. p. 96. 

Fonseca D., Martí N., Redondo E., Navarro I. and Sánchez A., Relationship between student 

profile, tool use, participation, and academic performance with the use of augmented 

reality technology for visualized architecture models, Computers in Human 

Behavior 31, 2014, 434–445,http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2013.03.006. 

Foroughi B., Toronto community housing: Tenant participation and informal learning, The 

Canadian Journal for the Study of Adult Educational 25 (2),2013, 35–52. 

Frampton K., Historia crítica de la Arquitectura moderna, 1981, Editorial GG;Barcelona. 

Fraser, J., & Miss, M. (2012). City as living laboratory for sustainability in urban design. New 

Knowledge Organization Ltd. Final Report, NewKnowledge Resource #NSF2.5556.02, 

24p.<http://informalscience.org/images/evaluation/City_as_Living_Lab_Final_Report.p

df>. 

Fung A. and Wright E.O., Deepening democracy: Institutional innovations in empowered 

participatory governance, 2003, Verso; London. 

García-Peñalvo F.J., Colomo-Palacios R. and Lytras M.D., Informal learning in work 

environments: Training with the Social Web in the workplace,Behaviour & Information 

Technology 31 (8), 2012, 753–755,http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/0144929X.2012.661548. 

García-Peñalvo F.J., Griffiths D., Johnson M., Sharples P. and Sherlock D.,Problems and 

opportunities in the use of technology to manage informal learning, In: García-

Peñalvo F.J., (Ed), Proceedings of the second international conference on technological 

ecosystems for enhancing multiculturality (TEEM’14), 2014, ACM; New York, 

USA, 573–580. 



García-Peñalvo F.J., Johnson M., Ribeiro Alves G., Minovic M. and Conde-

González M.Á., Informal learning recognition through a cloud ecosystem,Future 

Generation Computer Systems 32, 2014, 282–

294,http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.future.2013.08.00. 

Georgina D.A. and Olson M.R., Integration of technology in higher education: A review of 

faculty self-perceptions, Internet and Higher Education 11, 2007,1–

8, http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.iheduc.2007.11.002. 

Gray S.A., Nicosia K. and Jordan R.C., Lessons learned from citizen science in the classroom. 

A response to “The Future of Citizen Science”, Democracy & 

Education 20 (2), 2012, 1–5. 

Gschwandtner W.R. and Münzberger H., Lipoatrophia semicircularis. Ein Beitrag zu 

bandförmig-circulären Atrophien des subcutanen Fettgewebes im 

Extremitätenbereich, Der Hautartz 25, 1974, 222–227. 

Guidano V.F., Constructivist psychotherapy: A theoretical 

framework, In:Neimeyer R.A. and Mahoney M.J., (Eds.), Constructivism in 

psychotherapy, 1989, Cambridge University Press; Cambridge. 

Hague, C. (2009). General educators report, Learning Researcher, Futurelab, Educational 

Research Consultant 

<http://www2.futurelab.org.uk/resources/documents/project_reports/becta/Adult_Infor

mal_Learning_educators_report.pdf>. 

Hall B.L. and Clover D.E., Social movement learning, In: English L.M., (Ed),International 

encyclopedia of adult education, 2005, Palgrave Macmillan;New York, 584–589. 

Harrop D. and Turpin B., A study exploring learners’ informal learning space behaviors, 

attitudes, and preferences, New Review of Academic Librarianship 19 (1), 2013, 58–77. 

Hawkinson, E. (2013). Informal learning environments in tourism: Interactive panoramas. 

Tourism Institute of Northeast Asia International Academic Conference 

2013 “Revitalization of Rural Experience 

Tourism”<https://www.academia.edu/7724215/Informal_Learning_Environments_in_T

ourism_Augmented_Reality>. 

Higueras, J. (2013). la Salle Open University, Scenario Centered Curriculum, el learning-by-

doing de éxito en La Salle Open University, consultado 25 de julio de 2014. 

<http://blogs.uols.org/mba/scenario-centered-curriculum-el-learning-by-doing-de-exito-

en-uols/>. 



Jamieson, P., Dane, J., & Lippman, P. C. (2005). Moving beyond the classroom: 

Accommodating the changing pedagogy of higher education. Refereed Proceedings of 

2005 Forum of the Australasian Association for Institutional Research (pp. 17–23). 

Kreijns K., Acker F.V., Vermeulen M. and Buuren H.V., What stimulates teachers to integrate 

ICT in their pedagogical practices? The use of digital learning materials in 

education, Computers in Human Behavior 29, 2013, 217–

225,http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2012.08.008. 

Kristoffersen, S., & Ljungberg, F. (1999). Mobile informatics innovation of IT use in mobile 

settings. In Proc. Of IRIS’21 workshop report. Special interest group on computer 

human interaction bulletin (Vol. 31(1), pp. 29–34). 

Kuo Y.-F. and Yen S.-N., Towards an understanding of the behavioral intention to use 3G 

mobile valued-added services, Computers in Human Behavior 25 (1), 2009, 103–

110,http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2008.07.007. 

La Belle J., Formal, nonformal and informal education: A holistic perspective on lifelong 

learning, International Review of Education 28 (2), 1982,159–

175, http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/BF00598444. 

Lazzari M., Majowiecki M., Vitaliani R., Saetta A. and Nonlinear F.E., Analysis of montreal 

olympic stadium roof under natural loading conditions,Engineering 

Structures 31 (1), 2009, 16–

31,http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.engstruct.2008.07.010, (January, ISSN 0141-0296). 

Leggitt J., Drawing shortcuts: Developing quick drawing skills using today’s 

technology, 2009, John Wiley & Sons, 264. 

Lehner, F., & Nosekabel, H. (2002). The role of mobile devices in E with a wireless E-

Learning environment. In Proceedings of the IEEE international workshop on wireless 

and mobile technologies in education(pp. 103–106). 

Lu Z., Learning with mobile technologies, handheld devices, and smart phones: Innovative 

methods, IGI-Global 2012, 1–272,http://dx.doi.org/10.4018/978-1-4666-0936-5. 

Luna Corento, J. (2013): Fiascos arquitectónicos: los peligros del efecto Guggenheim. 

Retrieved 2014-12-15. <http://elarquitectohamuerto.blogspot.com.es/2013/12/fiascos-

arquitectonicos-efecto-guggenheim.html>. 

Malawi, A., & Srinivasan, R. (2004), Building performance visualization using augmented 

reality. In Proceedings of the fourteenth international conference on computer graphics 

and vision (pp. 122–127). 



Marsick, V. J., Watkins, K. E., Callahan, M. W., & Volpe, M. (2006). Reviewing Theory and 

Research on Informal and Incidental Learning. Retrieved from ERIC on 2015-04-10 

<http://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/ED492754.pdf>. 

Massy, W. F., & Zemsky, R. (1995). Using information technology to enhance academic 

productivity. CAUSE Conference 1995. Available: 

<http://www.educase.edu/nlii/keydocs/massy.html>. 

Mateos, R. & Quelart, R. (2014). La nueva baldosa de Barcelona, un suplicio para ir con 

tacones. Retrieved 2014-11-19. 

<http://videos.lavanguardia.com/local/barcelona/20141119/54419992257/la-nueva-

baldosa-de-barcelona-un-suplicio-para-ir-con-tacones.html>. 

Medeiros, J. (2011). Educative Landscapes: Informal Learning and Landscape Architecture, 

Student ASLA <http://www.asla.org/ppn/Article.aspx?id=32161>. 

Milgram, P., & Takemura, H. (1994). Augmented reality: A class of displays on the reality-

virtuality continuum. Presented at telemanipulator and telepresence technologies (Vol. 

2351, pp. 282–292). 

Moran, M., Seaman, J., & Tinti-Kane, H. (2011). Teaching, Learning, and Sharing: How 

Today's Higher Education Faculty Use Social Media. Babson Survey Research Group. 

Moreira, M. A., Santos, M. B. S. N., & Vargas, E. F. (2010). Buenas prácticas de aulas 

virtuales en la docencia universitaria semipresencial. Teoría de la Educación: Educación 

y Cultura en la Sociedad de la Información, 11(1), 7-31.Mueller, M. P., Tippins, D., & 

Bryan, L. A. The future of citizen science. Democracy & Education, (2012). 20(1), (pp 

1-12). 

Nielsen, J. (2012). Usability 101: Introduction to usability, Jakob Nielsen’s Alertbox. 

Retrieved 2010-06-01. 

Nielsen, J. (2000). Norman, Donald A: Web-Site Usability: Usability. On the web isn’t a 

luxury. informationweek. 

Pampinella, S. (2000). Arquitecturas de autor o Arquitecturas de mecenas, en Revista Block n. 

5, Buenos Aires. 

Parsons D., Refining current practices in mobile and blended learning: New applications, IGI-

Global 2012, 1–334, http://dx.doi.org/10.4018/978-1-4666-0053-9. 

Phang C.W. and Kankanhalli A., A framework of ICT exploitation for e-participation 

initiatives, Communications of the ACM 51, 2008, 128–

132,http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1409360.1409385, (December). 



Piekarski, W., & Thomas, B. (2001). Tinmith-Metro: New outdoor techniques for creating 

city models with an augmented reality wearable computer. First International 

Symposium on Wearable Computers (ISWC ’01) (pp. 31–38). 

Pifarré, M., & Tomico, O. (2007). Bipolar laddering (BLA): A participatory subjective 

exploration method on user experience. In Proceedings of the 2007 conference on 

designing for user eXperiences (DUX ‘07). ACM, New York, NY, USA, Article 2, 

doi: 10.1145/1389908.1389911. 

Prensky M., Digital natives, digital immigrants Part 1, On the Horizon 9 (5),2001, 1–6. 

Redondo, E. (2010). Dibujo digital: hacia una nueva metodología docente para el dibujo 

arquitectónico: un estudio de caso. Revista Pixel-Bit. Revista de Medios y Educación. In 

<http://www.sav.us.es/pixelbit/actual/7.pdf>. 

Redondo E. and Santana G., Teaching methodologies based on touch interfaces for the 

teaching of drawing and architectural projects,Arquiteturarevista 6 (2), 2010, 90–

105,http://dx.doi.org/10.4013/arq.2010.62.02. 

Retalis S. and Sloep P., B virtual environments for collaborative innovation and learning J 

UCS special issue, Journal of Universal Computer Science 17 (12), 2011, 1634–1637. 

Rios, M. (2014). Learning from informal practices: Implications for urban design. 

<https://www.academia.edu/8143136/Learning_from_Informal_Practices_Implications

_for_Urban_Design> (173–191, Chapter 9). 

Roca J. and Gagné M., Understanding e-learning continuance intention in the workplace. A 

self-determination theory perspective, Computers in Human Behavior 24, 2008, 1585–

1604,http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2007.06.001. 

Rodriguez-Izquierdo R.M., El impacto de las TIC en la transformación de la enseñanza 

universitaria: repensar los modelos de enseñanza y aprendizaje, Teoría de la 

Educación, Educación y Cultura en la Sociedad de la Información 11 (3), 2010, 32–68. 

Rogers D.L., A paradigm shift: Technology integration for higher education in the new 

millennium, Educational Technology Review 2000, 19–33. 

Romanillos, T. (2007). Lipoatrodia semicircular, La enfermedad de los nuevos edificios de 

oficinas. Retrieved 2014-12-12. 

<http://www.consumer.es/web/es/salud/problemas_de_salud/2007/04/27/162011.php>. 

Roult R. and Lefebvre S., Planning and reconversion of olympic heritages: The montreal 

olympic stadium, The International Journal of the History of Sport 27 (16–

18), 2010, 2731–2747. 



Sánchez, J. R., & Borro, D. (2007). Automatic augemeted video creation for markerless 

environments. In Poster proceedings of the 2nd international conference on computer 

vision theory and applications (VISAPP’ 07) (pp. 519–522). 

Sánchez, A., Redondo, E., & Fonseca, D. (2012). Developing an augmented reality 

application in the framework of architecture degree. In Proceedings of the ACM 

workshop on User experience in e-learning and augmented technologies in education 

(UXeLATE ‘12) (pp. 37–42). ACM, New York, NY, USA, doi: 

<10.1145/2390895.2390905>. 

Scheerens, J. (2009). Informal learning of active citizenship at school. An international 

comparative study in seven european countries series: Lifelong learning book series, 

Vol. 14. In Scheerens, Jaap (Ed.), XII, 370p. Springer Science + Business Media B.V., 

doi: 10.1007/978-1-4020-9621-1_1. 

Schugurensky, D., & Myers, J. P. (2008). Informal Civic Learning Through Engagement in 

Local Democracy: The Case of the Seniors’ Task Force of Healthy City Toronto. 

Learning through Community: Exploring Participatory Practices. K. Church et al. (eds.), 

Springer Science + Business Media B.V. (pp. 73–95, Chapter 5). 

Schugurensky D., The tango of citizenship learning and participatory 

democracy,In: Mundel K. and Schugurensky D., (Eds.), Lifelong citizenship learning, 

participatory democracy and social change, 2004, Transformative Learning Centre, 

OISE/University of Toronto; Toronto, 326–334. 

Shen C.X., Liu R.D. and Wang D., Why are children attracted to the Internet? The role of 

need satisfaction perceived online and perceived in daily real life, Computers in Human 

Behavior 29 (1), 2013, 185–192,http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2012.08.004. 

Shin D.H. and Dunston P.S., Identification of application areas for Augmented Reality in 

industrial construction based on technology suitability,Automation in 

Construction 17 (7), 2008, 882–894. 

Sully, N. (2009). Moder Architecture and Complaints about the Weather, or,‘Dear Monsieur 

Le Corbusier, it is still raining in our garage.”. M/C Journal 12(4). Retrieved 2014-12-

10. <http://journal.media-culture.org.au/index.php/mcjournal/article/viewArticle/172>. 

Taylor-Foster, J. (2013). Los siete pecados arquitectónicos cometidos alrededor del mundo. 

Retrieved 2014-12-15. <http://www.plataformaarquitectura.cl/cl/02-291775/siete-

errores-arquitectonicos-cometidos-alrededor-del-mundo>. 



Tonn C., Petzold F., Bimber O., Grundhöfer A. and Donath D., Spatial augmented reality for 

architecture designing and planning with and within existing buildings, International 

Journal of Architectural Computing 6 (1), 2008,41–58. 

Uddin M.S., Hybrid drawing techniques by contemporary architects and designers, 1999, John 

Wiley & Sons; New York. 

Villagrasa, S., Fonseca, D., & Durán, J. (2014). Teaching case: Applying gamification 

techniques and virtual reality for learning building engineering 3D arts. In Proceedings 

of the second international conference on technological ecosystems for enhancing 

multiculturality (pp. 171–177). ACM (October). 

Werquin P., Recognition of non-formal and informal learning in OECD countries: A very 

good idea in jeopardy?, Lifelong Learning in Europe 3, 2008, 142–149. 

Wood, L. C., Teräs, H., & Reiners, T. (2013). The role of gamification and game-based 

learning in authentic assessment within virtual environments, held at AUT University, 

Auckland, New Zealand, 2013-07-01 to 2013-07-04 Publisher: Higher Education 

Research and Development Society of Australasia (HERDSA)]. 

Wright G., The political economy of the montreal olympic games, Journal of Sport & Social 

Issues 2, 1978, 13–18,http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/019372357800200103), (March). 

Yaman R., Architectural design representation: The hybrid drawing, Built Environment 

Journal 6 (2), 2009, 25–40 

 


