












































P
A
L
I
M
P
S
E
S
T
O
 
#
1
5

Se
pt

ie
m

br
e 

 2
01

6

Dirección
Carlos Ferrater y Alberto Peñín

Redacción y diseño gráfico
Cecília Obiol

Editorial y “Doctores en Proyectos” AP

Agradecimientos
Daniel García-Escudero, Eduard Minobis, Miquel Planas

Colaboradores en este número
Claudi Alsina

Edición
Cátedra Blanca - E.T.S.A.Barcelona - UPC
palimpsesto@cbbarcelona.com

Impresión
Arts Gràfiques Orient

Depósito Legal B-5689-2011
ISSN 2014-1505
e-ISSN 2014-9751

V.O. PALIMPSESTO respeta el idioma original de los autores.

© De los textos: sus autores.
Las imágenes han sido cedidas por los autores de los artículos. No ha 
sido posible encontrar todos los propietarios de sus derechos. Las partes 
interesadas pueden ponerse en contacto con el editor. 

Reservados todos los derechos. Ninguna forma de reproducción, distribución, 
comunicación pública o transformación de esta obra se puede hacer sin 
autorización expresa de los titulares.

PALIMPSESTO
DE LOS SILENCIOS [...]

#15 Año 05. Septiembre 2016 (20 páginas) ISSN 2014-1505
Revista cuatrimestral de temática arquitectónica 

02

A partir de este título evocador, Paz Soler ahonda en el Jardín 
Seco Japonés extrayendo múltiples vértices al silencio de estos 
paisajes artificiales. Ausencia de autoría, fusión con la naturaleza, 
memoria, obra inacabada, la renuncia a la geometría y a la 
representación, son atributos que bien pudiéramos asociar a 
la arquitectura y que nos vienen prestados en este caso de un 
exquisito trabajo de doctorado. Recogiendo esta inclinación 
por la ligereza, Alvaro Moreno, fruto también de otra tesis, 
responde a la llamada de originales del anterior número con un 
análisis de varias arquitecturas, dos viviendas temporales de Le 
Corbusier y la casa de Burdeos de R.Koolhaas, que le sirve para 
definir el papel de la intuición y la transcripción en el proceso 
arquitectónico. 

Precisamente estos dos trabajos dan cuenta de la oleada de 
tesis leídas en el último curso académico en nuestras escuelas 
debida al cambio de normativa. En “Doctores en proyectos”, 
presentamos un primer estudio sobre sus contenidos, enfoques 
y distintos ámbitos, donde destaca la dimensión intelectual de 
los trabajos por encima de su carga operativa. El arquitecto 
como investigador aparece también en este número con el 
artículo de Jaime Ferrer sobre Charles Correa donde apunta, 
tal vez otro silencio, a la transformación de las estructuras del 
pasado como estímulo para una arquitectura inscrita en el 
paisaje cultural de la India. 

Otras investigaciones de figuras más próximas reseñan, bajo 
el pretexto del centenario de Sostres, uno de sus edificios más 
notables en un artículo conjunto que recupera dos textos de los 
profesores Carles Martí Arís y Coque Bianco.

Si hablábamos de la renuncia a la geometría como un recurso 
del silencio, otras propuestas pretenden trascenderla a través 
de su construcción o de su carácter como instrumento de 
pensamiento. El proyecto de para un mausoleo en Vila-real, 
de Camilla Mileto y Fernando Vegas, plagado de resonancias 
pasadas y presentes -a cuya datación convendría estar atentos-, 
apunta hacia una sofisticada y al mismo tiempo artesanal 
construcción. Por su parte, Claudio Alsina la reivindica como una 
parte de las matemáticas cuyo “primer gran objetivo debe ser 
pensar mejor” y así verse reflejadas en nuestros actuales planes 
de estudios.

Pensar mejor, nada más oportuno para una revista que cumple 
5 años de existencia. En una intensa entrevista, Dietmar 
Eberle se siente cómodo con una cierta idea de atemporalidad 
de la arquitectura sin por ello renunciar al más sofisticado 
conocimiento como sustituto de la tecnología, otra manera de 
pensar mejor. Edificios atentos a su construcción, pero también 
equidistantes con el programa que los origina y cada vez mejor 
inscritos en su paisaje cultural y tecnológico: renovadas formas 
del silencio como recurso arquitectónico.

Mr. Eberle, thank you very much for granting us this 
interview. In line with our tradition of interviewing great 
practice architects with a deep body of thought behind 
we are very glad that you agreed to lend us some of 
your time. Being aware that instead of a ‘just-do-it’ 
behavior sometimes we speak (and ask) too much about 
architecture, we dive into the following dialogue. 

Beginnings and influencesP

How did you become an architect? It has been said that 
the craft tradition in your Voralberg area was indeed an 
influence, or was it more of an inner impulse?

When I was a child I did not even know the profession 
of an architect. I wanted to become someone who 
would contribute to increasing the quality of living for 
ordinary people and so I was interested in becoming 
a writer or a crafts man. Because of my childhood 
experience, craftsmen were the people who built the 
buildings. So I was always  interested and deeply 
impressed by the feeling when a building sight was 
changed and it became a valuable part of our built 
environment. So in my understanding to make a 
building means two things: on one hand it is determined 
by a question of understanding and knowing and the 
ability to make use of this knowledge and transforming 
materials into reality. 

During your formation period, did you have any master 
that influenced you deeply, personally or otherwise?

There were two people who influenced me deeply 
during my application period. One was Hannes Meyer. 
Not as an architect but because of his way of radical or 
fundamental thinking and the other one was Schulze-
Fielitz, with whom I worked personally for many years 
and who was the partner of Yona Friedman who did 
super-structural visions, for example city of Paris on the 
12th level or city over the Channel. 
There, the main concern about architecture was thinking 
about the geometrical and naturalistic questions of 
these super-structures. 

Which could be your affinities with architects such as 
Roland Rainer, who was also close to the structural 
engineering field? 

As an Austrian educated in Vienna, the main figures 
of classical Austrian architecture are Otto Wagner and 
Adolf Loos. They were the leading influences in which 
I have been very interested. But in this tradition from 
the beginnings of modernism it has always been very 
clear that the material and its very specific geometrical 
expression, related to the material, were the main focus 
and interest of architecture. How to deal with this given 
conditions is determined by the very different cultures 
of Europe. The richness of Europe is the variety of 
knowledge related to the different cultural backgrounds 
and the way we deal with this issue.

One could think that this position is not only a Voralberg 
matter but something that links German culture with 
construction, even with a certain continuity with 
Werkbund. Hannes Meyer could represent the less 
artistic position at Bauhaus, more committed to a 
specialized work far from the praise of creativity.

The question is not about creativity, but rather a question 
of what kind of orientation the different directors of 
Bauhaus focused on, or -in architectural terms- which are 
the driving forces that generate the form. Gropius was 
very much focused on the question of industrialization 
and the working process which generated the form. 
Hannes Meyer was very much related to the social and 
political issues generating the form, and Mies did not give 
a specific orientation to Bauhaus but followed very much 
the structural possibilities that generate a building and, 
which very obvious, he was not interested in program or 
function at all.  

Alberto Peñín
DOI: 10.5821/palimpsesto.15.4811

Interview with

Dietmar Eberle

DisciplineP

You used to speak about “participatory construction” 
as a wider understanding of the traditional construction 
at Voralberg where the participation of industry and the 
influence of crafts, especially wood, were very deep. 
How can the international expansion of the architect’s 
field, particularly at your office, maintain this level of 
control?

My discourse about participatory construction involves 
a wider understanding of how to use all the knowledge 
of the people who are working in the buildings - so the 
participation of craftsmen or the building industry is a 
very valuable decision in our architecture. Thus, it is very 
clear that already in the stage of the design process, 
we think very much about integrating these people into 
the decision making process of design. Therefore, the 
traditional understanding of doing a schematic design, 
a detail design or a construction design does not really 
relate to our way of working. I may say it more easily – 
we only have to take the decision once but it has to be 
done on a very high level of knowledge.
It is true that in our area there are craftsmen with a 
deep knowledge of wood, glass and concrete and the 
performance of these people in their field is definitely 
excellent in relation with other areas.   

What is the role of the construction site process in your 
projects? Is it simply a linear execution of the conceived 
project or is there any kind of interaction with local 
agents once the building process has started? 

The building site process is a linear process in the 
execution of a project. The interaction with local agents 
and craftsmen and people who work in the industry is 
part of the design process, not part of the construction 
process. So if the amount of time dedicated to planning 
increases, it will result in a less expensive building and 
shorter construction times. 

We feel that you lean towards a certain autonomy of 
Architecture as a discipline. Can we still speak about 
volume, structure, envelope, efficiency away from any 
kind of intellectual speculation? 

To talk about architecture as a discipline, talking about 
volume, structure, envelope, program and surfaces 
involves speculation on an artistic, intellectual and 
social level regarding the architectural process in every 
field. These five subjects are the questions you have 
to answer in every project. These speculations and 
your interests will have influence in answering all of 
these questions but the main question in 21st century 
architecture will be the contribution to the public sphere, 
not the use of the building any more. 

Compactness, central core, do you think that your 
architecture could be recognized from a formal point of 
view? 

I hope that my architecture will not be recognizable 
in terms of personal authorship, as a person, but can 
always be seen as a contribution to the site in which it 
is built. Only one of the contributions of the architecture 
is the formal point of view understood by me in the 
question of the dialog to the existing environment.

Are compactness and neutrality values that still stand 
today?

Compactness is, in certain climates, the most efficient 
answer to reduce the carbon dioxide footprint of 
buildings – especially in the most populated areas in 
the world. The depth of the building used nowadays is 
only a backwards orientated tradition, thinking about 
cross-ventilation. But since this problem can be solved 
in many other ways it is only a leftover of wrongly-
understood modernism.
Neutrality is a word I would never use, but maybe 
it relates to two different questions: not to fix the 

Editorial



Se
pt

ie
m

br
e 

 2
01

6
P
A
L
I
M
P
S
E
S
T
O
 
#
1
5

03

2226 Lustenau _archphoto, inc. © baumschlager eberle>

program and to make an open building, which 
means that the use of the building can be very easily 
adapted. I think that this is a very important change in 
the understanding of architecture because in current 
buildings, the lifetime of the program of the building 
is only 20 years. Maybe the 2nd question concerns 
the atmosphere and characteristics of the buildings, 
so the word “neutrality” may become dangerous 
in relation to banality. But in my opinion, avoiding 
banality is not a question of the program but rather 
a question of material, dimension, light - the central 
architectural features on which we are working. So 
to answer your question, compactness – also in your 
Spanish tradition – is a highly efficient strategy in order 
to deal with economic and ecological questions. The 
openness of the building will generate a lifetime for our 
buildings which is far longer than the expected lifetime 
of their use. The characteristics of the buildings are 
not determined by the use of the building but by its 
architectural consistence.   

Does the envelope in your architecture not only play an 
urban or technical role as a membrane but also a formal 
one contributing for example to the dematerialization of 
the box? Could we say, the simpler the volume, the more 
sophisticated the envelope and vice versa? 

Of course, the envelope is a question from the inside to 
the outside but also a contribution to public space. The 
matter of a building being, or not, a box is not a question 
about dematerialization but a question of its architectural 
characteristics from the outside.  

Site and placeP

Your site plans both at your website and in your beautiful 
books are just a graphic contrast between empty and 
full shapes. Is there any intention to disregard any other 
considerations?

Yes, the initial question is about empty and full spaces. 
Many other considerations about the cultural, social, 
economic and material background are integrated in our 
projects as much as possible. Why do I use this black-
and-white drawings? Because in my understanding the 
dialog with the surroundings, as I mentioned before, 
can be seen very clearly in these drawings and, also as 
I mentioned before, the goal of design is to develop it as 
much as the buildings cannot be found any more clearly 
in the black-and-white drawings.    

In your opinion, how have the Voralberg landscape and 
geographic conditions influenced your architecture? 

Vorarlberg influenced me in two very different ways.
First the necessity to deal with topography, and second 
the very specific way of dealing with the built environment 
as an expression of the cultural thinking and background 
which were developed throughout its history. The 
most important condition was the poverty of this area 
for hundreds of years, which generated a very high 
awareness in terms of using the materials available in the 
most efficient way. 
 
But we could also consider the Voralberg landscape as a 
social organization system; a certain number of settlements 
that create a flexible and not bureaucratic network with a 
really contemporary feature: when urban meets rural. Do 
you think that politics has a link with design? 

I am not really interested in this question of urban 
and rural because the separation of these two 
is an intellectual misunderstanding, since the 
urban environment never existed without any rural 
backgrounds and rural never existed without any urban 
concentration. 
But there has always been a strong interaction between 
urban and rural environments. If you analyzed Vorarlberg 
with social key figures such as income, education, 
profession, divorce rate, lifespan, you would always 
understand Vorarlberg as a city. When you see the built 
environment you would always understand it as a rural 
development. Sure, there is a strong relation between 
design and politics, as long as politics is representing 
the majority of the society. 
Therefore, private design in architecture does not exist. 
All architectural design is always public – a contribution 
to society and as long as politics represents society, both 
politics and architecture deal with society. 

OfficeP

Your web site has a tag called “Position” which could 
reveal the need of doing so for an architect. Do you think 
this is an intellectual and cultural position or does it rather 
deal with service and social commitment?

In a company like ours you need many different positions 
and different understandings of our profession. So if you 
consider yourself more as an intellectual or cultural person 
or more as a service orientated person, with a high social 
commitment – it is a question that is up to you. As a 
company, it is useful to use all the different positions which 
I see as resources for contributing to a project.     

What is the role, in your opinion, of Professional 
associations? In your early years with Voralberger 
Baukünstler you had a strong position towards the 
chamber of Architects...

My expectation regarding Professional associations 
is that they should fight for the development of 
architecture but if organizations fail to do this, I have no 
reason to join them.

SocialP

What would be, in your opinion, the links with other 
disciplines? Despite some experiences in your practice 
with Olafur Eliasson or Adrian Schiess, would it be social 
sciences rather than artistic or philosophical ones? 

When we speak about collaboration with other 
disciplines, how would they be considered to belong to 
very different groups?
One group is related to a better understanding of the 
project like physicians, social scientists, economists, 
philosophers etc., and the other group is disciplines 
who can contribute something in the question of the 
formal appearance of the building such as artists or 
structural engineers.   

Can design be democratic?  

Design can never be democratic, but there can be 
design choices, and in a lot of public issues I think that 
this is reasonable.  

Today we read, view and listen much about cohousing, 
progressive housing, unfinished housing. At your 
‘Cooperative’ or ‘do-it-yourself’ houses, were you using 
those concepts avant la lettre? 

Yes, 35 year ago we practiced a lot of the elements that 
you mentioned about the development within houses, 
co-housing, self-built-houses, unfinished housing, 
cooperative housing – that is how I started dealing with 
buildings; but in all these models, also as an architect 
but mainly as a craftsmen and a mediator of these 
processes. When I show these examples to the young 
people nowadays there are always two phenomenons: 
first I tell the young people that what they talk about 
nowadays, we already practiced 35 years ago. Second 
they ask me “why don’t you publish again a book on 
these projects, which I did 35 years ago?” and I always 
answer: maybe. 

Why are there no people in your photographs? 

Because my respect for people is too high for using 
them as decoration for architecture. I know too many 
architectural photographs where always the same 2 
girls, the same models are on the picture. 

When program is not conceived to have a big influence 
in the project, could not this lead to some other 
problems? Some experiences in the 70s, like the 
Pompidou Center for example, show us that when 
everything is possible, nothing is really possible at its 
best level of performance without a strong technical 
support. 

I never say “everything is possible” but there should be a 
certain range of possibilities and before we speak about 
this in such an abstract manner, let me say this: 65% 
of the built environment is related to housing – a very 
different way of housing – according to the generations 
and the cultural differences according to regions. 
About 15–22% of the buildings are office buildings – 
either public or private, which is very similar to housing.

The traditional understanding of 
doing a schematic design, a detail 
design or a construction design 
does not really relate to our way of 
working; we only have to take the 
decision once but it has to be done 
on a very high level of knowledge.

Are still computers simply rationalistic tools to enlarge 
the scope of architects?

No – computers are tool that enhance the ability of 
architects in a many different ways - first in geometrical 
terms, second in the ability to have much more available 
data about your project: structural data, economic data, 
ecological data and social data. So computers do help 
to increase your knowledge of the background of the 
design.

Do models have an increasing role in your design 
method?

If you think about physical models, they are the central 
point of the education of architects. 

Private design in architecture does 
not exist. All architectural design 
is always public – a contribution 
to society and as long as politics 
represents society, both politics and 
architecture deal with society. 



P
A
L
I
M
P
S
E
S
T
O
 
#
1
5

Se
pt

ie
m

br
e 

 2
01

6

04

Only 5 % of the buildings are dedicated to religion, 
sports, museums, industry, or infrastructure. Even if I 
consider specific demands in this field, far more than 
90% are dealing with the everyday use of the buildings. 
So sometimes I speak about everyday architecture which 
is more than 90% of the building stock and Sunday 
architecture, which is less than 5%.
So when I speak about an open building, I speak of 
more than 90% of the existing buildings. So a strong 
technical support is never necessary in a building except 
to compensate for the mistakes you made in architecture. I 
am interested in everyday architecture, which is more than 
90% of the built environment. When you try to do Sunday 
architecture with the knowledge of everyday architecture, 
it will probably fail. But also, when you try to do everyday 
architecture by using the knowledge of Sunday 
architecture, it will be a disaster. This kind of thought we 
practice too many years now in the education of students.

When you see the Venice Biennale slogans or even 
some excellent practices like Lacaton&Vassal, could it 
be provocative today to speak about quality rather than 
square meters?

There have been many Venice Biennale slogans during 
the last 10 years. All of them have something in common, 
that they did not change anything in the understanding of 
the architectural phenomenon. So your question is about 
the relation of quantity and quality. But, and this is a result 
of the development of the 20th century, quantity is for 
most of the people the biggest quality that architecture 
contributed to their individual life. Nevertheless, I believe 
that the big difference between the 20th and 21st 
centuries, is the development of quantity towards quality. 
But nevertheless every quality is related to quantity and 
every quantity is related to quality. That is what you can 
see in every architectural phenomenon.

From other starting point as we asked Anne Lacaton, it 
seems as if the architectural speech has reached you at 
the field of sustainability. Is this also the point where social 
considerations meet technical ones? 

Sustainably is so boring because it is so complicated 
to understand how the social, cultural and physical 
phenomena meet each other. But in general the main 
idea of sustainability is how can we give these different 
phenomena a long term lifespan to open new possibilities 
of development, to increase the quality of living. 

SustainabilityP

Le Corbusier was labeled by Reyner Banham as the 
biggest delinquent when it relates to “Well temperate 
environment” because it generated the resignation of this 
competence for the architects. Your work and research 
show the contrary, maybe motivated by the architect’s 
capacity to face complexity and the need for synthesis. 
Do we definitely have to recover this skill?

There are different ways to understand the work of 
architects, but to say it very clearly - I consider the 
knowledge of Rudofsky more important for future 
architecture than the, for me, very much admired 
capacity of Le Corbusier.   

Is real life in the 2226 building as good as you planned? 
Rural and popular architecture used to introduce cows 
and other animals inside the spaces to temper clime. 
At the end there is once again a lesson from popular 
architecture. You stated that your architecture was more 
‘every day architecture’ than ‘Sunday architecture’. Do 
we need to look backwards to move forward? 

No, we do not need animals inside the room but real life 
is even much better than we ever expected. Therefore, at 
this moment, there are 6 other projects of 2226 in Zürich, 
Berlin, Frankfurt, Hamburg, Paris and Lingenau in progress. 

As an architect I think it is always necessary to look 
backwards and forwards at the same time and to 
manage the future; it is necessary, if we want to increase 
the quality of living by reducing the resources, to use the 
knowledge of the past to manage the future. 
It is true that, in this idea of modernism, we lost 
a lot of knowledge of the past but I believe that 
this knowledge is very much represented in the 
old buildings, or in a theoretical way in books like 
“architecture without architects” (Rudofsky). So the 
most important resource to manage our future will be 
knowledge – and it is not a question of how old this 
knowledge is.

You spoke of the difficulty of measurements. What is the role 
of perception, of physiological factors in this, such as light or 
thermal sensation? A dark corridor with a window in its end 
can be more lit than any other. How can we measure that?

To measure the feelings, experiences of the people 
is achieved with sociological methods. And it is a 
big mistake that we do not use these methods for 
architecture like they are used by every large company 
all over the world. Why don’t we use it for architecture? 
Because we are not large companies? 

Back to the subject of envelopes, in our Mediterranean 
climate, membranes need to be exploded. How could 
you introduce intermediate and adjustment spaces to 
your approach towards efficiency?

Intermediate and adjustment spaces are very useful in 
different climates because they generate a quality of “in 
between” the outside and the inside. The better they are, 
the more the inside will be protected and the capacity of 
hours per year, where they can be used on a comfortable 
level, will increase their quality. So 2226 is a principle to 
use the things you have in the most efficient way, but the 
goal of efficiency must be the balance between price and 
comfort.

Do you think there would be a chance to bring the 2226 
experience to regulations? There would surely be strong 
lobbies against it…

With the existing regulations – I do not know about 
Spanish regulations – but in France, Great Britain, 
Germany, Switzerland, Austria, Sweden, Poland and so 
on, 2226 fits perfectly into them, because in most of the 
regulations it is about goals but not about the way you 
reach those goals. So therefore I do not see any legal or 
regulation problem.

Knowledge replaces technology: how far can we go with 
this stimulating statement? Is the main goal of technology 
its own disappearance? 

No – the main goal of technology is not its disappearance 
but there must be a development of technologies and 
what we do in 2226 is that we replace hardware by 
software. In history many technologies, which were 
very important, disappeared, because we replaced one 
technology with a different one. We replaced coaches by 
trains or cars – so all the coach drivers had to look for a 
new profession. I could tell you many more very simple 
examples like this. 
So we understand 2226 only as a development of 
technology which happened in many other industries in 
the same way that software replaces hardware, which 
is a big contribution to the sustainable development of 
our societies by using less resources (grey energy) to 
increase the quality of our built environment.    
 

UniversityP

Knowledge, practice, we definitely speak about 
University. How does your teaching practice at University 
interact with your professional practice?

The interaction between my practice and the university is 
given by me using the knowledge I have as an architect 
and bringing this knowledge to the university. But at the 
university I developed specific methods to bring this kind 
of knowledge to students, who have specific different 
backgrounds according to their knowledge. If you are 
interested in these methods you can find it in a book 
called “from the city to the house”.   

Your master at Zurich seems to focus on urban issues as 
also the interaction with some other professors is based 
on technological support. Are those the main fields of 
design research or can we also consider, ‘Research by 
design’? 

Our master in Zurich is not focusing on urban issues but 
on the wide and broad understanding of architecture 
in its different context. The question you ask about the 
relation of research and design is very complex but at 
this moment I organized, together with other professors, 
a PhD about the results of all research by design 
approaches. At this moment it looks very critical because 
there does not seem to be a lot of new knowledge based 
on this method. I believe that we will be able to see 
the final statement within the next 3 to 4 years but the 
question is very clear, how do you define research and 
how do you define design. 
In my understanding the main difference is that in 
research you are defining the methods and everybody 
should be able to come to the same conclusions by using 
the same methods. This means that you are looking for a 
very general knowledge. In design you are looking for the 
most specific solution in relation either to the situation, 
the cultural context or the person who is doing this. So 
in the end I believe that there are two very different ways 
of generating knowledge and it is bad for both of them if 
you mix them up. Research and design are two different 
methods to generate knowledge. In research you are 
looking for the most general

To place and design an appropriate window more than 
to bet on a mesh or a conceptual envelope; to introduce 
reality and phenomenological issues in design, how 
difficult is to teach that in a school…

Architectural teaching is always based on two very 
different abilities. An architect has to do the same than a 
piano player. On one hand, he has to train his hands in 
relation to the instrument every day – pure repetition. On 
the other hand he has to increase his knowledge about 
the person who wrote the music and the historical cultural 
circumstances, but he does not need to understand the 
mechanics of his instrument. That is exactly the same 
way I see architecture. 

You have a wide experience as a teacher and also in 
management, as educational director during your Dean 
period at Zurich. Do you believe in a common European 
educational system? 

My last obligation at EHT, being the study director, 
was to develop a new curriculum which will be put 
in place in 2017. I had to deal with this question. I 
believe in a common European educational system in 
the sense that we will share common European goals 
and many regional contributions or different models of 
Universities, Academies or Schools, and how to reach 
these goals.

When a project in Spain?

I talk to a lot of Spanish people and try to understand 
Spanish culture better.

We would be honored by your presence at Visiting Studio 
at ETSAB School of Barcelona. We always end the 
interviews by asking what would be your first decisions if 
you were the director of the school of Barcelona. 

I do not know the school of Barcelona but I hope that 
they are very proud of their history and try to develop this 
in a proper manner.

Lastly, we ask you to propose a Call for papers for 
our readers. This can be formulated by a question, a 
statement or a text for which our readers will propose 
some texts that will then follow a peer blind review 
process.

Replace hardware by software.

There have been many Venice 
Biennale slogans during the 
last 10 years. All of them have 
something in common, that they 
did not change anything in the 
understanding of the architectural 
phenomenon.

To measure the feelings, experiences 
of the people is achieved with 
sociological methods. And it is a big 
mistake that we do not use these 
methods for architecture like they 
are used by every large company all 
over the world.

> La traducción íntegra al castellano de esta 
entrevista puede encontrarse en la edición digital de la 
PALIMPSESTO:

http://revistes.upc.edu/ojs/index.php/Palimpsesto


