



















































Enric Massip-Bosch __Emotion Devices-eng  1 / 14 

EMOTION DEVICES 
The role of concrete frame structures in the architecture of Kazuo 
Shinohara 
 
Enric Massip-Bosch 
Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya-BarcelonaTECH 
v1 07.2015 
v2 12.2015 

Figure 1: House in Uehara 
 
English Abstract: 
The work of the architect Kazuo Shinohara had as main goal the creation of 
emotion in the center of the house. His work, although mostly consisting of 
few, rather small single-family houses, places him as the most influential of 
his generation in Japan today. 
 
In his designs of the mid-1970s he uses concrete frame structures as a 
fundamental device to question the foundations of domesticity. By 
contrasting scales and textures, and the geometry and dimension of support 
elements, achieves a de-domestication of the house and turns it into a total 
space of emotion. 
 
Key words: Kazuo Shinohara, Japanese Architecture, Residential Design, 
Concrete Frame, Emotion. 

 
Spanish Abstract: 
El trabajo del arquitecto Kazuo Shinohara tuvo como objetivo fundamental la 
creación de emoción en el centro de la casa. Su obra, basada 
mayoritariamente en unas pocas casas unifamiliares bastante pequeñas, lo 
sitúa sin embargo como el más influyente de su generación hoy día en 
Japón. 
 



Enric Massip-Bosch __Emotion Devices-eng  2 / 14 

En sus casas de mediados de los 1970s usa las estructuras porticadas de 
hormigón como dispositivo fundamental para cuestionar los propios 
fundamentos de lo doméstico. Mediante contrastes de escalas y texturas, y 
por la propia geometría y dimensión de los elementos resistentes, consigue 
des-domesticar la casa y convertirla en un espacio total de emoción. 
 
Palabras clave: Kazuo Shinohara, arquitectura japonesa, diseño residencial, 
estructura de hormigón, emoción. 

 

1. Shinohara in context 
Kazuo Shinohara (1925-2006) was an architect that pushed 
architecture, especially domestic design, beyond its conventional 
limits. But although his work is widely acknowledged he remains a 
relatively unknown figure in the West. (Fig. 1) 
 
He is arguably the most influential architect of his generation in 
current Japanese architecture, and his long and lasting shadow spans 
the likes of Toyo Ito, Itsuko Hasegawa and Kazunari Sakamoto 
through Kazuyo Sejima and beyond, to the many excellent young 
studios of today. 
 
His importance and inspiration are felt across different aspects of 
architectural activity. The impact of his work on teaching, theory and 
design is very big, probably bigger now than when his proposals were 
first published, adding to the leading visionary nature of his work. 
 
It is then all the more surprising to realize that this enormous 
influence is based almost entirely on a very short list of houses, 
rather small for the most part, and on his architectural reflections, 
which mostly revolve around the idea of domesticity and the house 
as a device to create emotions. 
 
Domesticity, though, is taken by Shinohara to such degree of 
abstraction, criticism and re-elaboration as being capable to inform a 
whole set of theories about the city, about technique and about the 
very role of architects, resonant with today’s preoccupations. 
 
It is also surprising to realize that his current influence has been 
established almost by stealth, against all odds, navigating through 
different periods in which Shinohara’s was an isolated and antagonist 
voice in the midst of roaring noises promoting other directions for 
architecture: Metabolism at the beginning of his career, 
Postmodernism in his final years of practice. 
 
But the fact is that current young generations of architects in Japan, 
and increasingly in other countries like China as well,1 look up at 
Shinohara as a model, maintaining a sort of legendary status already 
achieved early in his career. As Toyo Ito explains: “In the early 1970s 



Enric Massip-Bosch __Emotion Devices-eng  3 / 14 

[...] I attended one of his lectures. It was packed and there were 
many people standing. A lot of young architects and students sighed 
and roared each time Shinohara showed a slide. It was just like 
seeing a Godard movie in a small theater among students who felt 
defeated by the outcome of the students’ movements”.2 
 
Perhaps this legendary status somehow prevents a clear and 
thorough understanding of his work. But it is quite understandable 
that it is upheld today, given that Shinohara always advocated for 
recognition of small-house design as a field of experimentation, and 
understood the architect as an artist, two conditions now prevalent 
among young practitioners in Japan.  
 
2. Questioning domesticity 
Of course Shinohara was not the only one centered in the small 
house as main subject of architecture.3 Kiyoshi Seike (1918-2005), 
Shinohara’s mentor but only seven years his senior, is one name that 
readily comes to mind. But in those times of accelerated changes, 
most architects went for the big, well-paid commissions available.  
 
The sociocultural climate created by the rapid development of 
Japanese economy, willingly embraced among others by the 
Metabolists, fostered a positivist, economicist approach which led to 
big development schemes and to the booming of the industrialization 
of the house. Architecture was instrumentalized in favor of big 
interests and corporations. 
 
Nowadays, in times of uncertainty and economy stagnation, most 
architects in Japan have but few small single-family house 
assignments, very much in the line of Shinohara’s  chosen 
commissions. His plea for the dignity and independence of the 
architect, at any scale or program, and his ascetic vouching for it, can 
quite naturally be seen now as exemplary. Above all, his claim that 
the house is a form of art inspires many in the profession. 
 
Furthermore, Shinohara’s is a very strong influence in the issues or, 
to be more precise, in the epistemological fields that these architects 
choose as their preoccupations in architecture. How else, if not 
referring to Shinohara, can positions such as Toyo Ito’s “Tarzans in 
the Media Forest”, Kengo Kuma’s “Erasing Architecture” or “Anti-
Object”, Junya Ishigami’s “Another Scale of Architecture” or Sou 
Fujimoto’s “Primitive Future”, be understood?  
 
Even acknowledging the possibility that all of them share a common, 
or Japanese, approach to nature,4 they all refer to a desirable 
condition of wilderness or primordiality ('savagery' to use Shinohara's 



Enric Massip-Bosch __Emotion Devices-eng  4 / 14 

wording) of architecture brought about by him in the first place, as a 
response to the technocratic approach of the Metabolists. 
 
An architectural expression of ‘savagery’ was already present in his 
House of Earth (1964-1966).5 This very small house consists of a 
single space, brightly colored in red and black, and an underground, 
windowless bedroom. The design stresses the primeval irrationality 
of inhabiting a womb, a way of going back to a stage when 
domesticity, understood in the usual bourgeois fashion, was 
unthinkable. This was one of the several ways he devised of stating 
the house as the space of aesthetic experience, in opposition to the 
house as the space of domestic complacency. 
 
But it was in the 1970s that Shinohara articulated more precisely this 
idea of ‘savagery’ as a central theme of his designs and as a way to 
bring forward his reexamination of domesticity.6 In this new 
approach to the de-domestication of the house he used concrete 
frame structure as the main protagonist of the space, capable of 
summoning emotions beyond the realm of the domestic and 
effectively rendering the house, and its space, as a work of art. 
 
3. “The House is Art” 
Already at the beginning of his career Shinohara published what I 
regard as the key text to understand his position about the role of 
architecture in general, and of domestic space in particular: the 
article titled Jūtaku ga geijutsu de aru (‘The House is Art’, 1961).7  
 
It has to be seen primarily as a reaction against Metabolism, which 
advocated a mechanist approach to residential design. Shinohara 
marks distances with the then increasingly prevalent idea of 
disposable architecture, while at the same time makes a strong 
statement in favor of architects designing small houses (‘authors of 
houses’, he calls them to reinforce their role as artists, as opposed to 
the conventional ‘architects of houses’) as a way to fight against the 
de-humanization of society taking place at a great speed as economy 
expanded and power concentrated in industrial conglomerates. 
 
For Shinohara, to say that the house is art means that “the house has 
to be separated from the territory of architecture: It has to be moved 
into the realm of Art, where painting, sculpture, literature and others 
belong.”8  
 
This may seem paradoxical because it is conventionally assumed that 
architecture is one of the arts, and that a house is architecture. But 
claiming that the house is art, while architecture is not, is one of the 
key points of the essay. 
 



Enric Massip-Bosch __Emotion Devices-eng  5 / 14 

Shinohara associates the term ‘architecture’ to a production related 
to economic, political or social power, beyond their possible 
intellectual or aesthetic values. These, in fact, are in Shinohara’s 
understanding little more than an alibi that legitimates and can 
actually make architecture fraudulently pass as art, thus masking its 
true depersonalized (or, as Shinohara says, "dehumanized") nature.9 
 
For Shinohara the true function of residential design, and 
consequently of domestic space, is another one. It must be the place 
for personal fulfillment, and thus must be able to induce a range of 
emotions not normally associated with the interior of a house. 
 
Even if his interiors are remarkably comfortable, domesticity in 
Shinohara’s work is never complacent or banal. It is rather a 
challenge to conventions, both practical and intellectual, a challenge 
that demands an active response from the inhabitants of his houses. 
 
Most of Shinohara’s clients were artists or publishers, and this helps 
to explain the many occasions that he had, and didn’t miss, to bring 
forward such unconventional designs, and their endurance over time: 
many of them are still standing and are inhabited by the original 
families –both very exceptional facts in rapidly-changing Japan.10 
 
Quite naturally, an unconventional space needs a willing user, not 
only to commission and accept it, but especially to find a way to 
inhabit it in unconventional terms. To put it differently: to be willing 
to challenge preconceptions and to make the effort to understand 
the new lifestyle possibilities opened up by that space and make it his 
or her own. 
 
Shinohara was well aware of that: “My venture towards abstracted 
simple forms could hardly be realized without the support of families 
able to understand how abstraction can empower spaces, which in 
turn invites a leap towards a new style for themselves. My 
contribution to such a leap may be quite minimal but I am hoping 
that it is a positive one that can be stored up for the future.”11 
 
In fact, what Shinohara is after is to make of the house a realm of 
emotions, bringing in the core of the house an awareness of which is 
not domestic, because “the house, the one space that comes in most 
direct contact with humanity, must face the uncertainty of both 
interior and exterior worlds”.12 
 
These uncertainties he talks about are not to be muffled by a 
pretended stability offered by the house. On the contrary, he is 
attracted by those uncertainties generating irrational conditions as a 
source of inspiration: “I have found topics for my spaces in those 



Enric Massip-Bosch __Emotion Devices-eng  6 / 14 

areas of the heart where irrationalities are constantly being built and 
torn down. Consequently, I have insisted on the restoration of the 
irrational”.13 
 
This will be done in a “super-human space”, that is, making “spaces 
that are beyond mere human physical scale, and then return these to 
human beings”.14 A psychological space, in short, capable of giving 
human experience a dimension different from those proposed, 
systematized and conventionalized by society. 
 
It will be the task of the architect to offer that, and he or she must 
“realize his unique expressive talent to create spaces that, by 
highlighting raw human emotions, will save architecture from 
becoming a unitary model. That is to say: spaces that incline toward 
the irrational, yet somehow remain at the heart of today’s vast flood 
of material production.”15 The “author of houses” must be an artist 
and move away from the main currents of conventional production. 
 
Shinohara bases his design method on the idea that emotion has to 
be established at the core of the house as a way to supersede its 
intrinsic character of being prosaic and ephemeral. An emotion that 
is generated most usually by invoking irrational feelings, or shocking 
or contrasting juxtapositions that are integrated in the everyday 
experience of domestic space. 
 
Shinohara’s use of juxtaposition is not only limited to specific house 
designs, but extends as a key structuring method throughout his 
oeuvre, to the point of becoming his most favored design strategy in 
order to achieve moving, compelling spaces.16 
 
4. The cocoon and the transgressor 
Many of the instances in which juxtaposition plays an emotional role 
in Shinohara’s work involve the contrast between a private interior 
(which I will call ‘cocoon’) and an external figure (which I will term 
‘transgressor’) that apparently does not belong there. Most of the 
times the role of transgressor in his designs is given to structural 
elements that pierce or occupy the cocoon, seemingly regardless of 
its inhabitants.  
 
From this chance encounter, or “misalignment” as he put it,17 of 
possible Surrealist roots,18 a new meaning is derived, a new 
expression of domestic space is achieved, and a new consciousness 
or awareness of the fragility of contemporary life and its many tolls 
on the aesthetical experience is attained. 
 
Even when it was not a transgressor, it has to be noted that 
experimental structure always played a critical role in the definition 



Enric Massip-Bosch __Emotion Devices-eng  7 / 14 

of Shinohara’s works, to the extent that he regularly engaged 
structural consultants to solve it, even for the smallest of his houses. 
 
Although adhering to conventional techniques at the beginning of his 
career, when the spaces of his houses were characterized by 
structural elements directly related with traditional Japanese 
architecture, Shinohara’s tour de force with structure was part of an 
effort to go beyond traditional construction methods and carry 
structural possibilities to the limits.19  
 
But the references from Japanese architecture used by Shinohara in 
his first period are not the traditional, light-timber and paper houses, 
even though his designs may look similar to them. Instead, interiors 
such as the ones of House with a Big Roof (1960-1961) or House with 
an Earthen Floor (1963) recall the large elements of old farmhouses 
or sake breweries, or the heavy wooden structures of temples and 
shrines.20 (Fig. 2)  
 
The role of these structural elements in his earlier interiors is, in spite 
of their big dimension, reassuring by evoking past spatial experiences 
linked with tradition and memory, and thus fixing domestic life 
beyond the passage of time. They thus reinforce the idea of the 
house as a central, stable point of existence. (Figs. 3, 4) 
 
From that moment on, big structural elements will become a 
recurrent presence that in time will only grow more conscious as a 
composition device and larger in size. But they will acquire a different 
role in the house, because Shinohara is not interested in a 
reenactment of tradition: “Tradition is the starting point, not the 
destination”, he subtitled his first article.21  
 
Instead, what he is searching for, and positively achieving, is an 
expression of contemporary life. It is by way of ‘displacing’ into the 
house the scale and the role in the space of non-domestic elements 
that he is giving a new, contemporary meaning to them –and to the 
house. Moreover, by using other materials, notably reinforced 
concrete, Shinohara will be able to convey new meanings, pushing 
the experience of domestic space towards the uncanny. 
 
It must be noted that his choice of materials and techniques 
throughout his oeuvre has another component: even though his 
designs were for the most part highly experimental, Shinohara was 
always very concerned about the material quality of his 
constructions, and tried to avoid construction solutions that were not 
sufficiently proven or that could mean problems for his clients.22 
 



Enric Massip-Bosch __Emotion Devices-eng  8 / 14 

This is the main reason why he stuck with wooden structure and 
slanted roofs until he was convinced that he could use concrete walls 
and flat roofs without the risk of leaks. The first example is the house 
called Repeating Crevice (1969-1971), in which he took, again, the 
possibilities of the new material to the limit, designing large 
cantilevers that would have been otherwise impossible with a 
wooden structure.  
 
With only the notable exception of Tanikawa House (1972-1974), a 
summer house in the middle of a thick forest, all his subsequent 
designs were built in concrete, right up to his last houses, which 
featured a combination of light steel frame construction and 
concrete walls, like House in Yokohama (1982-1984) and Tenmei 
House (1986-1988). 
 
5. Concrete emotions 
We could understand all the houses designed by Shinohara as 
belonging to two main groups. One is composed by those designs 
that rely on walls as main spatial devices. The other is formed by 
those houses in which free-standing structural elements become 
protagonists of the space. 
 
In his designs of the late 1970s Shinohara will perform what might 
seem like a quasi-direct translation from those heavy wooden 
elements to concrete frame structures, going one step forward 
liberating space of any traditional connotation.  
 
Recalling the heavy wooden construction of traditional Japanese 
industrial and religious architecture, that is, non-domestic 
references, Shinohara explores the capabilities of concrete structural 
elements to generate emotions like awe, restlessness or uncertainty 
in his domestic spaces. It is crucial to raise these emotions, as 
opposed to conventional domestic emotions if, as he stated, “house 
is art”.  
 
These emotions are also different from those sensations commonly 
assigned to Japanese architecture: “It is ‘abstract space’ that I have 
sought to find in the tradition of Japanese architecture. In the 
Japanese tradition that has formed a graceful harmony between man 
and nature, people find the world of emotions, not the world of 
abstractions I have been thinking about.”23 
 
Two houses very close together in a pleasant upmarket residential 
area called Uehara, in central Tokyo, entirely composed until recently 
of detached houses, may serve as perfect models of his approach to 
conveying emotions in the domestic space through the use of 
concrete frame structures. 



Enric Massip-Bosch __Emotion Devices-eng  9 / 14 

 
One is the so-called House in Uehara (1975-1976), a small house built 
for the well-known photographer Kiyoji Ōtsuji on a very small plot. 
(Fig. 1)The other is House on a Curved Road (1976-1978), the largest 
house ever designed by Shinohara, built for the poet Yasuyuki Suzuki 
and placed on a corner piece of land –and hence its name. (Fig. 5) 
 
House in Uehara makes use of a two-fold separation of the spaces of 
the house typical in many Shinohara projects: a smaller ground floor 
including the entrance and some functional spaces, and an upper 
floor charged with emotional characteristics. In this case, domestic 
space is pierced by huge freestanding structural elements around 
which dwellers live. 

These columns and struts support the cantilever and the roof: all 
these elements together form a concrete shell on which at a later 
stage an additional lightweight, half-cilinder volume was added. Only 
after this shell was poured as a single space, the floor separating the 
ground floor from the upper level was put in place as an added 
wooden element, like an inhabitable platform on the branches of a 
tree. (Figs. 6, 7, 8) 
 
Comparatively, the dimensions of columns and struts are 
extraordinarily big for a house. They are out of scale, belonging more 
to the world of the road infrastructures built in Tokyo from the mid-
1960s onwards than to the domestic realm. 
 
This very basic, non-domestic interior in the conventional sense, 
recalls that of the holiday mountain cabin built for the same family by 
Shinohara in the early 1960s, House with an Earthen Floor. At 
Uehara, a permanent urban dwelling where some comfort might be 
expected, the idea of basic lifestyle is taken to the extreme of not 
furnishing the interior but with a single table and benches. 
 
Living in this space is not exactly easy: one revolves always around 
the recurrent presence of the structure in the relatively small plan. It 
gets literally in the way and actually conditions life inside the house, 
calling for constant attention on the part of the dwellers.  
 
House in Uehara stirred many comments when it was first published, 
centered around its ‘violence’. Although we have all grown 
accustomed to strong emotions in the meantime, it is still viewed 
nowadays as a wild interior, the exact opposite of a domesticated 
interior. 
 
Built few years after House in Uehara, House on a Curved Road is 
once again an interior pierced by huge structural elements which 



Enric Massip-Bosch __Emotion Devices-eng  10 / 14 

have the capacity of erasing any conventional domestic feeling of the 
house. But here, in a reverse movement of that of House in Uehara, 
it is as if the ‘home’ (the cocoon) has been built around the 
‘infrastructure’ (the intruding pillars and beams). (Figs. 9, 10, 11) 
 
The original pictures published by Shinohara show some Thonet-like 
chairs in this space, representing the maximum fragility of human life 
confronting the permanence and solidity of concrete structure. The 
mere juxtaposition of both elements is enough to generate in the 
dweller and in the observer an attractive emotion of uneasiness, 
capable of questioning the values of time and life. 
 
This displacement of scales is another device to make an un-domestic 
interior in which the inhabitant will need to find his or her own way 
of dwelling it. Or, to put it in other terms, will need to negotiate with 
the structure and its powerful presence a way to reconcile life and 
emotion. At any rate, it places the dweller out of the usual comfort 
zone that domestic space is supposed to provide, almost by 
definition. 
 
Structural system of posts, beams and braces plays a fundamental 
role throughout Shinohara’s oeuvre. It represents a sort of 
counterpoint to formal, or “abstract space” as he put it. But not 
always in the same way. Early in his career spatial effects are induced 
by the relationship between two compositional systems, generating 
ritualized interiors defined by a static presence. 

However, in the second half of his career he tends to design dynamic 
experiences around the structure of the house. Inhabiting these 
structures, or the voids that these structures generate, is 
synonymous with a permanent negotiation of the relationship of the 
dweller with them, which must be understood as other ‘inhabitants’ 
of the space, maybe its protagonists. 

Both moments in his career constitute a persevering research 
towards a new domesticity defined by what we might call anti-
domestic strategies, designed to awaken the soul of modern man. 
With the adoption of concrete frame structures Shinohara could 
exploit the possibilities offered by this technology and bring it to the 
fore as a key element to convey emotions directly related to their 
material, physical and geometric properties. Concrete emotions.   



Enric Massip-Bosch __Emotion Devices-eng  11 / 14 

Enric Massip-Bosch 

emb@emba.cat 
+34 932112268 
 
Architect and Professor at UPC-BarcelonaTECH. Worked at Shinohara Atelier, Japan 
(1987-1988). Director of the UPC-accredited Urban Design Master Program Building 
the City Now, Saint Petersburg (Russian Federation) & Barcelona. He was co-founder 
and member of the editorial board of WAM-Web Architecture Magazine (1996-
2001). His theoretical work has been widely published in magazines and books. He is 
currently working on a compilation of his articles to be published in Biblioteca TC. 
In 1990 founded the studio EMBA with which he has won many international 
competitions and awards. The last publication of EMBA’s works is the monograph 
EMBA: ARQUITECTURA/ARCHITECTURE 2005-2015 (TC Cuadernos n. 121, 12.2015). 
 
 
Arquitecto y Profesor de la UPC-BarcelonaTech. Trabajó en el Shinohara Atelier, 
Japón (1987-1988). Director del Programa de Máster de Diseño Urbano acreditado 
por la UPC Building the City Now, San Petersburgo (Federación Rusa) & Barcelona. 
Fue co-fundador y miembro del consejo editorial de WAM-Web Architecture 
Magazine (1996-2001). Su trabajo teórico se ha publicado extensamente en revistas 
y libros. Actualmente está trabajando en una recopilación de sus artículos, a 
publicarse en Biblioteca TC. 
En 1990 fundó el estudio EMBA con el que ha ganado muchos concursos y premios 
internacionales. La última publicación de las obras de EMBA es la monografía EMBA: 
ARQUITECTURA/ARCHITECTURE 2005-2015 (TC Cuadernos n. 121, 12.2015). 

 

  



Enric Massip-Bosch __Emotion Devices-eng  12 / 14 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 
 
FAWCETT, Chris. “The New Japanese House. Ritual and Anti-Ritual Patterns of 
Dwelling”, London: Granada Publishing Ltd, 1980. 

GRAS, M., PASCUETS, J.R. & ONTIVEROS, I., eds. “Architects of Nothingness”, 
catalogue of the exhibition of the same name, curated by, and organized by Casa 
Asia and Japan Foundation, Barcelona 2013-2014. 
 
KOOLHAAS, Rem & OBRIST, Hans Ulrich. “Project Japan. Metabolism Talks...”, 
Cologne: Taschen, 2011. 

MASSIP-BOSCH, Enric; STEWART, David B.; OKUYAMA Shin-ichi. “Kazuo Shinohara: 
Casas/Houses”, 2G monograph, n. 58-59, Barcelona: Gustavo Gili, 2011. 
 
SHINOHARA Kazuo. “Shinohara Kazuo: Jūroku no jūtaku to kenchiku-ron” (‘Kazuo 
Shinohara: 16 Houses & Architectural Theory’), Tokyo: Bijutsu Shuppan-sha, 1971. 
 
SHINOHARA Kazuo. “Shinohara Kazuo 2: Jūichi no jūtaku to kenchiku-ron” (‘Kazuo 
Shinohara 2: 11 Houses & Architectural Theory’), Tokyo: Bijutsu Shuppan-sha, 1976.  
 
SHINOHARA Kazuo. “Shinohara Kazuo”, Tokyo: Toto Publishing Co., 1996. 
 
STEWART, David B. “The Making of a Japanese Architecture, 1868 to the Present”, 
Tokyo & New York: Kodansha International, 1987. 
 
STEWART, David B. “Centennial Hall”, Stuttgart: Axel Menges, 1995. 
 
TAKI, Koji. “Oppositions: The Intrinsic Structure of Kazuo Shinohara’s Work”, 
Perspecta: The Yale Architectural Journal, Vol. 20 (1983), pp. 43-60. 
 
 
 
 
IMAGES 
 
Figure 1: House in Uehara 

Figure 2: Sake brewery 

Figure 3: House with a Big Roof 

Figure 4: House with an Earthen Floor 

Figure 5: House in Uehara, exterior 

Figures 6, 7: House in Uehara. Construction of concrete shell before floor division. 

Figure 8: House in Uehara. Floor division in place. 

Figures 9, 10, 11: House on a Curved Road, interior. 

 

All images by Koji Taki, except number 2, by Enric Massip-Bosch. 

  



Enric Massip-Bosch __Emotion Devices-eng  13 / 14 

NOTES 
                                                 

1 The biggest retrospective exhibition ever of Shinohara's work was held in 
Shanghai in 2014 at Powerhouse of Art. 
2 In Rem Koolhaas & Hans Ulrich Obrist, “Project Japan. Metabolism 
Talks...”, Cologne: Taschen, 2011, p. 241. 
3 For a contemporary account of the role of house design in the post-war 
generation see for instance Chris Fawcett, “The New Japanese House. Ritual 
and Anti-Ritual Patterns of Dwelling”, London: Granada Publishing Ltd, 1980. 
It is also interesting to realize how many of the examples cited in that book 
are no longer relevant to explain Japanese architecture development after 
the bubble economy burst.  
4 This idea is further developed in Joan Ramon Pascuets, “Facing up to the 
21st Century”, included in the book edited by M. Gras, J.R. Pascuets and I. 
Ontiveros, “Architects of Nothingness”, Barcelona: Casa Asia & Japan 
Foundation, 2013, pp. 18-29. 
5 I am using throughout this article both the names and dates of Shinohara’s 
houses established in the monograph edited by Enric Massip-Bosch, David B. 
Stewart and Okuyama Shin-ichi “Kazuo Shinohara: Casas/Houses”, 2G n. 58-
59, Barcelona: Gustavo Gili, 2011. 
6 In this respect, see his articles “Dai san no yoshiki”, Shinkenchiku, 01.1977 
(translated as ‘The Third Style’ in 2G n. 58-59, op. cit.), and “The Savage 
Machine as an Exercise”, The Japan Architect, 03.1979. 
7 Shinkenchiku, 05.1962. No translation into English has yet been published. 
I am using my own translation, done in collaboration with Tomoko 
Sakamoto. 
8 Ibid. 
9 Years later still he insists on the de-personalized character of 
contemporary technological society: "I have adopted the militant viewpoint 
of trying to discover what things, when expressed in the small spaces of the 
house, will give spiritual support to the residents in the face of the terrifying 
growth power of contemporary technological society. "In" Beyond symbol 
spaces ", The Japan Architect, 04.1971, p. 82. 
10 An extraordinary fact indeed, but not one that Shinohara didn’t want, or 
didn’t foresee. He once famously wrote in 1967: “I would like for the houses 
I make to stand on this earth forever.” It is a statement that not only 
antagonizes the Metabolist approach, but departs from the received 
wisdom that domestic architecture in Japan, and any other sort of Japanese 
structure for that matter, is materially fragile and ill-equipped to resist the 
passage of time. In “Theory of Residential Architecture”, in 2G n. 58-59, op. 
cit. 
11 Ibid., p. 257. 
12 “Beyond Symbol Spaces”, op. cit., p. 83. 
13 Ibid. 
14 “Theory of Residential Architecture”, op. cit., p. 251. 
15 Ibid., p. 250. 
16 The critic (and photographer) Koji Taki bases his seminal study of 
Shinohara’s oeuvre precisely in this dual mechanism of contrast: 
“Oppositions: The Intrinsic Structure of Kazuo Shinohara’s Work”, Perspecta: 
The Yale Architectural Journal, Vol. 20 (1983), pp. 43-60. 
 

 



Enric Massip-Bosch __Emotion Devices-eng  14 / 14 

                                                                                                                                                         
17 “The Third Style”, op. cit. p. 273. 
18 David B. Stewart has pointed out this relationship in several texts. See in 
that respect his fundamental works “The Making of a Japanese Architecture, 
1868 to the Present”, Tokyo & New York: Kodansha International, 1987, and 
“Centennial Hall”, Stuttgart: Axel Menges, 1995. 
19 Shinohara’s fascination with the architectural possibilities of structure 
played a key role, by his own account, in his decision to turn from 
mathematics, his first major, to architecture, and was already reflected in 
his first texts. See in this respect any of his articles included in the special 
issue of The Japan Architect, 06.1964, devoted to traditional Japanese 
architecture. 
20 Although it is not part of the discussion posed here, it should be noted 
that some of the first houses designed by Shinohara the central pillar plays a 
symbolic role similar to the daikokubashira or shimbashira ('mainstay') of 
part of Japanese sacred architecture. See in this respect my article "Kazuo 
Shinohara: Beyond Styles, Beyond Domesticity" in 2G n. 58-59, op. cit. 
21 “Jūtaku-ron” (‘Residential Theory’), Shinkenchiku 04.1960. 
22 There are many instances in which Shinohara wrote about it as a 
fundamental choice for his architectural forms. One of the earliest is the 
conversation (in which he is introduced as “one of Japan’s brightest 
residential designers”) “The New Movement in Residential Architecture”, 
The Japan Architect 09.1968, p. 88. 
23 “Architectural theory for 16 houses”, in “Kazuo Shinohara: 16 houses and 
Architectural Theory”, Tokyo: Bijutsu Shuppan-sha, 1971, p. 11. Text in 
Japanese and English. 


