














































35]

2015, 14(2), Agosto 2015 [     Pons-Valladares, O. - González-Barroso, J. - López-Olivares, R. - Arias, I.     ] Revista de la Construcción
Journal of Construction

Educational Project to Improve Problem-Based Learning in Architectural 
Construction Courses Using Active and Co-operative Techniques
Proyecto Docente para la mejora del aprendizaje de la Construcción Arquitectónica basada en 
problemas con técnicas activas y cooperativas

Oriol Pons-Valladares (Main Author) (Contact Autor)
Universidad Politécnica de Cataluña, Barcelona, Tech Depart-
ment of Building Technologies I.
Av. Diagonal 649, 08028 Barcelona, Spain.
0034 649 781 652, 0034 93 689 27 25
oriol.pons@upc.edu

José M. González-Barroso
Universidad Politécnica de Cataluña, Barcelona, Tech Depart-
ment of Building Technologies I. 
Jose.M.Gonzalez@upc.edu

Rafael López-Olivares
Universidad Politécnica de Cataluña, Barcelona, Tech Depart-
ment of Building Technologies I.
rafael.lopez-olivares@upc.edu

Iván Arias
Universidad Politécnica de Cataluña, Barcelona, Tech Depart-
ment of Building Technologies I.
iarias81@hotmail.com

Manuscript Code: 434
Date of Reception/Acceptance: 08.09.2014/01.06.2015

Abstract
This article presents a Project for Teaching Innovation (PTI) for the 
improvement of teaching practices in the Construction 1 course at the 
Architecture School of Barcelona (ETSAB). Since the 1980s this course 
has successfully made use of Problem-Basic Learning (PBL); however 
over the last ten years, various learning problems have arisen and 
become endemic. This PTI has been designed and implemented with the 
intention of solving this situation, and has been evaluated to determine 
the viability of its application. This design has been developed by the 
teaching team and assessed by experts from the University, which has 
consisted of drawing up strategies for improving each one of the identified 
problems. These strategies consist of incorporating new activities, 
and active and co-operative learning techniques. For the purposes of 
evaluation, indicators were designed to control the functioning of each 
strategy, to collect and analyse data for each indicator, and to draw 
conclusions. To summarise, this project has provided a means to start 
resolving the problems faced by the Construction 1 PBL and, at the 
same time, has created knowledge about the success of the techniques, 
activities and indicators used in this PTI which may be of use to future 
teaching projects.

Keywords: Learning, Co-operative Learning, Innovation, Architecture, 
Construction.

Resumen
Este artículo presenta un Proyecto de Innovación Docente (PID) para 
la mejora de las prácticas de la asignatura Construcción 1 de la Escuela 
de Arquitectura de Barcelona (ETSAB). Esta asignatura ya incorporaba 
exitosamente Problem-Basic Learning (PBL) en los años 1980 pero desde 
los últimos 10 años se han detectado problemas de aprendizaje y se han 
convertido en endémicos. Con el objetivo de mejorar esta problemática 
se diseñó e implantó este PID, el cual también se evaluó para determinar 
la viabilidad de su aplicación. El diseño se realizó por parte del equipo 
docente con el asesoramiento de expertos de la Universidad. Consistió 
en construir estrategias de mejora de cada uno de los problemas. Las 
estrategias consistían en incorporar nuevas actividades y técnicas de 
aprendizaje activo y cooperativo. Para su evaluación se diseñaron 
indicadores para: controlar el funcionamiento de cada estrategia, 
recoger datos de los indicadores, analizarlas y llegar a conclusiones. En 
resumen, este proyecto ha permitido empezar a resolver los problemas 
que tenía el PBL de Construcción 1 y, al mismo tiempo, se han adquirido 
conocimientos sobre la idoneidad de las técnicas, actividades e 
indicadores de este PID que pueden ser útiles para futuros proyectos 
docentes.

Palabras Claves: Aprendizaje, Aprendizaje Cooperativo, Innovación, 
Arquitectura, Construcción.

Introducion

In project based learning (PBL), students develop projects - (in 
other words complex problems or challenges) which they have 
been set, which involve a process of design, investigation and 
decision making, allowing the students to work independently 
over a long time period, at the end of which they present a 
realistic project (Thomas, 2000). 

Precisely PBL had already been used successfully at the 
Architecture School of Barcelona (ETSAB) in the Barcelona Tech 
University (UPC) in most subjects since the 1980s. But over the 
last decade various problems have been detected in these PBL, 
which until now have proved impossible to resolve. The Project 
of Teaching Innovation (PTI) presented in this article aims to 
solve these weaknesses by means of progressively applying 
active and co-operative learning activities. These activities 
were already known to the scientific community but this PTI 
presents the following innovations: a) they have been applied 
in order to improve a PBL, and b) they have been specifically 
adapted to the specific case of teaching Architectural 
Construction. This article first presents the case study, followed 
by the method and the discussion of the results, from which 
the final conclusions are based.

State of the art

There are many variations of PBL in the technical literature 
(Tuncay et al., 2010).  Another similar case is problem based 

learning  (Takahashi & Saito, 2013), in which the students 
learn entirely through their understanding of a problem and 
resolving it with the objective of acquiring knowledge relating 
to the problem being studied, and developing skills to resolve 
similar, as well as more general problems (Barrows, 1980).

The incorporation of projects, coursework and problems has a 
long tradition in teaching across all educational levels. However 
the first PBL were first successfully introduced towards the end 
of the 20th century, as for example “Expeditionary Learning” 
(EL) by Outward Bound (Cambpbell et al., 1998) in primary 
schools, and “problem-based learning” (Barrows, 1992) in 
medical training at University level. During the same period 
other active learning methods were defined and introduced 
which involved the students more, placing greater emphasis 
on their skills and developing their abilities and values in higher 
level forms of learning (analysis, synthesis and evaluation) 
(Bonwell et al., 1991). Since then, these methods have been 
evaluated in university teaching and have been demonstrated 
to produce better results than their predecessors referred to 
as traditional teaching, in which students took a more passive 
role based on listening, and attending lectures  (Prince et al., 
2004). At the end of the 20th century co-operative learning 
methods were introduced such as ‘the puzzle’, first in primary 
schools (Aronson, 2012) and later in universities (Traver et al., 
2006, Tempelear et al., 2013).



2015, 14(2), Agosto 2015 [     Pons-Valladares, O. - González-Barroso, J. - López-Olivares, R. - Arias, I.     ] Revista de la Construcción
Journal of Construction

36]
Description of the problem

This article focuses on “Construction 1” that is an ETSAB core 
subject for second year Architecture students (Pla, 2010). This 
study concerns the practical sessions, which are conducted 
once a week during three hours with a reduced number 
of students and in work groups. Teaching is based on pro-
blem-solving of three exercises: 1) masonry, 2) structure and 
3) external building envelope (Gonzalez et al., 2014). The 
specific competencies of this course are based on the student’s 
deepening knowledge of the discipline of construction and 
in its practical application, at the same time as establishing 
relationships between technical knowledge and the design 
project in order to give it constructional sense. The objectives 
of the course are that the student: a) learns and understands 
the typological structure of the principal elements of the 
construction; b) learns the basic material and technical cha-
racteristics of the principal types of construction elements; 
c) critically evaluates the characteristics of each of these 
aspects in order to orientate and justify decision making in 
the design project; d) becomes more capable of developing 
design solutions for specific parts typically found in housing 
construction.

A total of 339 students participated in this project. The work 
groups for exercises were of between 18 and 27 students per 
professor and classroom from 2008 to 2013, and 40 students 
from 2013 on. The students admitted to the course must have 
previously passed the first year architecture degree course 
“Bases per a la Tècnica” (Basis for technology) (Pla, 2010) with 
a minimum grade of 50%.

As already mentioned in the introduction, during the last 
decade the PBLs for the course in question were found to 
have a number of problems. From 2008 to 2011, a study was 
conducted to analyse these problems which involved the 
course teachers taking into account the classes, exams and 
student coursework, the grades and university questionnaires 
such as Student Evaluation of Educational Quality (SEEQ). This 
study considered information from 113 students from which 
the following six issues were detected: P1) the evaluation 
of the practical exercises and exams demonstrated that 
the students had not acquired basic competency; P2) most 
students only attended the supervision of their own projects; 
P3) most students were reticent about taking an active role or 
participating in group activities, in contrast to various studies 
relating to other PBL cases (Hussain et al., 2007); P4) there were 
anomalies in participation as some groups and up to 20% of 
students did not hand in the practical exercises or complete the 
course; P5) the majority of students were dissatisfied with the 

course and P6) the seven generic competencies stipulated by 
the UPC were not attained: entrepreneurship and innovation, 
sustainability and social commitment, a third language, 
efficient oral and written communication, teamwork, effective 
use of information resources and self-directed learning (ICE, 
2008), even though the bibliography includes PBL learning case 
studies which show that such methods encourage the learning 
of similar competencies (Kumar & Natarajan, 2007, Kohl et al., 
2008).

Methodology

With the objective of resolving the aforementioned six existing 
problems, the PTI which was defined and applied consisted 
of: 1) defining strategies to improve each problem; 2) defining 
indicators to evaluate the strategies applied; 3) to collect, 
process and evaluate the results obtained in each indicator, 
and consequently to evaluate the strategies and the PTI.

Strategies for improvement

The following strategies for improvement were drawn up to 
answer the six problems mentioned in section 3: 
S1 – To improve the process of learning through: a) co-operative 
learning techniques, b) active learning techniques, c) manual 
activities such as building models d) out of class activities 
such as visits to buildings as well as improving the process of 
evaluation and its results using e) examples and rules for the 
exercises, f) brainstorming techniques with the students to 
define a part of the exam.

S2 – To encourage attendance by means of co-operative 
learning techniques, requiring the participation of all the 
students throughout the entire session.

S3 – To increase the level of involvement using active techniques 
requiring the students to take on an active rather than passive 
role, while at the same time making these techniques a more 
significant part of the evaluation.

S4 – To improve participation and reduce student absence 
through using activities which increase interest and motivate 
the students to learn demonstrating the use and application 
of Architectural Construction, both to other courses and to the 
professional life of the architect.

S5 – To satisfy the needs to the students by reorganising the 
techniques, activities and parts of the subjects criticised, after 
having checked that the student complaints correspond to the 
real situation. 

Table 1. Problems detected in the case study, strategies to resolve them and the techniques employed. Self-elaborated by the authors.

Problems Strategies
Techniques and activities

T1 T2 T3 T4 T5 T6 T7 A1 A2 A3

P1- Poor learning process S1- Improvement with new techniques and activities X X X X X X X X X

P2- Low attendance S2- encourage attendance using new techniques X X X X X

P3- low involvement S3- Increase involvement with new techniques X X X X X

P4- Improvable 
participation

S4- Improve participation using new 
activities X X X

P5- Student dissatisfaction S5- Improve techniques through gradual modification X X

P6- Unfilled competencies S6- Incorporate new activities X X

Key: T1- Puzzle; T2- Think, Pair and Share (TPS); T3- Brainstorming; T4- Examples and rubric; T5- Debate; T6- Oral presentations with student comments; T7- Digital portfolio; 
A1- Models; A2- Visits to buildings; A3- Lectures in other languages.



37]

2015, 14(2), Agosto 2015 [     Pons-Valladares, O. - González-Barroso, J. - López-Olivares, R. - Arias, I.     ] Revista de la Construcción
Journal of Construction

S6 – To incorporate new activities in order to attend to the 
generic competencies established by the University, bearing in 
mind that these are done in other subjects.

These strategies were formalised in a set of techniques and 
activities which were first incorporated into this course. To do 
so, meetings were held between the teachers and members 
of the Institute of Education Science (ICE) from the University. 
The techniques introduced were the following: T1- Puzzle; T2- 
Think, Pair and Share (TPS); T3- Brainstorming; T4- Examples and 
rules; T5- Debate; T6- Oral presentation with comments from 
the students; T7- Digital portfolio. The following activities were 
incorporated:  A1- Models; A2- Visits to buildings; A3- Lectures 
in other languages. Table 1 relates the six problems detected 
in the course, to the six strategies and these techniques. The 
majority of these techniques and activities were known of and 
have already been applied in other universities, but had to be 
adapted to the teaching of architectural construction and the 
reality of the subject.

T1 – The puzzle is a co-operative learning method which allows 
for dynamic and beneficial work for the students. It requires 
the students to be divided into base groups, normally three 
people. Each individual of the group is assigned the role of 
a different expert, thereby forming three groups of experts 
across the whole class. The puzzle takes the following form: 
1) each expert prepares their own article of text individually; 
2) the groups of experts meet to discuss their text together 

in order to deepen an understanding of their own text; 3) the 
base groups meet, and each expert explains and shares his or 
her knowledge previously discussed with the objective that 
all the students gain a better understanding of each text. The 
majority of these experiences is based on texts or articles, but 
those in this PTI are significantly different (Pons et al., 2012) 
as shown in Table 2. Puzzles about different construction parts 
of the building and their representation have been made: a) 
floor plants; b) structures sections; c) facades and d) facade 
details. In this last case, each class group had approximately 
21 students divided into 7 groups, each one of whom studied 
a different building; the seven buildings were the same in the 
three classes. The puzzle was made up of 63 students, with 
three main class-groups and 7 groups of experts of 3 types and 
3 with students in each group.

T2- “Think, pair and share (TPS)” is a co-operative work 
method carried out in pairs, in which the students first reflect 
individually upon a topic and then share their thoughts with 
their partner. This method has been in use since the 1980s 
(Lyman, 1981) and continues to be used in Universities today 
(Fitzgerald, 2013). In this educational project the TPS was the 
prelude to a debate, and served to prepare each group. The 
students, first individually, analysed four different facades 
studying their thermal, water resistant, acoustic, illumination 
and mechanical behaviour. After this, students were grouped 
into pairs and shared their analysis with their partner. 

Table 2. Characteristics of the four puzzles studied. Self-elaborated by the authors.

Part Object Character Classes Students Base Experts Time Classrooms Area Other

a. Floors Drawings Analysis 1 21 7 3 3

1
91,4

Example and 
rubric (Allen, 

2004)

b. Structures Outlines Proposals 1 21 7 3 3

c. Facades Details Analysis 1 21 7 3 3

d. Facade 
details Details Proposals 3 21 3 7 3 3

Key: Part: construction part. Object: The object of study worked on in the puzzle. Character: Whether the puzzle was analytical (analysing the object) or propositional (presenting 
proposals for the object). Classes: number of work groups participating in the puzzle. Students: Approximate number of students in the work groups. Base: The number of students 
in the base group.Experts: Number of students in the groups of experts. Time: Duration of the puzzle in hours. Classrooms: number of classrooms. Area: Area of the classroom used 
in m2. Auxiliary material: Extra material used in the puzzle.

T3- Brainstorming (Faickney, 1963) is a structured cascade of 
ideas, which generates as many ideas as possible and gives 
the opportunity for everyone’s voice to be heard. During the 
activity, questions are neither evaluated nor discussed so 
that the brainstorming may be as fluid as possible. One of the 
problems that this method raises is that it can only be done 
with small groups. In this educational project, brainstorming 
was used in three cases: a) for finding arguments in defence 
of the best facade for the debate activity, b) for deciding on 
questions to ask an expert following a lecture, c) for proposing 
questions for the exam. 

T4- Examples and rules (Brown, 2008) are a format for the 
presentation and evaluation of exercises with maximum 
transparency and tractability. The teaching team presents the 
activities with an outline example which describes in exhaustive 
detail what the students have to do and hand in, along with 
rules governing how each part will be evaluated. In the course 
in question, these documents were posted on Moodle so that 
all students would have access to the information.

T5- The debate is a widely used activity which is both well 
known and strongly defended (Parcher, 1998). In this project 
the debate focused on which was the best type of facade for 
the ETSAB classrooms. This was done with a work group of 
approximately 21 students which was divided into three facade 
groups of seven students each. Each group was assigned one 

type of facade which may provide the solution, the students 
then studied it using puzzles, TPS and brainstorming in order 
to prepare arguments in favour of it being the best facade. 
Following this, each facade group presented their arguments 
in favour to the whole class, trying to overturn the arguments 
in favour of the other facade groups and finally the entire class 
decided which was the best facade for ETSAB.

T6- Oral presentation (King, 2002) of this project was a 
pre-prepared and structured presentation of the PBL. This 
presentation was prepared in groups of three students and 
included an introduction, discussion and conclusions, and 
this was then made to the entire class. In this study, the 
students from other groups discussed and presented their 
commentaries together with the course exercise.

T7- The digital portfolio (Wesel & Prop, 2008) is a web page 
in which students show interesting parts from their learning 
process. The digital portfolio offers many advantages 
compared to a paper portfolio as it can incorporate hyperlinks, 
attaching multimedia resources which is easily shared. In this 
case, the students, either individually or in groups, worked 
on the specific learning process from Construction 1, even if 
this was linked to prior knowledge and may have formed part 
of an interdisciplinary portfolio. The objective is to show and 
present the most outstanding parts of the course that they 
have learnt, from the contents of the teaching material and 



2015, 14(2), Agosto 2015 [     Pons-Valladares, O. - González-Barroso, J. - López-Olivares, R. - Arias, I.     ] Revista de la Construcción
Journal of Construction

38]
student exercises to the expectations, evidence of learning, 
sources of information, reflection on and critical analysis of the 
learning process, comments and reflections, evaluations of the 
course etc. This was done individually in phase 3 and in groups 
of two or three students in phases 4 and 5. The exercises and 
the indicators filled in by the students may be seen in the 
digital portfolios and are presented in the following section 
(Ruiz, 2012).

A1- Models (Aebli, 2002) have the advantage that they may 
be observed from all angles as three-dimensional represen-
tations of reality at a reduced scale. This is neither possible 
with drawing or plan. Many models can be dismounted so as 

to show the construction process of the element in question. 
Through using models the student tackles the problems of 
visibility, and spatial conception. In our case the model was a 
physical construction made with modelling materials of one 
part of a structure at a predetermined scale, either realistic or 
conceptual. This was carried out in groups of three students 
and developed with the help of puzzles.

A2- Visits to buildings consisted of the whole class visiting the 
buildings which each group of three students had studied. 
During the visit to each building, the students who had studied 
it explained it and the entire group made comments.

Table 3. Phases of the case study. Self-elaborated by the authors.

Phase Academic year N1 N2 Exercise
Techniques and activities

T1 T2 T3 T4 T5 T6 T7 A1 A2 A3

f1 2010 - 2011, part 2
17 1

1) Construction

2) Structure X X

3) Facade and roof X X

27 1 All

f2 2011 - 2012, part 1
21 1

1) Construction

2) Structure

3) Facade and roof X X X X

22 1 All

f3

2011 - 2012, 
part 2

21 x 3 3

1) Construction X X

2) Structure X X X

3) Facade and roof X X X X X X X X X

f4 2012 - 2013, part 1 24 x 3 3

1) Construction X X

2) Structure X X X

3) Facade and roof X X X X X X X X X

f5 2012 - 2013, part 2 18 x 2 2

1) Construction X X X

2) Structure X X X X

3) Facade and roof X X X X X X

f6 2013 - 2014, part 1 39 + 42 2

1) Construction X X

2) Structure X X X X

3) Facade and roof X X X X

Key: N1- Number of students; N2- Number of groups; T1- Puzzle; T2- Think, Pair and Share (TPS); T3- Brainstorming; T4- Examples and rubric; T5- Debate; T6- Oral Presentation 
with student comments; T7- Digital portfolio; A1- Models; A2- Building visits; A3- Lectures in other languages.

A3- The lectures in other languages consisted in lectures 
by experts from another country given in a topic relating to 
the course subject. In this course following the lecture, the 
coursework group thought up questions using brainstorming 
and then asked the expert. 

This PTI was started in 2011 and finished in 2014. During this 
period, the strategies for improvement have been followed and 
the techniques and activities previously mentioned have been 
incorporated. This has been implemented in a gradual and 
progressive way according to the advice of the ICE, based on 
earlier experiences and writings (Biggs, 2011). This PTI strategy 
remained flexible at all times and was adapted to learning 
needs, maintaining dialogue between teacher and students 
throughout the whole process. This was done in six phases 
over six terms between 2010-11 and 2013-2014. In phases 1 
and 2, at the same time that the project was introduced with 
a work group, another control group was maintained which 
in contrast did not do a project. The project was then applied 
to all three work groups (for the afternoon group) from phase 
three onwards. From phase 5 on, the course was modified to 
have only two work groups because the University increased 

the number of students by reducing the number of teachers 
for economic reasons (Pinto, 2011). Table 3 summarises these 
phases in relation to the academic years, students, groups, 
exercises, techniques and activities.

Indicators to evaluate the improvement strategies.

The following eleven indicators were used to evaluate the 
improvement strategies: 

I1) Questionnaire SEEQ: a Student Evaluation of Educational 
Quality (Richardson, 2005). This was collected twice per term 
during phases 1 to 4; 

I2) Course satisfaction: a questionnaire regarding satisfaction, 
in which the student is asked to write openly and without 
prior limitations which sessions have been most useful, least 
useful...

I3) University questionnaire: A SEEQ-type questionnaire 
promoted by the university and directed to students referring 
to teaching performance and subjects. This was collected every 



39]

2015, 14(2), Agosto 2015 [     Pons-Valladares, O. - González-Barroso, J. - López-Olivares, R. - Arias, I.     ] Revista de la Construcción
Journal of Construction

second term except during 2011-2012 when it was collected 
during both terms.

I4) Academic evaluation: The result of evaluating the 
coursework made by students during the practical classes. This 
also shows the students who completed the hand-in and those 
who abandoned the course.

I5) Peer-to-peer evaluation (Sanchez et al., 2011) is the student 
evaluation of the work of their fellow students. This was used 
in the third phase where each student marked the portfolio of 
another student using the university intranet platform.

I6) Coursework Comparative Evaluation: A study of the 
exercises handed in by students from the previous courses and 
in the different stages of the PTI in order to determine if these 
showed that the students had learnt what was hoped for.

I7) Pre-test, post-test: A pre-test and post-test to assess the 
level of knowledge before and after the exercise (Dimitrov et 
al., 2003). This was carried out in phases 3 and 4 of the practical 
exercise number three on facades for three groups, and roofs 
and during phase 6 for the exercise two on structures for two 
groups. This indicator has been assessed when significant 
changes were made such as: a) the implementation of various 
new active methods in sessions 3 and 4; b) the incorporation 
of a new and completely different active method such as the 
model in session 6.

I8) Learning reports: These took the form of a list of questions 
before and after doing the coursework, and were completed 

in phases 2 and 3. These were accompanied by examples and 
rules.

I9) Dedication record: These registers recorded the time 
dedicated to the exercises on the part of both the students 
and teachers.

I10) The register of work completed in the classroom and 
handed in, with the objective of keeping a record of attendance.

I11) Distribution of work: Students evaluated the percentage 
of work carried out by each student in the three exercises.

I12) Filming: An audiovisual recording was made of the third 
phase by ETSAB.

I13) Teacher evaluation: The evaluation of the course made by 
the teaching team based on both objective indicators such as 
the twelve already mentioned, as well as day to day feedback.

Table 4 presents the indicators which were collected to evaluate 
each one of the improvement strategies. These indicators and 
when to apply them, was decided at meetings with experts in 
university education and the teaching team. Many different 
indicators have been collected with the intention of finding 
the most useful to the professors, and which would also have 
the widest acceptance by the students. At the same time, 
they have been alternated to avoid overloading the students 
with data collection, as already compiled in the literature (Pé-
rez-Martínez et al., 2010).

Table 4. Indicators collected for the analysis of the case study. Self-elaborated by the authors.

Strategies 
Indicators

I1 I2 I3 I4 I5 I6 I7 I8 I9 I10 I11 I12 I13

S1- Improvement with new techniques and activities X X X X X X X

S2- Encourage attendance using new techniques X X

S3- Increase involvement with new techniques X X X X

S4- Improve participation using new activities X X

S5- Improve techniques through gradual modification X X X

S6- Incorporate new activities X X

Key: I1) Questionnaire SEEQ, I2) Course Satisfaction, I3) University questionnaire, I4) Academic evaluation, I5) Peer-to-peer evaluation, I6) Coursework Comparative Evaluation, 
I7) Pre-test, post-test, I8) Learning report; I9) Dedication record, I10) Hand-in record, I11) Distribution of work, I12) Filming, I13) Teacher evaluation.

Discussion and results

The information obtained from the thirteen indicators is 
summarised in Table 5. The teaching team analysed this data 
with the help of experts from the Institute ICE of the University. 
The six strategies from the PTI are evaluated below using this 
analysis of the results of the indicators.

S1- Improved learning using active techniques and activities: 
I4, I6, I7 and I13 confirm that the PTI has managed to improve 
learning outcomes. I4 (Figure 1) shows that the academic 
grades have improved, and also demonstrates how these 
grades have gradually unified since the early phases. This can 
be clearly seen from the typical deviation as this indicator 
compiles data from all the phases. I6 confirms that the student 
learning process during the practical sessions of the course has 
also improved with the implementation of the PTI, and that 
there are more students who have obtained the knowledge 
and skills required with excellence and distinction. However it 
is important to note that this improvement has been erratic 
and that the worst results were found in the first courses when 
the PTI was applied, as the University assessors had warned in 
common with the literature (Biggs, 2011). I7 shows that during 

the phases when it was measured, the students have learnt in 
all the PBL which had been complemented with active teaching 
methods. For example, I7 confirms that the activity of model 
making has been extremely efficient for learning about the 
specific structure of a building. Finally, I13 corresponds with 
the results of the earlier indicators and has complemented 
them.

S2- Techniques for encouraging full attendance: I10 (Figure 2) 
has demonstrated that the PTI has increased attendance, as is 
also confirmed by other indicators which were not specifically 
intended to evaluate this task (such as I4 and I13). On the other 
hand I9 gives no information about the use and functioning of 
this strategy.

S3- Techniques for increasing involvement: I11 confirms that 
this strategy has been useful and that the debate technique has 
increased the involvement of the students. Other indicators 
such as I6 and I13 also confirm this. I11 on the other hand has 
not helped in evaluating this improvement strategy.



2015, 14(2), Agosto 2015 [     Pons-Valladares, O. - González-Barroso, J. - López-Olivares, R. - Arias, I.     ] Revista de la Construcción
Journal of Construction

40]
Table 5. Summary of the principal data obtained from the 13 indicators. Self-elaborated by the authors.

Indicator Main Results

I1
Interaction with the group is the most highly rated aspect during the initial phases of the PTI. 
The overall vision of the course and the learning process are the most poorly evaluated aspects during the initial phases of the PTI.
Participation increases, however students become more dissatisfied with the courses during the initial phases of the PTI.

I2 Group work and the use of coursework exercises are evaluated best during the final stages of the PTI.Completion of I18 and I19 by students and staff are evaluated most poorly during the final stages of the PTI.

I3 Staff evaluations show a tendency towards improvement.

I4 Academic grades have improved and become more homogeneous.Participation has increased.

I5 Peer evaluation has not helped to evaluate the learning process. 

I6 Student coursework shows that the learning outcomes have improved.

I7 Students have learnt new skills and knowledge.

I8 The learning questionnaires have not helped to evaluate the learning process.

I9 The record of dedication has not helped to record either attendance or student satisfaction.Staff dedication during classes has helped to improve the insertion of the PTI from phase to phase.

I10 The percentage of full hand-ins has increased.

I11 Sharing out work has had little impact on increasing student involvement.

I12 Students have become highly involved in the debates.

I13

The student learning process has improved with this PTI.
Staff dedication outside the classroom has increased, especially in the initial phases of the PTI.
The greater part of the PTI strategies have been successful with the exception of some activities and indicators which require improvement 
or substitution.

Key: I1) Questionnaire SEEQ, I2) Course Satisfaction, I3) University questionnaire, I4) Academic evaluation, I5) Peer-to-peer evaluation, I6) Coursework Comparative Evaluation, 
I7) Pre-test-post-test, I8) Learning report; I9) Dedication record, I10) Hand-in record, I11) Distribution of work, I12) Filming, I13) Teacher evaluation.

Figure 1. Academic evaluation. Self-elaborated by the authors.

Key (Grades out of 10):
E= Excellent, between 9 and 10, demonstrating that students have learnt the maximum expected of them
N= Good, between 7 and 8, demonstrating that students have learnt more than the minimum required
S= Pass, between 5 and 7, demonstrating that students have learnt the minimum required
I= Fail, less than 5, demonstrating that students have learnt less than the minimum required.

Figure 2. Register of work. Self-elaborated by the authors.



41]

2015, 14(2), Agosto 2015 [     Pons-Valladares, O. - González-Barroso, J. - López-Olivares, R. - Arias, I.     ] Revista de la Construcción
Journal of Construction

S4- Activities for improving participation: I4 and I10 
demonstrate that the PTI has increased participation because 
the percentage of hand-ins has increased while fewer students 
have abandoned the course.

S5- Activities for meeting students’ expectations: I2 and I3 
(Figure 3) show that student satisfaction with teachers and the 
course has increased, although I9 has not helped to evaluate 
this. I2 demonstrates that from the third phase onwards, new 
active methods were already achieving the desired results but 
were still in the final phase of perfection. I2 compiled the results 
from I1 and later phases, and showed that students clearly 
continued to evaluate the group work as the most positive, 
and that practical exercises help them to understand the 
theory. The negative aspects were similar but more dispersed: 
a) the indicators completed by the students (dedication time 
and learning reports), b) organizational, such as the lack of 
coordination between theory and practice. I3 shows that 
teacher evaluations have also improved with the introduction 
of the new project, even though in phase 4 student satisfaction 
has declined, which might be explained by problems with the 
functioning of certain activities inherited from other phases 
owing to the increase in the student ratio per group. 

S6- New activities to address the competencies: I4 and I13 
show that work has been done to satisfy the six generic 
competencies (ICE, 2008), and that these have been achieved 
in part. However the digital portfolio activity still has not fully 
worked as shown in various different versions. In contrast 
to other successful cases (Franquesa et al., 2013), in this 
particular one, the portfolio was not the principal activity but 
rather part of several others. It is considered that for it to work 
as a secondary activity, it would need to form part of a larger 
project in which all the courses across the whole degree would 
participate (Genís et al., 2012).

The indicators have also provided other information of use to 
the PTI which are described below:

a) The results of I1, when taken together, are slightly negative 
about the new teaching project presented here but with the 
positive side that participation has increased by around 6%. 
The explanation noted by the researchers is that the previous 
phases with better results were conducted using an older 
consolidating and contrasting methodology, while the first 
three phases of the PTI were still experimental and therefore 
obtained worse results. This hypothesis is corroborated by 
the least valued aspects of the new project in I2 which are: 

Figure 3. University Questionnaire. Self-elaborated by the authors.

Key
P1) I believe that this professor has helped me to understand this material.
P2) I think that the teacher is motivated in the material being taught.
P3) I consider that the teacher appears receptive in resolving the doubts of the students.
P4) I think that the professor who has taught this course is a good teacher 

the overall vision, learning outcomes, coursework and group 
interaction. The work-load is criticised as much in the new 
project as in previous phases. To summarise, it is considered 
that this indicator demonstrates that during the third phase, 
the new project was already achieving some of its initial 
objectives at the point when most of the active methods 
had already been implemented, even though various general 
aspects of the functioning of the course still required refining.

b) I5: the numerous successes compiled in the technical 
bibliography (Valero-García et al., 2005), have not worked 
for the purposes of evaluation in the PTI, because very few 
students have brought up constructive criticisms and the 
evaluation of students and professors has only coincided in a 
very few cases. It has however served to provide self-motiva-
tion for the students. However, as this indicator was applied 
only in one instance, it does not serve as a general rule.

c) I8 has still not been applied successfully. It was originally 
considered to be extremely useful from the students’ 
perspective; however, as the students showed dissatisfaction 
with this indicator from the beginning, it was decided to leave 
out this indicator after two phases and apply its analysis in a 
future phase. Students saw it as extra work which did not serve 
to improve their final grade and so its real importance would 
need to be demonstrated to the students (Felder & Brent, 
1994).

d) The same situation has occurred in I9 as in I7. Recording 
the teacher’s dedication to the class has been very useful 
for adjusting each one of the active methods to the course 
timetable during the subsequent phases of the project.

e) The same has occurred in I11 as in I8 and I7. Unequal and 
non-consensual distribution of work has only been detected 
in a few cases, nevertheless this has been useful for grading 
purposes.

f) I12 has helped to improve the debate. As a result, professors 
have a more active role in it and encourage more general 
participation and debate among students, add occasional 
comments in order to generate debate between the different 
groups and lead the exercise towards final conclusions.

g) I13 shows that the teachers’ dedication to the course 
outside of the classroom was greater during the initial phases 
of the activities with active methods, until these became 
consolidated in the more advanced phases, professors were 



2015, 14(2), Agosto 2015 [     Pons-Valladares, O. - González-Barroso, J. - López-Olivares, R. - Arias, I.     ] Revista de la Construcción
Journal of Construction

42]
trained and puzzles material used during the previous course 
could be updated and reused. I13 also shows that problems 
have arisen with certain consolidated activities such as the 
debate, when class sizes increased by almost 100% in phase 6. 
Bearing in mind the number of students, an attempt was made 
to split the group but this was not successful.

Conclusions

This PTI has managed to start solving the endemic problems of 
the PBL for the Construction 1 course at ETSAB. A progressive 
improvement in learning, participation, student involvement 
and satisfaction, as well as bringing in competencies extending 
across the whole course demonstrate this problem-solving 
tendency. Therefore the improvement strategies based on 
the incorporation of new active and co-operative techniques 
and activities have worked successfully, as is confirmed by 
the results and their evaluation in the previous section. 
Nevertheless the way is still open for further improvement 
hence it is advisable to continue applying this PTI and its 
continued improvement through collecting and analysing 
indicators in real time.

The principal innovation of this research is that three 
new activities and seven active and co-operative learning 
techniques have been applied progressively to improve a 
PBL in a specific case of learning architectural construction 
(Table 3). The majority of these techniques and activities have 
improved the studied PBL and make them relevant for studying 
specific aspects of teaching architectural construction. Another 
important innovation is recording the progress of the PTI 
using the 13 indicators, which has been a positive experience 
because most of these indicators have helped successfully to 
evaluate and improve the project. This is exclusively the case of 
the indicators that required little participation and dedication 
on the part of students and teachers. Both innovations agree 
with the technical literature in advising the slow and gradual 
introduction of new learning activities in order to be able to: 
improve or remove them in time if needed and, in the initial 
stages of each activity, manage the required greater dedication 
on the part of the professors who still have to gain experience.

The authors of this research have judged this PTI and the 
techniques and activities introduced to be positive and 
encourage the university education community to apply similar 
projects to improve learning. Despite the specific nature of 
the research, it confirms that with first hand knowledge and 
care the strategies, techniques and activities of this PTI may 
be applied to other areas of architecture and other disciplines, 
although it would need to be adapted to the particularities of 
each case.

Acknowledgements

This research is part of the research project “Elearning 3.0 
in the teaching of architecture. Case studies of edicational 
research for the foreseeble future” with Reference 
EDU2012-37247/EDUC from the Spanish Ministry of Economy 
and Competiveness. The authors would like to thank the Gilda 
research group, the ICE, Ernest Redondo, Jordi Franquesa and 
Miguel Valero.

References

Aebli, H. (2002). 12 formas básicas de enseñar. Una didáctica 
basada en la psicología. (12 basic ways of teaching. A 
psychology based didactic.) Madrid: Narcea.

Allen, M. J. (2004). Assessing academic programs in higher 
education. Bolton, MA: Anker. 

Aronson, E. (2000-2014). Jigsaw Classroom. Resource document. 
Elliot Aronson. [Retrieved from http://www.jigsaw.org/ visited 
7.04.14]

Barrows, H. S. & Tamblyn, R. M. (1980).  Problem-based learning: 
An approach to medical education. New York: Springer.

Barrows, H. S. (1992). The tutorial process. Springfield, IL: Southern 
Illinois University School of Medicine.

Biggs, J. & Tang, C. (2011). Teaching for Quality Learning at 
University. U.S.A.: McGraw Hill.

Bonwell C.C. & Eison J.A. (1991). Active Learning: Creating 
Excitement in the Classroom. ASHE-ERIC Higher Education 
Report N. 1. Washington, DC: The George Washington 
University, School of Education and Human Development. 

Brown, C. (2008). Targeted Assessment Rubric: an empirically 
grounded rubric for interdisciplinary writing. The Journal 
of Higher Education, 80 (3), 334-353.

Cambpbell, M., Liebowitz, M., Mednick, A. & Rugen, L. (1998). 
Guide for Planning a Learning Expedition. Expeditionary 
learning. Outward Bound Inc. Dubuque, IA: Kendall/Hunt.

Dimitrov, D. M. & Rumrill, P. D. (2003). Pretest-posttest designs and 
measurement of change. Work 20 Speaking of Research 
159–165. [Retrieved from http://www.phys.lsu.edu/faculty/
browne/MNS_Seminar/JournalArticles/Pretest-posttest_design.
pdf visited 03.05.14]

Faickney, A. (1963). Applied Imagination: Principles and Procedures 
of Creative Problem Solving. New York: Charles Scribner’s 
Sons.

Felder, R. M. & Brent, R. (1994). Co-operative learning in technical 
papers: Procedures, pitfalls, and payoffs. in ERIC Document 
Reproducion Service Report ED 377038. [Retrieved from 
http://ncsu.edu/felder-public/Papers/Coopreport.html visited 
10.04.14]

Fitzgerald, D. (2013). Employing think–pair–share in associate 
degree nursing curriculum. Teaching and Learning in 
Nursing, 8 (3), 88-90.

Franquesa, J., Moreno, J. & Elinbaum, P. (2013) The e-Portfolio for 
understanding the city. Recent Advances in Educational 
Technologies; 40-45. [Retrieved from http://www.wseas.
us/e-library/conferences/2013/CambridgeUSA/EET/EET-06.pdf 
visited 03.05.14]

Genís, M., Devesa, R. & Franquesa, J. (2012). La gestació i gestió 
d’un grup d’interès: L’experiència de Gilda. Jornada 
d’Innovació Docent - RIMA, 259-258. [Retrieved from http://
upcommons.upc.edu/revistes/bitstream/2099/12492/1/14-GIL-
DA-1-MGenis-249-258.pdf visited 03.05.14]

Gonzalez, M., Kulakowski, M., Breitenbach, L. & Kirch F. (2014). 
A case study about embodied energy in concrete and 
structural masonry buildings. Journal of Construction, 
13(2), 9 - 14.

Hussain, R. M. R., Mamat, W. H. W., Salleh, N., Saat, R. M. & Harland, 
T. (2007). Problem-based learning in Asian universities. 
Studies in Higher Education, 32(6), 761 - 772.

Institut de Ciències de l’Educació (Institute of Education Science, 
ICE - 2008. Summary of the generic competencies and their 
development in UPC undergraduate curricula. [Retrieved 
from http://www.upc.edu/ice/innovacio-docent/publicacions_ice/
arxius/resum_competencies_eng.pdf/view visited 09.04.14]



43]

2015, 14(2), Agosto 2015 [     Pons-Valladares, O. - González-Barroso, J. - López-Olivares, R. - Arias, I.     ] Revista de la Construcción
Journal of Construction

Richardson, J. T. E. (2005). Instruments for obtaining student 
feedback: a review of the literature, Assessment & 
Evaluation in Higher Education, 30:4, 387-415. [Retrieved 
from http://www.jcu.edu.au/learnandteach/public/groups/
everyone/documents/how_to/jcu_121465.pdf visited 03.05.14]

Ruiz, P. (2012). Portafolio. Resource document. http://www.wix.com/
patriciaruiz92/construccin Accessed 10 April 2014.

Sánchez, J., Ruiz, J. & Sánchez, E. (2011). Análisis comparativo de 
evaluación entre pares con la del profesorado. Un caso 
práctico. Revista Docencia e Investigación. 21. [Retrieved 
from http://www.uclm.es/varios/revistas/docenciaeinvestigacion/
pdf/numero11/01.pdf visited 03.05.14]

Takahashi, S. & Saito E. (2013) Unraveling the process and meaning 
of problem-based learning experiences. Higher Education 
66, 693-706.

Tempelaar, D. T., Wosnitza, M., Volet, S., Rienties, B., Giesbers, B. & 
Gijselaers, W. H. (2013) The role of self- and social directed 
goals in a problembased, collaborative learning context. 
Higher Education, 66, 253–267.

Thomas, J. W. (2000). A Review of Research on Project Based 
Learning. San Rafael, California: The Autodesk Foundation. 
[Retrieved from http://www.bobpearlman.org/BestPractices/PBL_
Research.pdf visited 09.04.14]

Traver, J. A.  & García, R. (2006). La técnica puzzle de Aronson como 
herramienta para desarrollar la competencia “compromiso 
ético” y la solidaridad en la enseñanza universitària. 
(Aronson’s puzle technic as a tool to develop the “ethic 
compromise and the solidarity in university education). 
Revista Iberoamericana de Educación. 40(4), 1-9.

Tuncay, N. & Ekizoglu, N. (2010). Bridging achievement gaps by 
“free” project based learning. WCES-2010. Procedia Social 
and Behavioral Sciences 2. 5664–5669.

Valero-García, M. & Díaz de Cerio. L.M. (2005). Autoevaluación 
y co-evaluación: estrategias para facilitar la evaluación 
continuada. Sindi, [Retrieved from http://epsc.upc.edu/
projectes/usuaris/miguel.valero/materiales/docencia/articulos/
SINDI2005.pdf visited 03.05.14]

Wesel, M. V. & Prop, A. (2008). The influence of Portfolio media 
on student perceptions and learning outcomes. Student 
Mobility and ICT: Can E-LEARNING overcome barriers of 
Life-Long learning Conference, Maastricht.

King, L. (2002). Preparing EFL Learners for Oral Presentations. 
Journal of Humanistic studies, 4, 401-418. [Retrieved from 
http://www1.lib.ndhu.edu.tw/libhtml/series/200204/4-401-418.
pdf visited 10.04.14]

Koh, G. C., Khoo, H. E., Wong, M. L. & Koh, D. (2008). The effects 
of problem-based learning during medical school on 
physician competency: A systematic review. Canadian 
Medical Association Journal, 178(1), 34–41.

Kumar, M. & Natarajan, U. (2007). A problem-based learning model: 
Showcasing an educational paradigma shift. Curriculum 
Journal, 18(1), 89–102.

Lyman, F. T. (1981). The responsive classroom discussion: 
the inclusion of all students. In A. S. Anderson (Ed.), 
Mainstreaming Digest (109−113). College Park, MD: 
University of Maryland Press.

Parcher, J. (1998). The Value of Debate. Adapted from the Report 
of the Philodemic Debate Society, Georgetown University. 
[Retrieved from http://www.principlestudies.org/docs/The_Value_
of_Debate_Secular.pdf visited 09.04.14]

Pérez-Martínez, J.E., García, J., Muñoz, I. & Sierra-Alonso, A. (2010). 
Active Learning and Generic Competences in an Operating 
Systems Course. International Journal of Engineering 
Education, 26(6), 1484–1492. [Retrieved from [Retrieved 
from http://c3po.eui.upm.es/dmae/Publicaciones/17_Ijee2387.
pdf visited 03.05.14]

Pinto, R. (2011). Doing more with less: Architectural Education in 
challenging times. 14th EAAE-ENHSA Meeting of Heads 
of Schools of Architecture. Center for Mediterranean 
Architecture. Chania, Crete. [Retrieved from http://
upcommons.upc.edu/e-prints/bitstream/2117/17995/1/Doing%20
more%20with%20less%20finances_Rita%20 Pnto%20de%20
Freitas.pdf visited 11.04.14]

Pons, O., Gonzàlez, J. M., Ramos, A., López, R. & Gumà, R. (2012). 
Recomanacions pels puzles en l’aprenentatge de la 
construcció a l’arquitectura (Recommendations for puzzles 
used to learn the construction of architecture). Jornada 
d’Innovació Docent - RIMA, 278-288. [Retrieved from http://
upcommons.upc.edu/revistes/bitstream/2099/12665/1/14-GILDA-
4-OPons-278-288.pdf visited 03.05.14]

Prince, M. J. (2004). Does active learning work? A review of the 
research. Journal of Engineering Education, 93(3), 223–31.


