














































   ARCHITECTURE AND THE CITY-2  — 1 of 3 

ARCHITECTURE AND THE CITY. 

2. COMMON PLACES 

Enric Massip-Bosch 

 

Public spaces, as was argued in the previous article, are what make a 

city a city. They are the binding glue of the multiple interactions 

taking place in a city. It is a specific category of public spaces which 

makes visible the social and political bonds among the people 

inhabiting it: they turn people, in fact, into citizens.    

 

These places, in the Northern Mediterranean, have been somehow 

redefined over centuries, but were invented as soon as democracy first 

appeared in ancient Greece, were developed in Roman times and have 

endured ever since, keeping their stubborn role of giving meaning to a 

community. They are our common places. 

 

A bit of history 

At the beginning was the agora, originally a trading space where 

makeshift shops were set up, close to public buildings. When 

democracy appeared in Athens and other Greek cities, agoras became 

the meeting point of the citizens, that is, the male landowners which 

were born free. They actually did not frown upon mixing with the 

populace and sharing space with lowly functions like commerce.  

 

It was then that the agora (which simply means ‘meeting place’) took 

its name, and naturally evolved into the main space to exchange 

information, discuss the city-state issues and to renew the 

commitment to the community: political affairs, that is, because they 

were the affairs of the polis, or ‘city’. 

 

Since Greek social structures were more based on an idea of belonging 

than to the existence of institutions, the urban role of the agora was 

also more abstract than physical. It often consisted in just an open 

space in the midst of the built tissue of the city, and a portico 

surrounding it: hence the peripatetic (that is, ‘walking around’) 

teachings of Aristotle, for instance. 

 

Rome Redux 



   ARCHITECTURE AND THE CITY-2  — 2 of 3 

This changed significantly with the reelaboration of the agora 

performed by the Romans, which would eventually result in the forum. 

The forum condensed and represented the very idea of Roman 

citizenship by accumulating political and religious institutions, and 

popular events like public executions, in a single spot. While the Greek 

agora contributed to giving the citizen self-consciousness, the Roman 

forum made the citizen aware of the state. 

 

The Imperial Forum in Rome was the heart and the face of the empire, 

and all important rendezvous took place there, while commercial uses 

were held elsewhere. It soon developed into a grandiose background 

where to represent (in the most direct theatrical sense) the different 

scenes of the imperial triumphs and the political quarrels. 

 

Other important Roman cities around the empire were built around  

their forum following the model of the capital, albeit less luxuriously. 

The replication of the Imperial Forum in every Roman city was another 

way to visualize the prominence and the protection of Rome over the 

territory: a glimpse or a reflection, so to say, of the brilliance of the 

capital into the dullness of the provinces. 

 

In some few cases, the forum has endured beyond ages of social and 

physical changes, keeping its role as political centers. A quite unique 

case in point is Barcelona: Plaça Sant Jaume, to this day the political 

heart of Barcelona and Catalonia, stands where the forum was planned 

by the Roman founders of the city over 2000 years ago. To attest to 

this high pedigree, there are four columns of the Temple of Augustus 

still standing nearby, at the highest point of the old city, inside a 

building. 

 

Twitter & Piazza 

But even more significant than the physical permanence forums is the 

permanence of the idea of communal belonging conveyed by its 

conceptual model as civic centers. That is, the very existence of a 

center signifying a society. 

 

It might be argued that their existence corresponds to ancient times 

when the only possible interchange among people was in person and 



   ARCHITECTURE AND THE CITY-2  — 3 of 3 

when the visualization of power needed to be materialized in 

buildings. Therefore their role nowadays, with human relationships 

increasingly mediated by virtual connections, is doomed to disappear. 

 

In reality, though, their role seems only to be more important now 

than some decades ago. And one lesson we have learned is that the  

physical existence of the forum or the piazza is not incompatible with 

the use of social networks. On the contrary, they seem to reinforce 

each other. 

 

There are many examples of the mutual interdependence between 

specific place and virtual connection, at many levels in our lives (and 

teleworking and its discontents is one of the most interesting, which 

we will explore in an upcoming article). 

 

But one of the most revealing was the way the demonstrations of the 

Arab Spring starting in December 2010 were summoned: using Twitter 

to call for people to gather in piazzas. It was effective, quick and 

cheap. And it represented the necessity of the existence of a physical 

common place. 

 

These physical common places need not be used by all all the time. We 

might even have never been to a public gathering in a piazza. But 

when we think of a city, or of a political power it embodies, chances 

are that we imagine (in the sense of thinking in an image) its most 

representative common place. 

 


