














































 1 

The Upper Cretaceous Guaynopa IOCG and Guaynopita porphyry 

copper deposits, Chihuahua, Mexico 
 

Antoni Camprubí
a,*

, Eduardo González-Partida
b
, Margarita López-Martínez

c
, Alexander 

Iriondo
b,d

, Pura Alfonso
e
, Edith Cienfuegos-Alvarado

a
, Eric Gutiérrez-Armendáriz

f
, Pedro 

Morales-Puente
a
, Carles Canet

g
, Luis González-Ruiz 

h
 

 

 

 
a 

Instituto de Geología, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Ciudad Universitaria, 

04510 México, D.F., Mexico 

b
 Centro de Geociencias, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Boulevard Juriquilla 

3001, 76230 Juriquilla, Querétaro, Mexico 

c
 Centro de Investigación Científica y Estudios Superiores de Ensenada, Carretera 

Tijuana-Ensenada km. 107, 22860 Ensenada, Baja California, Mexico 

d
 Department of Geological Sciences, Jackson School of Geosciences, The University of 

Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78712, USA 

e
 Departament d'Enginyeria Minera i Recursos Naturals, Universitat Politècnica de 

Catalunya, Av. de les Bases de Manresa 61-73, 08242 Manresa, Catalonia, Spain 

f
 Programa de Posgrado en Ciencias de la Tierra, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de 

México, Boulevard Juriquilla 3001, 76230 Juriquilla, Querétaro, Mexico 

g
 Instituto de Geofísica, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Ciudad Universitaria, 

04510 México, D.F., Mexico 

h
 Geologia Minería y Consultoría, Cipreses 104, Fraccionamiento Jurica, 76100 Santiago 

de Querétaro, Querétaro, Mexico 

 

 

*
 corresponding author: camprubitaga@gmail.com 

 



 2 

ABSTRACT 

 

The Guaynopa and Guaynopita mineralized areas in central-western Chihuahua are 

conterminous sets of ore deposits that formed in association with gabbroic and granitic 

intrusions that correspond to the Lower Volcanic Complex of the Sierra Madre Occidental 

silicic large igneous province. The Guaynopa IOCG deposit consists of (1) early iron 

oxide–copper–gold mantos accompanied by potassic (fuchsite, biotite and potassium 

feldspar) and/or calcic–sodic alteration (tremolite–actinolite) and hosted by marmorized 

limestones near the contact with intrusive granites, (2) later copper-rich stockworks and 

gold disseminations, and (3) late gold- and copper-rich quartz-calcite veins. Mantos contain 

most of the copper and gold ores in this deposit, and their hypogene mineralogy consists of 

magnetite, fuchsite, chalcopyrite, Ag-rich gold, cuprite, and late hematite. The Guaynopita 

porphyry copper deposit consists mainly of stockworks within potassic alteration zones, 

and includes ancillary sulfide copper- and lead-rich skarn deposits. Microthermometric 

studies of fluid inclusions were carried out on most mineral associations of the Guaynopa 

IOCG and in the Guaynopita porphyry copper deposits. In IOCG mantos, temperatures of 

homogenization (Th) in calcite and quartz vary between 152° and 310 °C, and apparent 

salinities between 10.7 and 24.2 wt.% NaCl equiv. In IOCG veins, Th in quartz vary 

between 310° and 400 °C, and apparent salinities between 11.1 and 21.0 wt.% NaCl equiv. 

In IOCG stockworks, Th in tremolite vary between 330° and 410 °C, and the apparent 

salinity is 16.0 wt.% NaCl equiv. In porphyry-copper stockworks, Th in quartz vary 

between 205° and 448 °C, and apparent salinities between 8.1 and 21.3 wt.% NaCl equiv. 

δ
34

S values for sulfides (mostly chalcopyrite) in IOCG associations range between −15.1 

and 7.0‰ in mantos, between −3.7 and −0.2‰ in veins, and between −1.6 and 0.2‰ in 

stockworks. δ13CVPDB values from calcite in IOCG mantos range between −5.22 and 

3.45‰, and δ
18

OVSMOW values between 9.61 and 17.23‰,which correspond to the 

interaction ofmagmatic fluidswith host limestones at a broad range of temperatures and 

water to rock volumeratios. Likely ore-formation processes are isothermal mixing, 

conductive cooling, and boiling. In the case of the Guaynopita porphyry copper deposit, 

similar possible magmatic-dominated fluids underwent progressive dilution and cooling 

with time, with the occurrence of boiling at some extent.  



 3 

New geochronological data from hydrothermal minerals and host rocks for these deposits 

suggest a minimum ~14 m.yr. span of conjoined magmatic and hydrothermal activity: 

biotite and chromian muscovite (fuchsite) from mantos at the Guaynopa IOCG deposits 

yielded 
40

Ar/
39

Ar plateau ages at 98.12 ± 0.37 and 95.42 ± 0.71 Ma (Cenomanian), 

respectively, whereas U–Pb dating in zircons from diorite and granodiorite host intrusives, 

and a potassic alteration assemblage at Guaynopita yielded ages at 92.4±0.5Ma, 89.1±0.7 

Ma (Turonian to Coniacian), and 84.4± 1.0 Ma (Santonian), respectively. These ages place 

the Guaynopa–Guaynopita ensemble within the Mesozoic metallogenic provinces and 

epochs in northwestern Mexico. Unlike the majority of Mesozoic generic magmatic-

hydrothermal iron oxide deposits in Mexico, Guaynopa in Chihuahua and Cerro del Oro in 

Sonora formed at a distal position fromthe paleo-Pacific margin (~500kminland) and 

therefore it cannot be ascribed to a general intra-arc “Coastal Andes Cordillera-type” 

tectonomagmatic setting. Therefore, this regionmay constitute a part of a previously 

unnoticedmetallogenetic region, and petrogenetic studies should follow in order to properly 

evaluate the hypothetical possibility for a back-arc setting there during the Late Cretaceous.  

 

1. Introduction  

 

The Guaynopa and Guaynopita deposits are located in the border between the Sierra 

Madre Occidental and the Basin and Range province, with large Mesozoic NW–SE fault 

zones disrupted by NE–SW, and occasionally E–W faults. Such structural features can be 

attributed to Cenozoic extensional events. The local sedimentary country rocks (Fig. 1) 

constitute a mostly Early Cretaceous sequence of carbonate and fine-grained clastic rocks 

of the Agua Salada, Lampazos and Los Picachos formations. The latter formation overlies 

unconformably the former two. Pubellier (1987) described twoAlbian sedimentary 

sequences: the lower sequence consists of argillaceous limestones and shales, and the upper 

consists of limestones and dolostones. Monreal and Longoria (2000a,b), based on fossil 

content, proposed a Lower Aptian age for the Agua Salada Formation, an Upper Aptian to 

Middle Albian age for the Lampazos Formation, and aMiddle toUpper Albian for the Los 

Picachos Formation. The Lampazos Formation is composed by dark gray thinly bedded 

limestones alternating with shales and sandstones. The microfauna associations within it, 



 4 

comprising bentonic and planctonic foraminifera, calpionelids, ostracoda and radiolaria, 

indicate depositional environments from external neritic to pelagic marine (Monreal and 

Longoria, 2000a,b).  

The above sedimentary sequences were intruded by granitic rocks that belong to the 

igneous suite of the Lower Volcanic Complex (Sierra Madre Occidental silicic large 

igneous province, or SLIP; see Ferrari et al., 2005, 2007), and developed contact 

marmorization and seldom contact skarn associations. The iron oxide–copper–gold deposits 

at Guaynopa and the porphyry-type deposits at Guaynopita are associated with such 

intrusives (Fig. 1),which are essentially gabbros and granodiorites, respectively. During the 

Eocene were also emplaced andesite porphyry dikes, as well as rhyolitic tuffs, dikes and 

ignimbrites, all of them ascribed to the Upper Volcanic Supergroup (Sierra Madre 

Occidental SLIP).  

Western Mexico, especially the northern part of this region, is well known to contain 

numerous metalliferous porphyry-type deposits, which started forming alongside skarn 

deposits during the Upper Cretaceous in association with the Sierra Madre Occidental SLIP 

(Valencia-Moreno et al., 2006, 2007; Camprubí, 2013). Then, the Guaynopita deposit 

constitutes a part of the Upper Cretaceous metalliferous porphyry-type belt that extends 

along the paleo-Pacific continental margin (Camprubí, 2013). However, no metallogeny for 

the Upper Cretaceous in Mexico has ever been formally described for magmatic-

hydrothermal iron oxide (MHIO) deposits that formed several hundreds of kilometers 

inland. Such is the case of the deposits of Guaynopa in Chihuahua or Cerro del Oro in 

Sonora. The occurrence of MHIO deposits in such location raises the possibility that they 

may constitute a harbinger sign of a relevant tectonomagmatic and metallogenic event 

distally to the paleo-Pacific margin, previously unheard of.  

 

2. Ore deposits  

 

2.1. Cuale, Jalisco  

 

Preliminary surveys in the Guaynopa deposit (González-Partida et al., 2011) indicate 

that there are four styles of magmatichydrothermal iron oxide (MHIO) mineralization (Fig. 



 5 

1): early iron oxide-rich mantos (Fig. 2a,b), later copper-rich stockworks, gold 

disseminations, and late quartz and calcite-rich veins (Fig. 2c). Mantos (Tres Amigos, 

Cinco de Mayo, Chalas, and Tazcate) average 2 m in thickness, and are located 

preferentially between the marmorized limestones and the intrusive rocks. Their hypogene 

mineralogy consists of magnetite, chromian muscovite (fuchsite), chalcopyrite, pyrite, 

sphalerite, Ag-rich gold, cuprite, K-feldspar, some tremolite– actinolite and kaolinite, 

besides malachite and azurite as supergene minerals. Some hypogenic replacement of 

magnetite by hematite (martitization) is common in mantos at variable degrees. Quartz and 

calcite are common gangue minerals in any ore-bearing assemblages.  

The Tres Amigos manto averages 11.84 g/t Au, 14.88 g/t Ag, and 1.54% Cu. High-

grade quartz–gold veins strike nearly E–W or NE–SW (Fig. 1), are visibly up to 800 m 

long, 600 m deep, and average 0.80 m thick (La Libertad vein), and are hosted by the 

limestone sequence and the highly altered dioritic intrusive. Average grades for the La 

Libertad vein are 44.8 g/t Au, 32.8 g/t Ag, and 0.13% Cu.  

Fuchsite, biotite and K-feldspar constitute potassic alteration assemblages. Tremolite–

actinolite, and kaolinite are the key minerals that constitute calcic–sodic, and argillic 

alteration assemblages, respectively. Propylitic alteration is the most conspicuous alteration 

assemblage and consists of chlorite, calcite and epidote. Pervasive potassic alteration was 

identified on most diorite outcrops and is spatially associated with mantos. 

Ferromagmesian minerals in the diorite, such as hornblende, are typically altered to 

chlorite. Strongly pervasive hypogene argillic alteration appears to be associated 

exclusively with widespread stockworks and gold disseminations (Fig. 2c). The former are 

conspicuous by the Yuta gulch as an array of veinlets up to 2 cm thick and consist of 

quartz, copper sulfides and gold. In the La Escondida–El Muerto area, gold is found both in 

stockworks and disseminated in argillic alteration assemblages that were developed in the 

host diorite, which grade up to 30.05 g/t Au.  

 

2.2. The Guaynopita porphyry copper deposit  

 

The Guaynopita porphyry copper deposit (Fig. 1; González-Partida et al., 2011) crops 

out in an area of ~5 km2 about 5 km south of the IOCG Guaynopa deposits. It consists of 



 6 

quartz veinlets (Fig. 2d) that occasionally form stockworks in the intrusive rocks (Fig. 2e). 

Preliminary surveys indicate that these ore-bearing associations grade between 0.1 and 2% 

Cu, and are coupled with anomalous Au, Ag and Mo contents. When hosted by the 

carbonate rocks, the mineralization is essentially found as quartz veins, up to 0.5 m thick 

and 150 to 200 m long. The most prominent stockwork zones are named La Leona and La 

Esmeralda (Fig. 1).  

The hypogene mineralogy of the ores consists of quartz, potassium feldspar, 

chalcopyrite, chalcocite, pyrite and sphalerite plus widespread supergene azurite, malachite 

(Fig. 2e) and native copper. The veinlets are zoned and showpotassiumfeldspar on the 

borders (Fig. 2d),whereas quartz and copper minerals occur in the veinlet cores. Only 

potassic alteration is pervasive in the mineralized area, as observed in the present state of 

exploration endeavor, and occurs in association with the highest metal grades. Propylitic 

alteration occurs peripherally to potassic alteration zones.  

The timing of both the Guaynopita porphyry copper-type and the Guaynopa IOCG 

deposit and their ‘parental’ intrusives is explored in this paper in the next sections. Sulfide 

skarn deposits are also present, and consist of up to ~2 m thick mantos (Morelos manto) 

that are rich in chalcopyrite and pyrrhotite, with azurite and malachite as supergene 

minerals. Other smaller mantos (Fig. 1) are found detached from either skarns or 

stockworks; one of them is constituted by manganese oxi-hydroxides and grades up to 2.5 

kg/t Ag, and some are constituted by massive galena as the main mineral (i.e. the Plomosas 

manto). Although these mantos have not been identified to correlate in any way with the 

porphyry copper and sulfide skarn mineralizations at Guaynopita or with the IOCG deposits 

at Guaynopa, the likeliest possible genetic association of such mantos would be with the 

sulfide skarn mineralizations.  

 

3. Fluid inclusion studies 

 

Preliminary fluid inclusion petrographic and microthermometric studies were carried 

out in fourteen samples (calcite, quartz and tremolite), comprising mantos (Tres Amigos 

and Las Chalas), the La Libertad vein, and La Escondida–El Muerto stockwork zone, being 

all of them part of the IOCG deposits (Guaynopa), and the La Esperanza stockwork zone of 



 7 

the porphyry copper deposit (Guaynopita). The studied samples were doubly polished 

sections (100 to 150 μm thick). Primary, pseudosecondary and secondary inclusions were 

found. The analyzed inclusions are liquid-rich (their degree of filling varies from 0.60 to 

0.90; Fig. 3-A,B) and therefore the inclusions homogenized systematically into a liquid 

phase, contain no daughter crystals, and their sizes range from 5 to 25 μm. CO2-bearing 

inclusions are common in the IOCG deposits and are most conspicuous in the La Libertad 

vein as “double bubbles”, with liquid CO2 (Fig. 3-C). This vein also shows aqueous liquid-

rich and vapor-rich inclusions coexisting in individual fluid inclusion assemblages (or, at 

least, inhomogeneous degrees of filling within each FIA), which is interpreted as likely 

evidence for boiling (Fig. 3-B for Guaynopa and 3-F for Guaynopita). Only a few 

inclusions contain daughterminerals, amongwhich halite is the only recognizable phase 

(Fig. 3-E). Primary fluid inclusions occur in growth zones parallel to crystal faces (Fig. 3-

D), or occur as solitary inclusions or isolated groups of inclusions lacking healed fractures 

(where growth zones could not be identified). Pseudosecondary inclusions occur along 

planes crosscut by later growth zones.Many primary and pseudosecondary inclusions 

showed evidence of necking and some leakage. Necking is manifested in groups of fluid 

inclusions resulting in a wide range of vapor to liquid ratios (degree of filling). These have 

been differentiated from fluid inclusion assemblages (FIAs) that recorded boiling using the 

criterion that, although both have similar variations in degree of filling, inclusions due to 

necking have relatively irregular shapes with elongated terminations that point to similar 

terminations in other inclusions. For this paper, only primary and pseudosecondary 

inclusionswere analyzed. All liquid-rich inclusions homogenized into a liquid phase, none 

did so into a supercritic fluid. Microthermometric studies were carried out on a Linkam 

THMSG600 heating-freezing stage. Calibration runs show that the measurements are 

accurate to ±0.2 °C for lowtemperature measurements, and to ±2 °C for high-temperature 

measurements. Salinitieswere calculated by using freezing point depression temperatures in 

the SALTY software by Bodnar et al. (1989) and Bodnar (1993). The obtained 

microthermometric data are displayed in Table 1 and Fig. 4.  

Inclusion fluids in IOCG mineralizations at Guaynopa yielded the following data 

ranges:  



 8 

• temperatures of homogenization between 152° and 310 °C, and ice melting 

temperatures between −22.8° and −7.2 °C (calculated salinities range between 10.7 and 

24.2 wt.% NaCl equiv.) in mantos; both temperature of homogenization and salinity 

data are higher in the Chalas manto than in the Tres Amigos manto, as they span from 

171° to 310 °C and from 23.0 to 24.2 wt.% NaCl equiv. in the former, and from 152° to 

258 °C and from 10.7 to 23.7 wt.% NaCl equiv. in the latter;  

• temperatures of homogenization between 310° and 400 °C, temperatures of 

homogenization of CO2 between 31.2° and 33.5 °C, and ice melting temperatures 

between −18.1° and −7.5 °C (calculated salinities range between 11.1 and 21.0 wt.% 

NaCl equiv.) in veins;  

• temperatures of homogenization between 330° and 410 °C, and ice melting 

temperatures at −12.1 °C (calculated salinity of 16.0 wt.% NaCl equiv.) in stockworks. 

 

Inclusion fluids in porphyry-copper stockworks at Guaynopita yielded temperatures of 

homogenization that range between 205° and 448 °C, average pressures of homogenization 

up to 272 bar, and ice melting temperatures between −18.5° and −5.2 °C (calculated 

salinities range between 8.1 and 21.3 wt.% NaCl equiv.). All the different mineral 

associations from Guaynopa and Guaynopita that were analyzed in fluid inclusion studies 

contain numerous fluid inclusion associations (FIA); within each FIA, the variation ranges 

of temperatures of homogenization did not span more than 20 °C. Then, relatively wide 

ranges of variation of such temperatures in each mineral association are more likely to be 

the effect of actual geological mechanisms (dilution, boiling, conductive cooling, 

isothermal mixing; Fig. 4) related to mineral precipitation than the consequence of post-

trapping phenomena or to mixed data from different FIAs.  

 

4.  Isotope studies 

 

4.1. Sulfur 

 

Sulfur isotope compositions were analyzed in 46 pure separates of chalcopyrite, pyrite 

and sphalerite from manto (Tres Amigos, Tazcate, Cinco de Mayo, and Chalas), vein (La 



 9 

Libertad) and stockwork (La Escondida) associations from the Guaynopa area. The sulfide 

separates from these deposits were obtained by hand picking under the microscope from 

samples previously studied in polished section. The sulfides were combusted with CuO at 

1000 °C to release SO2. The SO2 was analyzed using a Finnigan continuous flow 

spectrometer in the Serveis Cientificotècnics of the Universitat de Barcelona (Spain). 

Precision of the analyses is better than ±0.2‰. Sulfur isotope composition is expressed as 

the delta permil notation with respect to the Canyon Diablo Troilite (CDT) standard. The 

obtained δ
34

S data are displayed in Table 2 and Fig. 5.  

The δ
34

S data for the mantos are distributed in wide range of variation, from −15.1 to 

7.0‰. The Tres Amigos manto records the widest variation, between −15.1 and−0.1‰ with 

a broadly bimodal distribution towards either extreme values, whereas the other mantos 

display much shorter ranges of variation: between −2.5 and −1.3‰ in the Tazcatemanto, 

between 5.8 and 7.0‰ in the Chalasmanto, and between 3.5 and 6.8‰ in the Cinco de 

Mayo manto. The δ
34

S data for the La Libertad vein range between −3.7 and −0.2‰, and 

those for the La Escondida stockwork range between −1.6 and 0.2‰. These compositions 

correspond essentially to chalcopyrite; only in the La Escondida– El Muerto stockwork the 

sole analyzed mineral was pyrite (see Table 2).  

 

4.2. Carbon and oxygen  

 

Carbon and oxygen isotopic compositions were determined for 3 limestone samples that 

host the IOCG mineralization at Guaynopa, and 31 calcite samples of the Tres Amigos, 

Cinco de Mayo, and Chalas mantos at the same deposit. Such analyses were performed by 

using the method by McCrea (1950), in which CO2 is released by means of the reaction of 

calcite with pureH3PO4 at 25 °C during 50 h. Thematerial involved, the samples and the 

analysis were handled and prepared following the procedure described by Révész et al. 

(2001) and Révész and Landwehr (2002), using a Gas Bench II coupled with a Thermo 

Finnigan MAT 253 mass spectrometer available at the Instituto de Geología of the 

Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México. δ13C values are reported as permil deviations 

fromthe VPDB standard normalized to the consensus values of −46.6‰ for LSVEC 

(LiCO3) and +1.95‰ para for NBS19 (Coplen et al., 2006). δ
18

O values are reported as 



 10 

permil deviations from the VPDB and VSMOW standards, normalized as indicated by 

Coplen (1988). All the analyses were performed by using the LSVEC, NBS-19 and NBS-

18 reference material, and every 7 samples a CaCO3 (by Sigma) internal reference was 

placed in the sequence of samples in order to verify repetitivity and reproducibility, which 

needs to be b0.2‰ for both oxygen and carbon. Our working standard is CO2 at a 99.998% 

purity, which is calibrated at a daily basis with CO2 (by Oztech) with a certified isotopic 

composition of δ
18

OVPDB = −9.78‰ and δ
13

CVPDB = −10.99‰. An additional calcite control 

sample is placed every 7 samples, with a known isotopic composition of δ
18

OVPDB = −21.4 

± 0.06‰ and δ13CVPDB= −8.08 ± 0.05‰.  

The results of the C and O isotopic studies of host rocks and mantos in Guaynopa are 

shown in Table 3 and Fig. 6. The host limestones correspond to the Middle Albian 

Lampazos Formation and span δ
13

CVPDB between 3.20 and 3.53‰, and δ
18

OVPDB between 

−14.01 and −13.27‰ (δ
18

OVSMOW=16.62 and 17.23‰). Hydrothermal calcite from 

mineralized mantos spans the following compositions:  

• δ
13

CVPDB between−5.22 and 3.45‰, andδ
18

OVPDB between−20.66 and −13.47‰ 

(δ
18

OVSMOW=9.61 and 17.03‰) in the Tres Amigos manto.  

• δ
13

CVPDB between −3.01 and −2.39‰, and δ
18

OVPDB between −17.19 and−16.03‰ 

(δ
18

OVSMOW=13.19 and 17.23‰) in the Cinco deMayo manto.  

• δ
13

CVPDB between−4.37 and −1.26‰, and δ
18

OVPDB between−18.44 and −15.73‰ 

(δ
18

OVSMOW =11.90 and 15.20‰) in the Chalas manto.  

 

δ
18

OVSMOW values of water in equilibrium with calcite were calculated using the 

fractionation equation by Horita (2014), δ
18

OVSMOW values of CO2 in equilibrium with 

calcite were calculated using the fractionation equation by Ohmoto and Rye (1979), and the 

δ
13

CVPDB values of CO2 in equilibrium with calcite were calculated using the fractionation 

equations by Bottinga (1969) and Ohmoto and Rye (1979). For suchcalculations, we used 

the temperatures of homogenization of fluid inclusions from the Tres Amigos and Chalas 

mantos (no such data are available for the Cinco deMayo manto). In order to ensure the 

representativity and likeliness of the calculated isotopic data, the temperatures chosen were 

the highest and lowest average temperatures of homogenization fromthe various analyzed 

samples in each mineralized manto.  



 11 

5. 
40

Ar/
39

Ar dating  

 

The 
40

Ar/
39

Ar analyses were performed at the Geochronology Laboratory of the 

Departmento de Geología, Centro de Investigación Científica y Educación Superior de 

Ensenada (CICESE, Mexico). The argon isotope experiments were conducted on a few 

flakes of fuchsite and biotite (from the potassic alteration assemblages around the 

Guaynopa IOCG mantos) separated from sample GUAYN-1. The mineral grainswere 

heatedwith a Coherent Ar-ion Innova 370 laser. The extraction system is on line with a 

VG5400 mass spectrometer. The sample and irradiation monitors, were irradiated in the U-

enriched research reactor of University of McMaster in Hamilton, Canada, at position 5C. 

To block thermal neutrons, the capsule was covered with a cadmium liner during 

irradiation. To determine the neutron flux variations, aliquots of the irradiation monitor 

FCT-2 sanidine (27.84 ± 0.04 Ma) were irradiated alongside sample GUAYN-1. Upon 

irradiation the monitors were fused in one step while the fuchsite sample GUAYN-1 was 

step-heated. The argon isotopes were corrected for blank, mass discrimination, radioactive 

decay of 37Ar and 39Ar and atmospheric contamination. For the Ca neutron interference 

reactions, the factors given by Masliwec (1984) were used. The decay constants 

recommended by Steiger and Jäger (1977) were applied in the data processing. The 

equations reported by York et al. (2004)were used in all the straight line fitting routines of 

the argon data reduction. The relevant 40Ar/39Ar data are presented in Table 3, which 

includes the results of the individual steps, and the integrated, plateau and isochron ages. 

The analytical precision is reported as one standard deviation (1 σ). The error in the 

integrated, plateau and isochron ages includes the scatter in the irradiation monitors.  

The 40Ar–39Ar results are listed in Table 3 and presented in Fig. 7. With the exception 

of the first fraction, a well-defined straight line, with mean standard weight deviations 

(MSWD) of 0.55 for n=6, indicates isochron ages of 96.66±0.71Ma for fuchsite and 

97.64±0.29 for biotite, which are statistically indistinguishable from the plateau ages. We 

then take the 98.12 ± 0.37 and 95.42 ± 0.71 Ma (Cenomanian) from the plateau ages of 

biotite and fuchsite, respectively, as our best estimates for the age of sample GUAYN-1.  

 

6. U–Pb dating 



 12 

 

Three samples were selected for U–Pb dating in zircon separates from Guaynopita: two 

samples from instrusive bodies (sample GRANO-7, diorite, and sample CAMP, 

granodiorite), and a sample from a potassium feldspar from the potassic alteration 

assemblage around quartz veins and veinlets (sample L-9). The U–Pb zircon analyses were 

performed at the Isotopic Studies Laboratory (LEI) at the Centro de Geociencias from the 

Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México. An excimer (193 nm) laser ablation system by 

Resonetics was attached to a quadrupole Thermo-X series ICP-MS spectrometer to carry 

out the analyses. The system has been recently described by Solari et al. (2010) and all data 

have been reduced by in-house software “UPb.age” (Solari and Tanner, 2011) and plotted 

with the computational software “Isoplot 3.0” (Ludwig, 2003).  

The analyzed samples yielded concordant ages at 92.4 Ma for the diorite intrusive, 89.1 

Ma for the granodiorite intrusive (both hosting the porphyry copper deposit), and 84.4 Ma 

for the potassic alteration assemblage in the porphyry copper deposit. These analyses are 

displayed in Table 4 and Fig. 8. (See Table 5.). 

 

7. Discussion 

  

7.1. The formation of the guaynopa and guaynopita deposits 

 

According to our results, the Guaynopa IOCG deposits and the Guaynopita porphyry 

copper deposit in Chihuahua, plus the associated intrusives, formed at leastwithin a time 

span of ~10 m.y., as featured by the following ages: 98.15Ma for biotite and 95.42Ma for 

fuchsite in the potassic alteration assemblages of the IOCG deposit, 92.4 Ma for a diorite 

intrusive, 89.1Ma for a granodiorite intrusive (both hosting the porphyry copper deposit), 

and 84.4 Ma for potassic alteration in the porphyry copper deposit (hydrothermal zircon). 

Such time span is in agreementwith those determined in other Mexican IOCG ‘clan’ 

deposits (e. g., Peña Colorada in Colima; Camprubí et al., 2011; Camprubí and González-

Partida, 2016–in this issue), as the ore-forming phenomena are relatively long lasting 

within favorable regions with a complex structural configuration. Widely know features for 

generic MHIO are (1) the entrainment at different scales of observation (regional and local) 



 13 

of both alkaline and calc-alkaline magmas within a relatively short period of time, which 

are associated with the formation of either generic MHIO or porphyry-type (Cu, Mo, 

Au,W) deposits, and (2) the relatively wide variety of tectonomagmatic environments in 

which generic MHIO deposits formed (e.g., Williams et al., 2005). It has been long 

suspected that porphyry-type and some types of MHIO deposits may have a common 

ancestry in Andean-type settings. In fact, recent research in mineralized magmatic-

hydrothermal paleosystems in Northern Chile (Tornos et al., 2010) allowed to invoke such 

common origin at a local scale, and suggests a “broadly contemporaneous” formation of 

similar deposits at a regional scale. In that case, the Tropezón Cu–Mo–(Au) deposit in 

Chile bears characteristics of both IOCG and porphyry-hosted deposit models,which led 

Tornos et al. (2010) to suggest that this deposit represents a ‘missing link’ between both the 

consideredmodels. However, the Guaynopa–Guaynopita cluster contains separate ore 

deposits that can be formally ascribed to both the above models with no ‘missing link’ ever 

found so far, despite being so close in time and space. The broadly contemporaneous 

formation of both types of deposits also includes the emplacement of at least some of the 

local (‘parental’?) intrusive bodies; one of them, which hosts the porphyry copper deposits, 

is nearly (and notably) contemporaneous to the IOCG deposit. Such features also for a 

continuum of some sort between IOCG and porphyry-copper deposits that formed as a 

result of an enabling evolution of parental magmas, and the occurrence of a Tropezón-like 

‘missing link’ between them seems not an unreasonable possibility. Flores (1951) already 

noticed that several MHIO deposits were consistently associated with (or even rooted on) 

porphyry copper deposits or non-iron oxide skarns in association with the Mesozoic–

Cenozoic magmatism due to the Pacific arc in Mexico. At least two Cenozoic likely 

examples for the above are known in Mexico. One of them is represented by some small 

deposits (e. g., La Piedra Imán, El Sol y La Luna) in the Concepción del Oro corridor in 

eastern Zacatecas, which includes the giant non-iron oxide skarn deposits of Peñasquito 

(477 Mt in hypogene sulfides and 87Mt in supergene oxides, containing 575Moz Ag, 

10Moz Au, 1.67Mt Pb and 3.62 Mt Zn; data from 2006, in Turner, 2009). The second 

example that can be invoked is the suite of deposits associated with the San Carlos caldera 

in Chihuahua (dated at 31 Ma; Immitt and Kyle, 1981), where magnetite-rich skarn 



 14 

deposits formed in association with Pb–Zn skarns and epithermal veins (Clark and Fitch, 

2009).  

The case of theGuaynopa–Guaynopita group of deposits, for regional exploration 

purposes, may also benefit from its comparison with the geological characteristics of the 

Cenozoic Eastern Alkaline Province (EMAP) of Mexico. The most relevant of these 

(Camprubí, 2009, 2013), for the matter, are that (1) the EMAP is constituted by a series of 

magmatic massifs that are discontinuously distributed in a relatively narrowstrip of land 

that crosses the entire easternMexico fromCoahuila and Chihuahua in the north to Chiapas 

in the south, (2) it is the metallogenic province inMexicowith the highest ‘typological 

diversity’, as it contains a myriad of types and styles of magmatic-hydrothermal ore 

deposits, including both generic MHIO deposits, carbonatitic complexes, and ultra-alkaline 

massifs, and (3) the ‘parental’ magmatic rocks for these deposits have either alkaline or 

calc-alkaline affinities, as well as both intraplate and subduction affinities, even within the 

same individual magmatic massif (Camprubí, 2009, 2013). Such magmatism and 

magmatically driven metallogenic activity “unzips” southwards and correlates with the 

distribution in time and space of the eastward and southwardmigration of the Cenozoic arc 

magmatism. Therefore, the EMAP is likely to constitute a large-scale continental 

extensional back-arc province for the Cenozoic Sierra Madre Occidental SLIP. Whether or 

not the tectonomagmatic setting of northwestern Mexico during the Upper Cretaceous 

parallels in any way the one existing in the EMAP (though at a smaller scale), the sole 

occurrence of theGuaynopa–Guaynopita cluster should be enough to encourage research 

efforts towards evaluating such possibility. Ifwe assumed that to be the case, it might be 

predicted the occurrence of more deposits similar to those in the Guaynopa–Guaynopita 

cluster along the trace of the Basin and Range province in northwestern Mexico during the 

Upper Cretaceous.  

 

7.2. Fluid inclusion and stable isotope data  

 

Some of the temperatures of ice melting listed above are lower than the eutectic 

temperature of the H2O–NaCl system,which is an expected effect for CO2-rich fluid 

inclusions (Hedenquist and Henley, 1985; Fáll et al., 2011), as it is actually the case for 



 15 

some fluid inclusion assemblages in the Guaynopa deposit (Fig. 3-C). However, such 

melting temperatures can also be accounted by (1) H2O–NaCl–FeCl2 or H2O–FeCl2 fluids 

(Lecumberri-Sanchez et al., 2015; Steele-MacInnis et al., 2015), (2) H2O–NaCl–CaCl2 

fluids (Hunt et al., 2011; Steele-MacInnis et al., 2011), or (3) be due to largely 

unpredictable metastability problems in the H2O–NaCl–CaCl2 or H2O–NaCl–MgCl2 

systems (Bakker and Baumgartner, 2012), as all these cases are plausible for the Guaynopa 

deposit. Until the current studies in the Guaynopa and Guaynopita deposits are properly 

completed and their salinity is recalculated as suggested by Fáll et al. (2011); Steele-

MacInnis et al. (2011, 2015) or Lecumberri-Sanchez et al. (2015), the salinities displayed 

above must be cautionarily considered as apparent salinities when referred to NaCl alone. 

In the Guaynopa IOCG deposits, the highest temperatures of homogenization (Th) were 

obtained in stockwork and vein fluid inclusion samples, which span very similar ranges of 

variation (310° to 410 °C). Also, apparent salinities from vein inclusion fluids (between 

11.1 and 21.0 wt.% NaCl equiv.) encompass those from stockwork samples. Contrastingly, 

fluid inclusions from manto samples show neatly lower Th (between 152° and 310 °C) and 

higher apparent salinities (between 10.7 and 24.2 wt.% NaCl equiv.) than those fromvein 

and stockwork assemblages, and both Th and apparent salinity are higher in the Chalas 

manto than in the Tres Amigos manto. The highest temperatures of homogenization (up to 

448 °C) were obtained in stockwork samples from the Guaynopita porphyry copper deposit, 

although the ranges for them are very similar to those obtained for the Guaynopa IOCG 

deposit. Then, mineralizing fluids for both sets of deposits are intermediate- to 

hightemperature and relatively high-salinity brines. The ranges of Th and apparent salinities 

from IOCG associations at Guaynopa are in agreement with those commonly found in fluid 

inclusions from deposits of different types within the IOCG ‘clan’ (e. g., Borrok et al., 

1998; Smith and Henderson, 2000; Bastrakov et al., 2007; Davidson et al., 2007), within 

the medium-salinity range (10 to 30 wt.% NaCl equiv.). At the present state of research, 

only a fewfluid inclusionswith daughter minerals (Table 1 and Fig. 3-E) have been found in 

samples from the Guaynopita porphyry copper deposit, which is a striking feature for this 

type of deposits. However, this study is based only on limited surface sampling, as there are 

no old mines or drill cores available from these deposits; therefore, this study constitutes 

only a first approximation to its full-length metallogenic characterization.  



 16 

The trends of microthermometric data fromthe Guaynopa IOCG and the Guaynopita 

porphyry copper deposits are, even at the preliminary stage of research in these deposits, 

strikingly different. The observed petrographic evidence for boiling (i.e. coexistence in the 

same fluid inclusion associations of vapor-rich and liquid-rich inclusions) in the La 

Libertad vein could suggest that high-salinity fluids might constitute “false brines” due to 

boiling-off of vapor. Although the consistency of data from that vein and the similar 

microthermometric behavior of fluid inclusions from IOCG mineralizations may rule out 

“false brines” as responsible for relatively high salinities in mantos, the geometry of the 

two subsets of microthermometric data from the La Libertad vein may either be due to (1) 

boiling fromhigh-temperature andmoderately saline brines, or (2) different brine pulseswith 

contrasting temperature and salinity. Most of the fluid inclusion assemblages (FIAs) 

analyzed in IOCG ores display data trends that are either suggestive of isothermal mixing 

(similar Th but varying salinity, as in manto and vein samples) or of conductive cooling 

(similar salinity but varying Th, as in manto and stockwork samples). Contrastingly, fluid 

inclusions from the Guaynopita porphyry copper deposit display a positive correlation 

between Th and apparent salinity, thus standing for a convincing dilution trend between 

relatively high salinity and temperature fluids, and water likely derived from meteoric 

sources. Such dilution trend is found both in every FIA and as a general trend for the whole 

set of data in the Guaynopita porphyry copper deposit.  

As a general feature, the C and O isotopic compositions of host limestones of the 

Lampazos Formation are compatible with those of marine Albian–Cenomanian limestones 

(Huber et al., 1999; Norris et al., 2001; Zürcher et al., 2001). Further, such compositions 

were shifted towards lower δ
18

O values (Fig. 6) as the rocks of the Lampazos Formation 

underwent rock-dominated interaction withmineralizing fluids during hydrothermal stages 

of the Guaynopa deposit. According to Zheng and Hoefs (1993), magmatic water may have 

δ
18

OSMOW values that range between 6 and 15‰ and δ
13

CPDB values similar to those of the 

undepleted mantle (between −9 and−4‰). Therefore, C and O isotopic compositions of 

hydrothermal calcite from mineralized mantos at Guaynopa, and of CO2 and water in 

isotopic equilibrium with calcite show, in general, mixed sources between compositions 

that correspond tomagmatic fluids and marine limestones. However, the analytical data 

have a strong affinity with magmatic isotopic compositions, which is corroborated by the 



 17 

calculated δ
18

O and δ
13

C values of CO2 in isotopic equilibrium with calcite. This 

interpretation is valid at a broad variety of temperatures andwater/rock interaction models 

(Fig. 6). Then, it follows thatmineralizing fluids in the Guaynopa deposit would have been 

essentially magmatic brines (up to N24 wt.% NaCl equiv. or more) that underwent 

significant interaction with the local host rocks. Also, δ
18

OSMOW values of water in 

equilibrium with calcite (between −5.22 and 2.21‰) suggest that upwelling fluids 

interacted with meteoric water, similarly to the case described for Mexican epithermal 

deposits by Albinson et al. (2001) and Camprubí et al. (2001). Such interactionwould 

account for the isothermal mixing and dilution features deduced from the behavior of fluid 

inclusion microthermometric data (Fig. 4).  

Most of the sulfides display a bimodal distribution of δ
34

S values, roughly between−4 

and 1‰, and between 2 and 7‰, although chalcopyrite samples fromsomemanto 

associations span values below−9‰. The former range of data is compatible with magmatic 

sources for sulfur, either derived from cooling magmas or, less likely, leached from igneous 

rocks by relatively oxidized fluids. The likeliness of the coolingmagmahypothesis is 

implied by the relatively high apparent salinities obtained in fluid inclusions frommanto 

assemblages, which can be attained by magmatic brines (with some degree of entrainment 

of more oxidized and dilute surficial waters) in settings where no modified seawater, 

sedimentary or bittern brines can be related to the generation of mineralizing brines. The 

obtained range of δ
34

S values includes most data frommanto samples and all of the 

stockwork samples. Vein samples peak between −3 and −2‰, thus probably reflecting 

magmatic sources for sulfur under increasingly oxidizing conditions departing from the 

~0%-centered values in stockwork assemblages. The highest δ
34

S values (up to 6.8‰), 

obtained in the Chalas and Cinco de Mayo mantos, are seemingly not high enough as to 

allow invoke the incursion of modified seawater as in the Mantoverde deposit in Chile 

(Benavides et al., 2007) and most deposits in the Coastal Andes Cordillera (Williams et al., 

2005). Instead, these values would be associated with crustal sedimentary rocks as in other 

IOCG ‘clan’ deposits (Bastrakov et al., 2007; Chen and Zhou, 2012). In this sense, it is 

worth noting that the location of the Guaynopa deposits, over 500 km inland from the 

paleo-Pacific margin, and that formed during the continentalization process of magmatism 

and metallogeny in Mexico, renders the role of modified seawater unlikelier than in intra-



 18 

arc settings like those in the Coastal Andes Cordillera. The large negative δ
34

S values in the 

Tres Amigos manto, in which chalcopyrite is associated with martitization and the lowest 

temperatures of homogenization were obtained, can be explained by the oxidation of 

mineralizing fluids over time, as in other IOCG deposits (Bastrakov et al., 2007; Davidson 

et al., 2007). Such late oxidized fluids can be interpreted as surficial waters that became 

more efficiently entrained by upwelling fluids as the paleohydrothermal system waned. 

Such feature is not uncommonly invoked for other relatively shallow deposits of the IOCG 

‘clan’ (Borrok et al., 1998; Reynolds, 2000; Bastrakov et al., 2007). This possibility is 

compatible by the isothermal mixing trend suggested by the distribution of 

microthermometric data in the Tres Amigos manto (Table 1), which span a difference of 

apparent salinities of over 4 wt.% NaCl equiv. in fluid inclusions with an extremely narrow 

variation range in temperatures of homogenization. The features concerning the likely 

sources for sulfur discussed above are similar to those described in the IOCG deposits of 

the Mantoverde and Olympic Dam districts (Bastrakov et al., 2007; Benavides et al., 2007; 

Davidson et al., 2007; Rieger et al., 2010).  

 

7.3. The troublesome occurrence of fuchsite at Guaynopa  

 

The prominent occurrence of epigenetic fuchsite (chromian muscovite) as part of the 

potassic alteration assemblage, which contains the iron oxide–copper–gold associations in 

the main mantos, is an interesting feature in the Guaynopa deposit. This deserves further 

attention although such occurrence cannot be easily explained. Fuchsite (or, for that matter, 

chromian phengite or “mariposite”) is seemingly an extremely uncommon epigenetic 

mineral variety in generic magmatic-hydrothermal iron oxide deposits, unless it takes after 

preexisting minerals in several types of deposits. Typical cases would be orogenic deposits 

(i.e., “listvenites”) or other types of deposits in which chromium was remobilized from 

underlying ultramafic–mafic rock complexes (e.g., Nesbitt et al., 1986; Partington and 

Williams, 2000; Jébrak and Doucet, 2002; Baksheev and Kudryavtseva, 2004; Haeberlin et 

al., 2004; Doroshkevich et al., 2007; Dubé and Gosselin, 2007; Espi et al., 2007; Holma 

and Keinänen, 2007; Belkabir et al., 2008; Peltonen et al., 2008; González-Jiménez et al., 

2014), or associated with banded iron formations (Hall and Goode, 1978; Jenkins and 



 19 

Alibert, 1991; Kwitko et al., 2002; Elkady, 2003; Bhattacharya et al., 2007). Chromian 

muscovite or phengite have seldom been described in skarn deposits and other rock 

assemblages due to thermal metamorphism (Rumyantseva, 1983; Kazachenko et al., 1993; 

Uher et al., 2008) as well. They have also been found in some carbonatite deposits, in 

association with calcite, dolomite, apatite, albite, sodic amphiboles and chlorite (Nelson et 

al., 1988), although no clear paragenetic correspondence between these minerals and 

fuchsite or mariposite was established by the authors above. In other carbonatite deposits, 

chromian phengite is found in late assemblages due to regional metamorphism within 

carbonatitic assemblages or in xenoliths in association with magnetite (Doroshkevich et al., 

2007; Ripp et al., 2007). Only recently fuchsite has been found in another IOCG deposit: 

Tatatila–Las Minas in Veracruz, also in Mexico, which is Miocene in age and related to the 

Eastern Mexico Alkaline Province (Camprubí, 2013). Notice that Groves and Vielreicher 

(2001), Gandhi (2003) and Pirajno (2009), among others, concur in placing carbonatite and 

similar deposits (the Phalaborwa and Bayan Obo types) as end-members in the IOCG 

‘clan’.  

Does the above mean that there are ultramafic–mafic complexes so far unheard of 

within the local Early Cretaceous sequences in the study area? Otherwise, may it be that the 

Guaynopa deposit has unusually high chromium contents associated with unknown 

magmaticmetallogenic processes? (Or none of these?) Provided that some types of deposits 

in ultramafic–mafic complexes and in the IOCG ‘clan’ form in extensional environments 

(though they occur in quite different settings), could it be possible that there is some sort 

genetic link between chromium-producing magmas and those associated with MHIO 

deposits? The association of gabbroic to intermediate magmas with the latter may be an 

important clue for further research. Hitherto, none of these questions can be answered, 

especially in the preliminary state of research in the Guaynopa deposit and the broad 

spectrum of types of deposits encompassed into the IOCG ‘clan’. However, for 

comparison, it is interesting to be aware of the geological characteristics of the Cenozoic 

Eastern Magmatic Alkaline Province (EMAP) of Mexico, discussed earlier in this paper.  

 

8. Conclusions  

 



 20 

• There may have an unfathomed potential formagmatic-hydrothermal iron oxide 

(MHIO) deposits in Mexico during the Mesozoic, as suggested by new data from the 

Guaynopa deposit in Chihuahua. Most Mesozoic MHIO deposits in Mexico occur in 

subductionrelated continental margins near the continental edge, and these have been 

interpreted to form in intra-arc environments, much alike those in the Coastal Andes 

Cordillera. However, other deposits (i.e., Guaynopa, Cerro del Oro) are found up to 

~500 km inland from the continental paleo-edge, and thus other settings must be 

invoked (associated with back-arc magmatism?).  

• The Guaynopa and Guaynopita deposits in west-central Chihuahua were formed in 

association with granitic intrusions of the Lower Volcanic Complex (Sierra Madre 

Occidental SLIP) that intruded a Lower Cretaceous sequence of carbonate and fine 

detritic rocks and developed contact skarns. These deposits are barely separated by 5 

km and are likely to represent a single metallogenic event previously unrecorded in this 

area, though the study presented in this paper is largely preliminary and still under way 

for both metallogenetic and petrogenetic matters. The Guaynopa deposits are 

constituted by iron oxide–Cu–Au associations in mantos, veins and stockworks, with 

associated fuchsite, biotite or potassium feldspar (potassic assemblages), tremolite–

actinolite (calcic–sodic assemblages) and, locally, hypogene propylitic and argillic 

alteration assemblages.  

• The temperatures of homogenization and apparent salinities of inclusion fluids, and 

δ
34

S values of sulfides in the Guaynopa deposit are quite similar to those found in other 

deposits of the IOCG ‘clan’ elsewhere, although only medium-range apparent salinities 

were obtained. δ
18

O and δ
13

C values of hydrothermal calcite, and those calculated for 

CO2 and water suggest that mineralizing fluids came from magmatic sources and 

underwent significant interaction with host rocks and meteoric fluids., Such feature is 

compatible with dilution and mixing patterns of mineralizing brines and the evolution 

of mineral assemblages, from relatively reduced magnetite–chalcopyrite to more 

oxidized hematite-dominated assemblages. Data trends in individual fluid inclusion 

assemblages from either manto, stockwork and vein mineral assemblages can be 

interpreted as indicative of isothermal mixing, conductive cooling, or boiling. 

Contrastingly, fluid inclusions from the Guaynopita porphyry copper deposit display 



 21 

quite clear trends for progressive dilution of possibly magmatic fluids, at the scale of 

fluid inclusion assemblages or at a broader one.  

• 40Ar/39Ar dating in biotite and chromian muscovite (fuchsite) from mantos at the 

Guaynopa IOCG deposits yielded respective plateau ages at 98.12±0.37 and 

95.42±0.71Ma (Cenomanian).U–Pb dating in zircons from diorite and granodiorite 

intrusives related to the Guaynopita porphyry copper deposit, and from its potassic 

alteration assemblage yielded ages at 92.4 ± 0.5 Ma, 89.1 ± 0.7 Ma (Turonian to 

Coniacian), and 84.4 ± 1.0 Ma (Santonian), respectively. Therefore, there is a minimum 

~14m.yr. period of metallogenic andmagmatic activity in the area. This attests for a 

long-lasting magmatic-hydrothermal system, which could suggest a common 

tectonomagmatic ancestry for both deposits. In addition, the obtained ages render new 

possibilities for exploration in northwestern Mexico for both types of deposits in 

Cretaceous rock assemblages.  

• Coarse-grained fuchsite (chromian muscovite) within the Guaynopa deposit as part of 

the potassic alteration assemblage is an uncanny and previously undocumented mineral 

occurrence for IOCG deposits, and might be indicative of undiscovered chromium 

resources in this region.  

 

Acknowledgments  

 

Financial support for this paper was obtained through the CONACYT research program 

(grant IN155662 to A. Camprubí). Additional funding was received from internal annual 

research budgets of the Instituto de Geología, the Instituto de Geofísica and the Centro de 

Geociencias (UNAM). M.A. García-García is thanked for his assistance in the 40Ar/39Ar 

experiments, for which A.S. Rosas-Montoya was in charge of the mineral separation and 

preparation of the analyzed samples at the CICESE, and Carlos Ortega-Obregón was the 

technician in charge of the U–Pb determinations at the Centro deGeociencias (UNAM). 

Mike Porter lent a hand in our “fuchsite trouble” by kindly scanning his huge ore deposit 

database. Matthew Steele-MacInnis and an anonymous reviewer are wholeheartedly 

acknowledged for their insightful reviews. 

 



 22 

References 

 

Albinson, T., Norman, D.I., Cole, D., Chomiak, B.A., 2001. Controls on formation of low 

sulfidation epithermal deposits in Mexico: constraints from fluid inclusion and stable 

isotope data. Soc. Econ. Geol. spec. Publ. 8, 1–32. 

Andersen, T., 2002. Correction of common lead in U–Pb analyses that do not report 204Pb. 

Chem. Geol. 192, 59–79. 

Bakker, R.J., Baumgartner, M., 2012. Unexpected phase assemblages in inclusions with 

ternary H2O-salt fluids at low temperatures. Cent. Eur. J. Geosci. 4, 225–237. 

Baksheev, I.A., Kudryavtseva, O.E., 2004. Nickeloan tourmaline from the Berezovskoe 

gold deposit, Middle Urals, Russia. Can. Mineral. 42, 1065–1078. 

Bastrakov, E.N., Skirrow, R.G., Davidson, G.J., 2007. Fluid evolution and origins of iron 

oxide Cu–Au prospects in the Olympic Dam District, Gawler Craton, South Australia. 

Econ. Geol. 102, 1415–1440.  

Belkabir, A., Jébrak, M.,Maacha, L., Azizi Samir, M.R., Madi, A., 2008. Gold 

mineralization in the Proterozoic Bleida ophiolite, Anti-Atlas, Morocco. In: Ennih, N., 

Liégeois, J.-P. (Eds.), The Boundaries of theWest African Craton. Geological Society 

Special Publication 297, pp. 249–264.  

Benavides, J., Kyser, T.K., Clark, A.H., Oates, C.J., Zamora, R., Tarnovischi, R., Castillo, 

B., 2007. The Mantoverde iron oxide–copper–gold district, III Región, Chile: the role 

of regionally derived, nonmagmatic fluids in chalcopyrite mineralization. Econ. Geol. 

102, 415–440.  

Bhattacharya, H.N., Chakraborty, I., Ghosh, K.K., 2007. Geochemistry of some banded 

ironformations of the Archean supracrustals, Jharkhand–Orissa region, India. J. Earth 

Syst. Sci. 116, 245–259.  

Bodnar, R.J., 1993. Revised equation and table for determining the freezing point 

depression of H2O–NaCl solutions. Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta 57, 683–684.  

Bodnar, R.J., Sterner, S.M., Hall, D.L., 1989. SALTY: A FORTRAN program to calculate 

compositions of fluid inclusions in the system NaCl–KCl–H2O. Comput. Geosci. 15, 

19–41.  



 23 

Borrok, D.M., Kesler, S.E., Boer, R.H., Essene, E.J., 1998. The Vergenoeg magnetite–

fluorite deposit, South Africa: support for a hydrothermal model for massive iron 

oxide deposits. Econ. Geol. 93, 564–586.  

Bottinga, Y., 1969. Calculated fractionation factors for carbon and hydrogen isotope 

exchange in the system calcite–carbon dioxide–graphite–methane–hydrogen–water 

vapor. Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta 33, 49–64.  

Camprubí, A., 2009. Major metallogenic provinces and epochs of Mexico. SGA News 25, 

1–20.  

Camprubí, A., 2013. Tectonic and Metallogenic History of Mexico. In: Colpron, M., 

Bissig, T., Rusk, B.G., Thompson, J.F.H. (Eds.), Tectonics, Metallogeny, and 

Discovery: the North American Cordillera and Similar Accretionary Settings. Society 

Of Economic Geologists, Special Publication 17, pp. 201–243.  

Camprubí, A., González-Partida, E., 2016. Mesozoic magmatic-hydrothermal iron oxide 

deposits (IOCG ‘clan’) in Mexico: a review. Ore Geol. Rev. 81, 1084–1095 (in this 

issue).  

Camprubí, A., Cardellach, E., Canals, À., Lucchini, R., 2001. The La Guitarra Ag–Au low 

sulfidation epithermal system, Temascaltepec district, Mexico: fluid inclusion and 

stable isotope data. Soc. Econ. Geol. spec. Publ. 8, 159–185.  

Camprubí, A., Tolson, G., Centeno-García, E., Ortega, B., Bolaños, D., Portugal-Reyna, 

J.L., Aguilar-Hernández, J.A., Corona-Chávez, P., 2011. Mineralogy, 
40

Ar/
39

Ar Dating 

and Structural Analysis of the Peña Colorada Magnetite Deposits (Colima, Mexico). 

In: Barra, F., Reich, M., Campos, E., Tornos, F. (Eds.), 11th SGA Biennial Meeting — 

Let's Talk Ore Deposits v. 2. Ediciones Universidad Católica del Norte, Antofagasta, 

Chile, pp. 446–448.  

Chen,W.T., Zhou, M.-F., 2012. Paragenesis, stable isotopes, and molybdenite Re–Os 

isotope age of the Lala iron–copper deposit, Southwestern China. Econ. Geol. 107, 

459–480.  

Clark, K.F., Fitch, D.C., 2009. Evolución de depósitos metálicos en tiempo y espacio en 

México. In: Clark, K.F., Salas-Pizá, G., Cubillas-Estrada, R. (Eds.), Geología 

Económica de México, second ed. Servicio Geológico Mexicano — Asociación de 

Ingenieros de Minas, Metalurgistas y Geólogos de México, pp. 62–133.  



 24 

Coplen, T.B., 1988. Normalization of oxygen and hydrogen isotope data. Chem. Geol. 72, 

293–297.  

Coplen, T.B., Brand, W.A., Gehre, M., Gröning, M., Meijer, H.A.J., Toman, B., 

Verkouteren, R.M., 2006. New guidelines for δ13C measurements. Anal. Chem. 78, 

2439–2441.  

Davidson, G.J., Paterson, H., Meffre, S., Berry, R.F., 2007. Characteristics and origin of the 

Oak Dam East breccia-hosted, iron oxide Cu–U–(Au) deposit: Olympic Dam region, 

Gawler Craton, South Australia. Econ. Geol. 102, 1471–1498.  

Doroshkevich, A.G., Wall, F., Ripp, G.S., 2007. Calcite-bearing dolomite carbonatite dykes 

fromVeseloe, North Transbaikalia, Russia and possible Cr-richmantle xenoliths. 

Mineral. Petrol. 90, 19–49.  

Dubé, B., Gosselin, P., 2007. Greenstone-hosted quartz-carbonate vein deposits. In: 

Goodfellow, W.D. (Ed.), Mineral Deposits of Canada: A Synthesis of Major Deposit- 

Types. District Metallogeny, the Evolution of Geological Provinces, and Exploration 

Methods, Geological Association of Canada, Mineral Deposits Division, Special 

Publication 5, pp. 49–73.  

Elkady, M.F., 2003. Structural Evolution in the Palaeoproterozoic Basement (Banded Iron 

Formation and Related Rocks) of SW Egypt. Unpublished PhD dissertation, Ruprecht- 

Karls-Universität Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Gemany, 139 pp.  

Espi, J.O., Hayashi, K.-I., Komuro, K., Murakami, H., Kajiwara, Y., 2007. Geology, wall-

rock alteration and vein paragenesis of the Bilimoia gold deposit, Kainantu 

metallogenic region, Papua New Guinea. Resour. Geol. 57, 246–268.  

Fáll, A., Tattitch, B., Bodnar, R.J., 2011. Combined microthermometric and Raman 

spectroscopic technique to determine the salinity of H2O–CO2–NaCl fluid inclusions 

based on clathrate melting. Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta 75, 951–964.  

Ferrari, L., Valencia-Moreno, M., Bryan, S., 2005. Magmatismo y tectónica en la Sierra 

Madre Occidental y su relación con la evolución de la margen occidental de 

Norteamérica. Bol. Soc. Geol. Mex. 57, 343–378.  

Ferrari, L., Valencia-Moreno, M., Bryan, S., 2007. Magmatism and tectonics of the Sierra 

Madre Occidental and its relation with the evolution of the western margin of North 

America. In: Alaniz-Álvarez, S.A., Nieto-Samaniego, A.F. (Eds.), Geology of México: 



 25 

Celebrating the Centenary of the Geological Society OfMéxico. Geological Society Of 

America Special Paper 422, pp. 1–39.  

Flores, T., 1951. Geología, génesis y condiciones estructurales de los yacimientos de fierro 

de México. Inst. Nac. Invest. Recur. Mineral. Bol. 29 (30 pp.).  

Gandhi, S.S., 2003. An overview of the Fe oxide–Cu–Au deposits and related deposit 

types. CIMMontréal 2003 Mining Industry Conference and Exhibition, Canadian 

Institute of Mining, Technical Paper, CD-ROM.  

González-Jiménez, J.M., Barra, F.,Walker, R.J., Reich, M., Gervilla, F., 2014. Geodynamic 

implications of ophiolitic chromitites in the la Cabaña ultramafic bodies, Central Chile. 

Int. Geol. Rev. 56, 1466–1483.  

González-Partida, E., Canet, C., Camprubí, A., González-Ruiz, L., 2011. Guaynopa y 

Guaynopita, dos tipologías de mineralización de edad Cretácico Superior en la Sierra 

Madre Occidental, México. Actas INAGEQ 17, 156.  

Groves, D.I., Vielreicher, N.M., 2001. The Phalaborwa (Palabora) carbonatite-hosted 

magnetite-copper sulfide deposit, South Africa: an end member of the iron-oxide– 

copper–gold–rare earth element deposit group? Mineral. Deposita 36, 189–194. 

 Haeberlin, W., Moritz, R., Fontboté, L., 2004. Carboniferous orogenic gold deposits at 

Pataz, eastern Andean Cordillera, Peru: geological and structural framework, 

paragenesis, alteration, and 
40

Ar/
39

Ar geochronology. Econ. Geol. 99, 73–112.  

Hall, W.D.M., Goode, A.D.T., 1978. The early Proterozoic Nabberu Basin and associated 

iron formations of Western Australia. Precambrian Res. 7, 129–184.  

Hedenquist, J.W., Henley, R.W., 1985. The importance of CO2 on freezing point 

measurements of fluid inclusions: evidence from active geothermal systems and 

implications for epithermal ore deposition. Econ. Geol. 80, 1379–1406.  

Holma, M.J., Keinänen, V.J., 2007. The Levijärvi-Loukinen gold occurrence: an example 

of orogenic gold mineralisation with atypicalmetal association. In: Ojala, V.J. (Ed.), 

Gold in the Central Lapland Greenstone Belt, Finland. Geological Survey of Finland, 

Special Paper 44, pp. 165–184.  

Horita, J., 2014. Oxygen and carbon isotope fractionation in the system dolomite–water– 

CO2 to elevated temperatures. Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta 129, 111–124.  



 26 

Huber, B.T., Leckie, R.M., Norris, R.D., Bralower, T.J., CoBabe, E., 1999. Foraminiferal 

assemblage and stable isotopic change across the Cenomanian Turonian boundary in 

the subtropical Atlantic. J. Foraminifer. Res. 29, 392–417. Hunt, J.A., Baker, T., 

Cleverley, J., Davidson, G.J., Fallick, A.E., Thorkelson, D.J., 2011. Fluid inclusion 

and stable isotope constraints on the origin of Wernecke Breccia and associated iron 

oxide–copper–gold mineralization, Yukon. Can. J. Earth Sci. 48, 1425–1445.  

Immitt, J.P., Kyle, R.J., 1981. Relation of skarn and epithermal veins to caldera 

development, San Carlos, Northern Chihuahua. Geological Society of America, 

Cordilleran Section Meeting Abstracts with Program, 62.  

Jébrak, M., Doucet, P., 2002. Geology and gold–molybdenum porphyry mineralisation of 

the Archean Taschereau–Launay plutons, Abitibi, Quebec. Precambrian Res. 115, 

329–348.  

Jenkins, C.J., Alibert, C., 1991. Sedimentary and metamorphic rock clasts from the 

Cenozoic diamictons of sites 739–743, Prydz Bay, east Antactica. Proc. Ocean Drill. 

Program Sci. Results 119, 133–141.  

Kazachenko, V.T., Butsik, L.A., Sapin, V.I., Kitaev, I.V., Barinov, N.N., Narnov, G.A., 

1993. Vanadian–chromian tourmaline and vanadian muscovite in contact-

metamorphosed carbonaceous rocks, Primorye, Russia. Can. Mineral. 31, 347–356. 

 Kwitko, R., Cabral, A.R., Lehmann, B., LaFlamme, J.H.G., Cabri, L.J., Criddle, A.J., 

Galbiatti, H.F., 2002. Hongshiite, PtCu, from itabirite-hosted Au–Pd–Pt mineralization 

(Jacutinga), Itabira district, Minas Gerais, Brazil. Can. Mineral. 40, 711–723. 

 Lecumberri-Sanchez, P., Steele-MacInnis, M., Bodnar, R.J., 2015. Synthetic fluid 

inclusions XXI. Experimental determination of the vapor-saturated liquidus of the 

system H2O– NaCl–FeCl2. Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta 148, 34–49.  

Ludwig, K.R., 2003. ISOPLOT, a Geochronological Toolkit for Microsoft Excel, Version 

3.00. Berkeley Geochronology Center Special Publication 4 (70 pp.).  

Masliwec, A., 1984. Applicability of the 40Ar/39Ar Method to the Dating of Ore Bodies. 

Unpublished PhD Dissertation. University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. 

McCrea, J.M., 1950. On the isotopic chemistry of carbonates and paleotemperature scale. J. 

Chem. Phys. 18, 849–857.  



 27 

Monreal, R., Longoria, J.F., 2000a. Lower cretaceuos rocks of Sierra Los Chinos, east-

central, Sonora. Geofis. Int. 39, 309–322.  

Monreal, R., Longoria, J.F., 2000b. Stratigraphy and structure ofthe Lower Cretaceous of 

Lampazos, Sonora, (nortwest Mexico) and its relationship to the Gulf Coast 

succession. Bull. Am. Assoc. Pet. Geol. 84, 1811–1831.  

Nelson, D.R., Chivas, A.R., Chappell, B.W., McCulloch, 1988. Geochemical and isotopic 

systematics in carbonatites and implications for the evolution of ocean-island sources. 

Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta 52, 1–17.  

Nesbitt, B.E., Murowchick, J.B., Muehlenbachs, K., 1986. Dual origins of lode gold 

deposits in the Canadian Cordillera. Geology 14, 506–509.  

Norris, R.D., Kroon, D., Huber, B.T., Erbacher, J., 2001. Cretaceous Palaeogene ocean and 

climate change in the subtropical North Atlantic. Geol. Soc. Spec. Publ. 183, 1–22.  

Ohmoto, H., Rye, R.O., 1979. Isotope of sulfur and carbon. In: Barnes, H.L. (Ed.), 

Geochemistry of Hydrothermal Deposits. John Wiley & Sons, pp. 509–567. 

 Partington, G.A., Williams, P.J., 2000. Proterozoic Lode Gold and (Iron)–Copper–Gold 

Deposits: a Comparison of Australian and Global Examples. In: Hagemann, S.G., 

Brown, P.E. (Eds.), Gold in 2000. Reviews in Economic Geology 13, pp. 69–101.  

Peltonen, P., Kontinen, A., Huhma, H., Kuronen, U., 2008. Outokumpu revisited: new 

mineral deposit model for the mantle peridotite-associated Cu–Co–Zn–Ni–Ag–Au 

sulphide deposits. Ore Geol. Rev. 33, 559–617.  

Pirajno, F., 2009. Hydrothermal Processes and Mineral Systems. Springer (1250 pp.). 

Pubellier, M., 1987. Relations entre domaines cordillerain et mésogéen au nord du 

Mexique, étude géologique de la vallée de Sahuaripa, Sonora. Unpublished PhD 

dissertation, Université de Paris VI, Paris, France, (219 pp.).  

Révész, K.M., Landwehr, J.M., 2002. δ
13

C and δ
18

O isotopic composition of CaCO3 

measured by continuous flow isotope ratio mass spectrometry statistical evaluation and 

verification by application to Devils Hole Core DH-11 Calcite. Rapid Commun. Mass 

Spectrom. 16, 2102–2114.  

Révész, K.M., Landwehr, J.M., Keybl, J., 2001. Measurement of δ
13

C and δ
18

O Isotopic 

Ratios of CaCO3 using a Thermoquest Finnigan Gas Bench II Delta PLus XL 



 28 

Continuous Flow Isotope Ratio Mass Spectrometer with Application to Devils Hole 

Core DH-11 Calcite. U.S. Geological Survey, Open-File Report 01–257. 

 Reynolds, L.J., 2000. Geology of the Olympic Dam Cu–U–Au–Ag–REE deposit. In: 

Porter, T.M. (Ed.), Hydrothermal Iron Oxide Copper–Gold and Related Deposits: a 

Global Perspective. PGC Publishing, Adelaide, Australia, pp. 93–104.  

Rieger, A.A., Marschik, R., Díaz, M., Hölzl, S., Chiaradia, M., Akker, B., Spangenberg, 

J.E., 2010. The hypogene iron oxide–copper–gold mineralization in the Mantoverde 

district, northern Chile. Econ. Geol. 105, 1271–1299.  

Ripp, G.S., Doroshkevich, A.G., Badmatsyrenov, M.V., Karmanov, N.S., 2007. Mantle(?) 

xenoliths in the carbonatites of northern Transbaikalia. Geochem. Int. 45, 538–545. 

Rumyantseva, Ye.V, 1983. Chromdravite — a new mineral from Karelia. Int. Geol. Rev. 

25, 989–992.  

Sláma, J., Košler, J., Condon, D.J., Crowley, J.L., Gerdes, A., Hanchar, J.M., 

Horstwood,M.S.A., Morris, G.A., Nasdala, L., Norberg, N., Schaltegger, U., Schoene, 

B., Tubrett, M.N., Whitehouse, M.J., 2008. Plešovice zircon: A new natural reference 

material for U–Pb and Hf isotopic microanalysis. Chem. Geol. 249, 1–35.  

Smith, M.P., Henderson, P., 2000. Preliminary fluid inclusion constraints on fluid evolution 

in the Bayan Obo Fe–REE–Nb deposit, inner Mongolia, China. Econ. Geol. 95, 1371–

1388.  

Solari, L.A., Tanner, M., 2011. UPb.age, a fast data reduction script for LA-ICP-MS U–Pb 

geochronology. Rev. Mex. Cienc. Geol. 28, 83–91.  

Solari, L.A., Gómez-Tuena, A., Bernal, J.P., Pérez-Arvizu, O., Tanner, M., 2010. U–Pb 

zircon geochronology by an integrated LA-ICPMS microanalytical workstation: 

achievements in precision and accuracy. Geostand. Geoanal. Res. 34, 5–18.  

Steele-MacInnis, M., Bodnar, R.J., Naden, J., 2011. Numerical model to determine the 

composition of H2O–NaCl–CaCl2 fluid inclusions based on microthermometric and 

microanalytical data. Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta 75, 21–40.  

Steele-MacInnis, M., Lecumberri-Sanchez, P., Bodnar, R.J., 2015. Synthetic fluid 

inclusions XX. Critical PTx properties of H2O–FeCl2 fluids. Geochim. Cosmochim. 

Acta 148, 50–61.  



 29 

Steiger, R.H., Jäger, E., 1977. Subcommission on geochronology: convention on the use of 

decay constants in geo and cosmochronology. Earth Planet. Sci. Lett. 36, 359–362. 

Tornos, F., Velasco, F., Barra, F., Morata, D., 2010. The Tropezón Cu–Mo–(Au) deposit, 

Northern Chile: the missing link between IOCG and porphyry copper systems? 

Mineral. Deposita 45, 313–321.  

Turner, Y., 2009. La geología y los depósitosminerales del proyecto Peñasquito, Zacatecas, 

México. In: Clark, K.F., Salas-Pizá, G., Cubillas-Estrada, R. (Eds.), Geología 

económica de México, 2ª edición Servicio Geológico Mexicano – Asociación de 

Ingenieros de Minas, Metalurgistas y Geólogos de México, pp. 925–931.  

Uher, P., Kováčik, M., Kubiš, M., Shtukenberg, A., Ozdín, D., 2008. Metamorphic 

vanadian– chromian silicate mineralization in carbon-rich amphibole schists from the 

Malé Karpaty Mountains, Western Carpathians, Slovakia. Am. Mineral. 93, 63–73. 

Valencia-Moreno, M., Ochoa-Landín, L., Noguez-Alcántara, B., Ruiz, J., Pérez-Segura, E., 

2006. Características de los depósitos de pórfido cuprífero en México y su situación en 

el contexto mundial. Bol. Soc. Geol. Mex. 58, 1–26.  

Valencia-Moreno, M., Ochoa-Landín, L., Noguez-Alcántara, B., Ruiz, J., Pérez-Segura, E., 

2007. Geological and metallogenetic characteristics of the porphyry copper deposits of 

México and their situation in the world context. In: Alaniz-Álvarez, S.A., Nieto- 

Samaniego, A.F. (Eds.), Geology of México: Celebrating the Centenary of the 

Geological Society of México. Geological Society Of America Special Paper 422, pp. 

433–458.  

Williams, P., Barton, M.D., Johnson, D.A., Fontboté, L., De Haller, A., Mark, G., Oliver, 

N.H.S., Marschik, R., 2005. Iron oxide copper–gold deposits: geology, space–time 

distribution, and possible modes of origin. In: Hedenquist, J.W., Thompson, J.F.H., 

Goldfarb, R.J., Richards, J.P. (Eds.), Economic Geology 100th Anniversary Volume. 

Society of Economic Geologists, Littleton CO, pp. 371–406.  

York, D., Evensen, N.M., López-Martínez, M., De Basabe-Delgado, J., 2004. Unified 

equations for the slope, intercept, and standard errors of the best straight line. Am. J. 

Phys. 73 (3), 367–375.  



 30 

Zheng, Y.F., Hoefs, J., 1993. Carbon and oxygen isotope covariations in hydrothermal 

calcites: theoretical modeling on mixing processes and application to Kushikino gold 

mining area in Japan. Mineral. Deposita 25, 246–250.  

Zürcher, L., Ruiz, J., Barton, M.D., 2001. Paragenesis, elemental distribution, and stable 

isotopes at the Peñaa Colorada iron skarn, Colima, Mexico. Econ. Geol. 96, 535–557. 



 31 

 

FIGURE CAPTIONS 

 

Figure 1. Location for the Guaynopa and Guaynopita deposits in Chihuahua. The upper 

right map was extracted from Fig. 3 in Ferrari et al. (2005), with due permission from 

the publishers. Lower part: geological maps and representative cross-sections for both 

mineralized areas. The same colors and symbols are used in all the maps and cross-

sections for rock units,with the exception of granitic intrusives (red crosses) and late 

dikes (plain light rose) in the Ki (Lower Cretaceous) assemblage.  

Figure 2. Pictures of the ore deposits at Guaynopa and Guaynopita, Chihuahua. (a) Detail 

of the main IOCG mineralization at Guaynopa from the Tres Amigos manto, featuring 

magnetite, chalcopyrite and calcite. (b) Fuchsite and calcite in the Guaynopa deposit, 

from the Tres Amigos manto; fuchsite from this locality was dated at 94.21 ± 0.71 Ma 

(Cenomanian) by means of 40Ar/39Ar (see Fig. 7). (c) Stockwork mineralization with 

patches of argillic alteration (bright colors), IOCG mineralization at Guaynopa, from the 

La Escondida–El Muerto area. (d) Potassic alteration around quartz veins and veinlets 

bearing copper mineralization at the Guaynopita porphyry copper deposit, hosted by 

diorite. Both the fresh diorite and the potassic alteration were dated by means of U/Pb in 

zircons (Fig. 8). (e) Copper mineralization in stockwork, Guaynopita porphyry copper 

deposit; notice the green staining of the rock due to supergene malachite. Abbreviation: 

cc= calcite, cp= chalcopyrite, fu = fuchsite, ma = malachite, mt = magnetite.  

Figure 3. Photomicrographies of representative fluid inclusion assemblages from the 

Guaynopa IOCG and Guaynopita porphyry copper deposits, Chihuahua. (A) Two-phase 

aqueous inclusions with homogeneous degree of filling in quartz, Tres Amigos manto, 

Guaynopa. (B) Two-phase aqueous inclusions with heterogeneous degree of filling in 

quartz, La Libertad vein, Guaynopa; interpreted as evidence for boiling. (C) CO2-

bearing aqueous inclusions in quartz, La Libertad vein, Guaynopa. (D) Trails of primary 

and secondary inclusions in vein quartz, Guaynopita. (E) Aqueous inclusion with halite 

daughter crystal and two more unidentified daughter crystals, Guaynopa. (F) Two-phase 

aqueous inclusions with heterogeneous degree of filling in quartz, Guaynopita; 



 32 

interprtter resemble VMS-type mineralization, and (2) later coarse-grained massive ore 

assemblages that are mostly composed by pyrrhotite, sphalerite and galena (see Figure 3 

in Canet et al., 2009), which occur generally in the vicinity of dikes and are associated 

with late epithermal calcite–quartz veins (plausible skarn-type stages of mineralization). 

Zn–Pb orebodies are associated with host rocks that are largely altered to chlorite and 

eHistogram for δ
34

S data of sulfides from the Guaynopa IOCG deposit, Chihuahua.  

rite and eHistogram for δ
34

S data of sulfides from the Guaynopa IOCG deposit, 

Chihuahua.  

Figure 6. Correlation between δ
18

O and δ
13

C values in samples from the Guaynopa IOCG 

deposit, Chihuahua. Water/rock interaction curves for W/R = 20 and 10 correspond, 

from left to right, to the follow1ing temperatures: 450°, 400°, 350°, 300°, and 250 °C, 

which encompass most of the temperatures of homogenization obtained in this study.  

Figure 7. Ar/Ar ages for samples of hydrothermalminerals in potassic alteration 

assemblages from the Guaynopa IOCG deposit, Chihuahua, comprising age spectra, 

37ArCa/39ArK vs. fraction of 39Ar released, and 
36

Ar/
40

Ar vs. 
39

Ar/
40

Ar correlation 

diagrams for (A) fuchsite and (B) biotite. The arrows identify the fractions selected to 

calculate plateau ages that represent N80% of the 
39

Ar released. These fractions are in 

agreement within 1 σ,with a MSWD=0.85 for the weightedmeans. In the age spectra, 

theweightedmean of the fractions above the arrowwas used to calculate the plateau age. 

All errors are 1 σ.  

Figure 8. Tera-Wasserburg U–Pb concordia plots (a, c, e) and plots of weighted averages 

of individual 206Pb/238U ages (b, d, f) of analyzed zircons from a potassic alteration 

assemblage (sample L-9, diagrams at the bottom) and two granitoid samples (GRANO-

7, diorite, and CAMP, granodiorite) in the Guaynopita area, Chihuahua, associated with 

porphyry-type mineralizations. Solid-line ellipses, with black square centers, are data 

used for age calculations; gray-line ellipses are data excluded from age calculations due 

to different degrees of Pb-loss and/or zircon inheritance. All U–Pb data are plotted with 

2-sigma errors and all calculated weighted mean ages are also listed at the 2-sigma level. 

Original U(Th)–Pb data can be found for inspection in Table 4. 



 33 

Fig. 1 

 
 

 

 



 34 

Fig. 2 

 



 35 

Fig. 3 

 



 36 

Fig 4 

 

 



 37 

Fig. 5 

 
 

 

Fig. 6 

 

 
 



 38 

Fig. 7 

 

 



 39 

Fig. 8 

 



 40 

Tables 

 

Table 1 

Summary of fluid inclusion microthermometric studies in the Guaynopa and Guaynopita 

deposits, Chihuahua. 
 

Deposit  Mineral Ore association Th range Average Th Tmi range Average Tmi Salinity for Tmi range Average salinity n Notes 
   (°C) (°C) (°C) (°C) (wt.% NaCl equiv.) (wt.% NaCl equiv.)   

Guaynopa  Quartz IOCG manto 255 to 310 280 −21.5 to −22.8 −22.2 23.4 to 24.2 23.8 40  
(Las Chalas) Calcite Calcite IOCG manto 182 to 198 171 −21.0 to −22.0 −21.5 23.1 to 23.7 23.4 40  

 
Calcite IOCG manto 184 to 190 172 −21.0 −21.0 23.1 23.1 26  

Guaynopa Quartz Quartz IOCG manto 230 to 258 248 −10.0 −10.0 13.9 13.9 20  
(Tres Amigos)  Quartz IOCG manto 200 to 225 212 −21.4 to −22.0 −21.7 23.3 to 23.7 23.5 31  

 
Calcite IOCG manto 180 to 195 189 −7.2 to −11.0 −9.2 10.7 to 15.0 13.0 35  

 
Calcite IOCG manto 152 to 189 169 −16.0 to −17.0 −16.6 19.5 to 20.2 19.9 39  

Guaynopa (La Libertad)  Quartz IOCG vein 376 to 400 385 −7.5 to −10.1 −9.3 11.1 to 13.9 13.1 35 CO2-rich 
  Th for CO2: 31.2 to 33.5 32.7     21  

 
Quartz IOCG vein 310 to 336 321 −14.0 to −18.1 −16.6 18.6 to 21.0 19.9 49 Evidence 

          for boiling 
Guaynopa (El Muerto)  Tremolit

e 

IOCG swk. 330 to 410 367 −12.1 −12.1 16.0 16.0 30  
Guaynopita (La Esperanza) Quartz porph. Cu swk. 388 to 439 408 −13.7 to −17.7 −15.3 17.5 to 20.8 18.8 22  

 
Quartz porph. Cu swk. 335 to 448 388 −11.9 to −18.5 −15.5 15.9 to 21.3 19.0 32  

 
Quartz porph. Cu swk. 330 to 448 406 −10.0 to −18.0 −14.2 13.9 to 21.0 17.9 37  

   396 to 420 Ts for NaCl: 180 to 380  30.0 to 42.0 35.1 6  
 

Quartz porph. Cu swk. 205 to 387 292 −5.2 to −16.0 −9.7 8.1 to 19.5 13.4 25  
Key: IOCG = iron oxide–copper–gold deposit, n = number of analyzed inclusions, porph. Cu = porphyry copper, swk. = stockwork, Th = temperature 

of homogenization, Tmi = temperature of ice melting; Ts = temperature of halite solubilization. 

 



 41 

Table 2 

Sulfur isotope compositions in sulfides in the Guaynopa IOCG deposits, Chihuahua.  

 

Ore body Assemblage Mineral δ34S (‰) 

Tres Amigos 

 

Tazcate 

 

Chalas 

Manto 

 

Manto 

 

Manto 

Chalcopyrite 

chalcopyrite 

Chalcopyrite 

Chalcopyrite 

Chalcopyrite 

Chalcopyrite 

Chalcopyrite 

Chalcopyrite 

Pyrite 

Sphalerite 

Chalcopyrite 

Chalcopyrite 

Chalcopyrite 

Chalcopyrite 

Chalcopyrite 

Chalcopyrite 

−11.6 

−11.4 

−15.1 

−14.5 

−14.0 

−0.1 

−9.8 

−0.1 

−1.1 

−1.2 

−1.3 

−2.5 

−1.8 

−1.8 

−1.5 

6.0 

  Chalcopyrite 5.8 

  Chalcopyrite 7.0 

  Chalcopyrite 6.1 

  Chalcopyrite 6.7 

Cinco de Mayo Manto Chalcopyrite 3.5 

  Chalcopyrite 5.0 

  Chalcopyrite 6.5 

  Chalcopyrite 5.5 

  Chalcopyrite 6.8 

  Chalcopyrite 5.5 

  Chalcopyrite 4.2 

  Chalcopyrite 5.0 

  Chalcopyrite 4.9 

  Chalcopyrite 4.6 

La Escondida 

 

La Libertad 

Stockwork 

 

Vein 

Pyrite 

Pyrite 

Pyrite 

Pyrite 

Pyrite 

Chalcopyrite 

Chalcopyrite 

Chalcopyrite 

Chalcopyrite 

Chalcopyrite 

Chalcopyrite 

Chalcopyrite 

Chalcopyrite 

Pyrite 

Pyrite 

0.2 

−0.9 

−0.9 

−0.8 

−1.6 

−0.2 

−2.5 

−1.9 

−2.0 

−2.6 

−2.4 

−3.7 

−1.6 

−2.3 

−2.6  

 



 42 

Table 3 

O and C isotope compositions in carbonates, and water and CO2 in isotopic equilibrium 

with them, in the Guaynopa IOCG deposits, Chihuahua.  

 

Ore body Assemblage Sample number Mineral or rock δ13CVPDB sample 

(‰) 

δ13CVPDB CO2 

(‰)a 

δ13OVPDB sample 

(‰) 

δ18OVSMOW sample 

(‰) 

δ18OVSMOW CO2 

(‰)b 

δ18OVSMOW water 

(‰)c 

 Tres Amigos Host rock 3M # CZ-1 Limestone 3.20  −14.01 16.47  

  3M # CZ-2 Limestone 3.26  −13.86 16.62 

  3M # CZ-3 Limestone 3.53  −13.27 17.23 

 Manto 3M-1 Calcite −4.55  −19.43 10.88 

  3M-2 Calcite −4.65  −19.16 11.16 

  3M-3 Calcite −3.20  −19.62 10.68 

  3M-4 Calcite −2.03  −17.74 12.62 

  3M-5 Calcite −3.13 2.65 −19.73 10.57 8.81 −1.79 

  3M-6 Calcite −4.53 −6.02 −20.66 9.61 10.82 2.21 

  3M-7 Calcite −4.42 4.75 −20.16 10.13 10.91 −1.22 

  3M-8 Calcite −4.95 3.02 −19.85 10.44 13.92 −5.22 

  3M-9 Calcite −4.38  −18.74 11.59   

  3M-10 Calcite −5.22  −19.03 11.29   

  3M-14 Calcite 3.45  −13.47 17.03   

Cinco de Mayo Manto 5M-1 Calcite −2.40  −16.81 13.58   

  5M-2 Calcite −2.94  −16.03 14.39   

  5M-3 Calcite −3.01  −16.07 14.34   

  5M-4 Calcite −2.48  −17.19 13.19   

  5M-5 Calcite −2.56  −16.57 13.83   

  5M-6 Calcite −2.49  −16.44 13.96   

  5M-7 Calcite −2.39  −16.94 13.45   

  5M-8 Calcite −2.77  −16.38 14.03   

  5M-9 Calcite −2.76  −16.39 14.01   

  5M-10 Calcite −2.50  −16.60 13.80   

Chalas Manto CHA-1 Calcite −1.61  −15.73 14.69   

  CHA-2 Calcite −1.26  −16.85 13.54   

  CHA-3 Calcite −1.43  −16.99 13.40   

  CHA-4 Calcite −3.50 −1.96 −16.11 14.30 11.20 −0.70 

  CHA-5 Calcite −3.71 0.54 −17.24 13.13 13.01 −5.70 

  CHA-6 Calcite −3.97 −4.44 −17.55 12.81 13.70 −3.49 

  CHA-7 Calcite −1.92 2.57 −15.24 15.20 16.49 −4.49 

  CHA-8 Calcite −2.98  −18.44 11.90   

  CHA-9 Calcite −4.37  −16.45 13.96   

  CHA-10 Calcite −3.04  −17.29 13.08   

For these calculations we used: 

(1) the highest and lowest average temperatures of homogenization (Th) of fluid inclusions in each manto (see Table 1); 

these are 169° and 248 °C for the Tres Amigos manto, and 171° and 280 °C for the Chalas manto; 

(2) the highest and lowest isotopic values for δ13C and δ18O in each manto where Th are available, which are highlighted  

in bold typeface. 

a Calculated by using the fractionation equation of Bottinga (1969) and Ohmoto and Rye (1979). 

b Calculated by using the fractionation equation of Ohmoto and Rye (1979). 

c Calculated by using the fractionation equation of Horita (2014). 

 



 43 

Table 4 

Summary of 
40

Ar/
39

Ar results for sample GUAYN-1, which corresponds to a potassic alteration 

assemblage fromthe Guaynopa IOCG deposit, Chihuahua, Mexico. Latitude 28.4952° N, longitude 

108.5109°W. 

  
Pwr 

F 
39

Ar 
40

Ar*/
39

ArK 
t (Ma) 

% 
40

Ar* 
40

Ar/
36

Ar 
37

ArCa/
39

ArkK 
ti (Ma) tp (Ma) tc (Ma) (40Ar/36Ar)i MSWD/n 

Fuchsite (chromian muscovite)  
0.70 0.0502 2.47 ± 2.31 14.84 ± 13.86 2.59 303.35 2.065  
1.20 0.1156 14.10 ± 1.25 83.16 ± 7.19 34.78 453.07 1.406 
1.60 0.0851 15.52 ± 0.80 91.37 ± 4.58 53.68 637.95 0.362 
2.10 0.3743 15.78 ± 0.20 92.86 ± 1.15 86.60 2205.43 0.055 
2.70 0.3306 16.21 ± 0.16 95.29 ± 0.92 95.46 6510.95 0.031 
3.30 0.0398 15.44 ± 1.02 90.91 ± 5.86 99.99 3240.62 b0.001 
4.50 0.0044 17.09 ± 9.53 100.30 ± 54.45 91.04 3296.52 5.015 88.54 ± 1.33 94.21 ± 0.71 94.96 ± 0.79 273 ± 11 0.55/6 

Biotite 

0.20 
 

0.0003 
 
−8.38 ± 17.22 

 
−52.42 ± 109.31 

 
−2.81 

 
287.44 

 
0.032 

     

0.60 0.0019 8.97 ± 2.25 54.48 ± 13.45 17.65 358.85 0.449      
1.20 0.0221 15.00 ± 0.27 90.22 ± 1.60 51.15 604.94 0.788      
1.80 0.0780 16.12 ± 0.07 96.78 ± 0.43 90.28 3041.18 0.068      
2.40 0.1092 16.08 ± 0.04 96.52 ± 0.26 98.20 16,403.37 0.004      
3.00 0.1109 16.28 ± 0.05 97.69 ± 0.29 98.68 22,388.11 0.004      
3.50 0.0833 16.19 ± 0.05 97.18 ± 0.28 99.17 35,437.39 0.009      
4.00 0.0727 16.32 ± 0.05 97.95 ± 0.27 99.36 46,290.84 0.006      
4.60 0.1982 16.64 ± 0.04 99.79 ± 0.25 99.23 38,500.68 0.016      
6.20 0.1344 16.37 ± 0.04 98.22 ± 0.22 99.57 68,271.26 0.031      
7.20 0.1224 16.28 ± 0.04 97.69 ± 0.22 99.91 322,974.07 0.046      
8.50 0.0606 16.13 ± 0.07 96.85 ± 0.43 99.87 230,720.98 0.310      
13.00 0.0060 15.99 ± 0.48 96.00 ± 2.78 79.97 1475.46 2.448 97.61 ± 0.27 97.64 ± 0.29 97.64 ± 0.29 267 ± 8 3.8/12 

 



 44 

Table 5 

U–Th–Pb zircon data for Guaynopita samples (porphyry copper deposit), Chihuahua, Mexico. 

 

 

 
 

 

    Corrected ratios Corrected ages (Ma) 

 

Corrected ages(Ma) 

 
 U

#
 

 

Th
#

 

 

Th/U 207
Pb/

206
Pb
†
 ±1 s

⁎ 207Pb/
235

U
†
 ±1 s

⁎ 206Pb/
238

U
†
 ±1 s

⁎ 208Pb/
232

Th
†
 ±1 s

⁎ Rho % 

 

±1 206Pb/238U 

 

±1 207
Pb/

235
U  

 

±1 207
Pb/

206
Pb 

 

±1 208Pb/
232

Th ±1 Best  1s 

 (ppm) 

 

(ppm) 

 

          s⁎ 

 

 s⁎ 

 

 s⁎ 

 

 s⁎ 

 

 
s⁎ 

 

Age 

(Ma) 

  

Zircon_33 460 498 0.98 0.0538 0.0015 0.1011 0.0030 0.0137 0.0001 0.0043 0.0001 0.300 1
1 

87.5 0.8 98 3 364 63 86 1 87.5 ± 0.8 
Zircon_31 437 354 0.74 0.0520 0.0012 0.1005 0.0024 0.0141 0.0001 0.0044 0.0001 0.300 7 89.9 0.7 97 2 286 53 89 2 89.9 ± 0.7 
Zircon_2 184 142 0.70 0.0591 0.0025 0.1152 0.0053 0.0141 0.0003 0.0045 0.0002 0.410 1

9 
90.0 2.0 111 5 571 86 91 3 90.0 ± 2.0 

Zircon_6 271 228 0.77 0.0509 0.0020 0.0991 0.0040 0.0142 0.0001 0.0046 0.0001 0.240 5 90.8 0.8 96 4 236 90 93 2 90.8 ± 0.8 
Zircon_21 181 205 1.03 0.0524 0.0017 0.1025 0.0035 0.0142 0.0001 0.0043 0.0001 0.280 8 91.0 0.8 99 3 303 70 87 2 91.0 ± 0.8 
Zircon_9 126 73 0.53 0.0544 0.0031 0.1060 0.0061 0.0142 0.0001 0.0046 0.0002 0.180 1

1 
91.0 0.9 102 6 389 129 93 3 91.0 ± 0.9 

Zircon_24 334 328 0.89 0.0497 0.0015 0.0978 0.0031 0.0143 0.0001 0.0044 0.0001 0.230 4 91.2 0.6 95 3 181 66 88 1 91.2 ± 0.6 
Zircon_12 314 385 1.11 0.0508 0.0018 0.0998 0.0037 0.0143 0.0001 0.0044 0.0001 0.270 6 91.3 0.9 97 3 233 77 89 2 91.3 ± 0.9 
Zircon_28 364 344 0.86 0.0498 0.0035 0.0987 0.0073 0.0144 0.0002 0.0045 0.0001 0.200 4 91.9 1.0 96 7 187 157 91 2 91.9 ± 1.0 
Zircon_19 136 105 0.70 0.0528 0.0021 0.1044 0.0043 0.0144 0.0002 0.0044 0.0001 0.270 9 92.0 1.0 101 4 320 85 89 2 92.0 ± 1.0 
Zircon_35 208 173 0.76 0.0569 0.0029 0.1123 0.0063 0.0143 0.0002 0.0045 0.0001 0.230 1

5 
92.0 1.0 108 6 486 114 90 1 92.0 ± 1.0 

Zircon_8 113 93 0.74 0.0616 0.0028 0.1219 0.0057 0.0145 0.0002 0.0045 0.0001 0.260 2
1 

92.0 1.0 117 5 662 97 92 2 92.0 ± 1.0 
Zircon_18 413 553 1.22 0.0513 0.0018 0.1015 0.0037 0.0144 0.0001 0.0045 0.0001 0.260 6 92.1 0.8 98 3 253 75 90 1 92.1 ± 0.8 
Zircon_16 516 670 1.18 0.0476 0.0011 0.0944 0.0023 0.0144 0.0001 0.0045 0.0001 0.300 0 92.2 0.6 92 2 78 48 90 1 92.2 ± 0.6 
Zircon_20 297 277 0.84 0.0523 0.0016 0.1046 0.0032 0.0145 0.0001 0.0046 0.0001 0.230 8 92.9 0.6 101 3 297 64 92 1 92.9 ± 0.6 
Zircon_7 363 402 1.00 0.0532 0.0012 0.1067 0.0025 0.0145 0.0001 0.0046 0.0001 0.340 1

0 
92.9 0.7 103 2 339 50 93 1 92.9 ± 0.7 

Zircon_17 185 179 0.88 0.0525 0.0017 0.1046 0.0036 0.0145 0.0002 0.0045 0.0001 0.320 8 93.0 1.0 101 3 309 70 91 2 93.0 ± 1.0 
Zircon_32 343 321 0.85 0.0527 0.0023 0.1055 0.0052 0.0145 0.0002 0.0046 0.0000 0.350 9 93.0 1.0 102 5 315 98 92 1 93.0 ± 1.0 
Zircon_22 363 419 1.05 0.0540 0.0038 0.1085 0.0081 0.0146 0.0002 0.0046 0.0001 0.160 1

1 
93.2 1.0 105 7 371 151 92 1 93.2 ± 1.0 

Zircon_1 238 273 1.04 0.0515 0.0025 0.1050 0.0052 0.0146 0.0001 0.0047 0.0001 0.190 7 93.6 0.8 101 5 263 104 95 2 93.6 ± 0.8 
Zircon_15 255 239 0.85 0.0493 0.0016 0.0994 0.0034 0.0147 0.0001 0.0046 0.0001 0.250 2 93.9 0.8 96 3 160 71 92 1 93.9 ± 0.8 
Zircon_25 233 281 1.09 0.0707 0.0078 0.1431 0.0171 0.0147 0.0003 0.0045 0.0001 0.320 3

1 
94.0 2.0 136 1

5 
948 220 90 1 94.0 ± 2.0 

Zircon_29 266 200 0.68 0.0520 0.0052 0.1059 0.0113 0.0148 0.0002 0.0046 0.0001 0.170 8 94.0 1.0 102 1
0 

286 224 94 3 94.0 ± 1.0 
Zircon_23 257 221 0.78 0.0548 0.0034 0.1113 0.0072 0.0147 0.0001 0.0046 0.0000 0.150 1

2 
94.3 0.8 107 7 402 129 93 1 94.3 ± 0.8 

Zircon_30 226 210 0.84 0.0542 0.0018 0.1099 0.0038 0.0147 0.0002 0.0047 0.0001 0.290 1
1 

94.3 1.0 106 3 381 74 95 2 94.3 ± 1.0 
Zircon_3 276 271 0.89 0.0512 0.0018 0.1051 0.0039 0.0149 0.0001 0.0047 0.0001 0.250 6 95.5 0.8 102 4 248 83 96 2 95.5 ± 0.8 
Zircon_10 218 180 0.75 0.0548 0.0029 0.1123 0.0060 0.0150 0.0002 0.0047 0.0001 0.210 1

1 
96.0 1.0 108 5 405 110 95 2 96.0 ± 1.0 

Zircon_4 161 139 0.78 0.0599 0.0025 0.1237 0.0053 0.0150 0.0002 0.0048 0.0001 0.270 1
9 

96.0 1.0 118 5 599 89 97 2 96.0 ± 1.0 
Zircon_5 78 57 0.66 0.0547 0.0075 0.1131 0.0165 0.0150 0.0003 0.0047 0.0002 0.240 1

2 
96.0 2.0 109 1

5 
398 301 94 4 96.0 ± 2.0 

Zircon_14 137 116 0.77 0.0461 0.0034 0.0961 0.0075 0.0151 0.0002 0.0049 0.0002 0.210 −
4 

97.0 1.0 93 7 1 138 99 5 97.0 ± 1.0 
Zircon_34 131 98 0.68 0.0580 0.0061 0.1220 0.0136 0.0153 0.0003 0.0047 0.0001 0.250 1

6 
98.0 2.0 117 1

2 
530 236 95 2 98.0 

 
2.0 

n = 31                  Weighted 
206

Pb/
238

U mean age =  

92.4 ± 0.5 

± 0.7 

                     MSWD = 1.6; 

                     n = 22 



 45 

  Sample CAMP Mount ICGEO-20 (January 2011)                   

Zircon_18 438 207 0.43 0.0529 0.0017 0.0968 0.0032 0.0133 0.0001 0.0043 0.0001 0.280 10 84.9 0.8 94 3 325 72 87 2 84.9 ± 0.8 
Zircon_32 272 230 0.77 0.0508 0.0018 0.0932 0.0034 0.0133 0.0001 0.0041 0.0001 0.260 5 85.4 0.8 90 3 232 80 83 2 85.4 ± 0.8 
Zircon_13 301 220 0.67 0.0520 0.0019 0.0962 0.0036 0.0134 0.0001 0.0040 0.0001 0.220 8 85.8 0.7 93 3 284 82 80 2 85.8 ± 0.7 
Zircon_26 233 129 0.50 0.0521 0.0017 0.0977 0.0034 0.0136 0.0001 0.0044 0.0001 0.280 9 86.8 0.8 95 3 290 75 89 2 86.8 ± 0.8 
Zircon_21 245 178 0.66 0.0530 0.0019 0.1000 0.0036 0.0136 0.0001 0.0040 0.0001 0.270 10 87.3 0.8 97 3 328 79 81 2 87.3 ± 0.8 
Zircon_17 178 102 0.52 0.0523 0.0027 0.0990 0.0053 0.0138 0.0002 0.0042 0.0001 0.220 8 88.0 1.0 96 5 299 118 85 2 88.0 ± 1.0 
Zircon_9 292 168 0.52 0.0504 0.0018 0.0953 0.0034 0.0137 0.0001 0.0042 0.0001 0.220 4 88.0 0.6 92 3 214 82 85 2 88.0 ± 0.6 
Zircon_34 195 111 0.52 0.0546 0.0026 0.1040 0.0051 0.0138 0.0002 0.0045 0.0001 0.230 11 88.6 1.0 100 5 397 110 91 3 88.6 ± 1.0 
Zircon_14 272 198 0.66 0.0554 0.0022 0.1060 0.0043 0.0139 0.0001 0.0043 0.0001 0.240 13 88.8 0.9 102 4 428 87 87 2 88.8 ± 0.9 
Zircon_15 194 114 0.54 0.0493 0.0023 0.0945 0.0046 0.0139 0.0002 0.0041 0.0001 0.240 3 88.8 1.0 92 4 160 106 82 2 88.8 ± 1.0 
Zircon_27 206 119 0.53 0.0519 0.0020 0.0994 0.0039 0.0139 0.0001 0.0045 0.0001 0.240 7 88.9 0.8 96 4 279 87 90 2 88.9 ± 0.8 
Zircon_36 149 79 0.48 0.0518 0.0024 0.0995 0.0047 0.0139 0.0002 0.0045 0.0001 0.230 7 89.0 1.0 96 4 276 107 90 2 89.0 ± 1.0 
Zircon_5 160 85 0.49 0.0587 0.0034 0.1136 0.0068 0.0140 0.0002 0.0046 0.0002 0.260 18 89.0 1.0 109 6 555 130 93 4 89.0 ± 1.0 
Zircon_25 175 86 0.45 0.0538 0.0023 0.1035 0.0046 0.0139 0.0002 0.0044 0.0001 0.260 11 89.2 1.0 100 4 362 96 89 3 89.2 ± 1.0 

(continued on next page) 

 



 46 

 
    Corrected ratios Corrected ages (Ma) 

Corrected ages(Ma) 

Corrected ratios Corrected ages (Ma) 

Corrected ages(Ma) 

 

Corrected ratios Corrected ages (Ma) 

Corrected ages(Ma) 

Corrected ratios Corrected ages (Ma) 

Corrected ages(Ma) 

 

 U
#

 

 

Th
#

 

 

Th/U 207
Pb/

206
Pb
†
 ±1 s

⁎ 207Pb/
235

U
†
 ±1 s

⁎ 206Pb/
238

U
†
 ±1 s

⁎ 208Pb/
232

Th
†
 ±1 s

⁎ Rho  
 

% 206Pb/238U ±1  207Pb/
206

Pb
†
 

±1  207
Pb/

206
Pb 

±1 208
Pb/

232
Th  

±1 207
Pb/

232
Th

b
†
 

±1  1 s 

 (ppm) 

 

(ppm) 

 

          disc**  

 

s⁎  s⁎  s⁎  s⁎  s⁎  

Zircon_28 172 82 0.44 0.0538 0.0018 0.1044 0.0037 0.0141 0.0002 0.0044 0.0001 0.300 11 90.0 1.0 101 3 361 76 89 3 90.0 ± 1.0 
Zircon_31 263 150 0.52 0.0504 0.0018 0.0991 0.0035 0.0142 0.0001 0.0046 0.0001 0.180 5 90.8 0.6 96 3 215 80 93 2 90.8 ± 0.6 
Zircon_1 217 118 0.49 0.0533 0.0026 0.1037 0.0051 0.0142 0.0001 0.0045 0.0001 0.200 9 91.0 0.9 100 5 340 108 90 2 91.0 ± 0.9 
Zircon_35 286 226 0.72 0.0514 0.0017 0.1017 0.0034 0.0144 0.0001 0.0047 0.0001 0.270 6 91.8 0.8 98 3 260 75 94 2 91.8 ± 0.8 
Zircon_8 193 106 0.50 0.0518 0.0022 0.1019 0.0044 0.0143 0.0001 0.0045 0.0001 0.220 7 91.8 0.9 99 4 277 98 91 3 91.8 ± 0.9 
Zircon_2 166 87 0.48 0.0537 0.0021 0.1061 0.0043 0.0143 0.0002 0.0045 0.0001 0.300 10 92.0 1.0 102 4 357 87 90 2 92.0 ± 1.0 
Zircon_23 157 74 0.43 0.0492 0.0020 0.0975 0.0041 0.0144 0.0002 0.0046 0.0001 0.250 2 92.0 1.0 94 4 156 94 94 2 92.0 ± 1.0 
Zircon_30 165 83 0.46 0.0490 0.0020 0.0971 0.0042 0.0145 0.0002 0.0047 0.0001 0.300 2 92.0 1.0 94 4 146 93 94 3 92.0 ± 1.0 
Zircon_37 180 108 0.55 0.0499 0.0021 0.0989 0.0042 0.0144 0.0001 0.0048 0.0001 0.230 4 92.2 0.9 96 4 190 97 98 2 92.2 ± 0.9 
Zircon_22 225 129 0.52 0.0525 0.0017 0.1049 0.0037 0.0145 0.0002 0.0045 0.0001 0.340 8 93.0 1.0 101 3 306 75 92 2 93.0 ± 1.0 
Zircon_4 269 186 0.63 0.0481 0.0021 0.0961 0.0054 0.0145 0.0002 0.0046 0.0002 0.300 0 93.0 1.0 93 5 103 99 93 3 93.0 ± 1.0 
Zircon_20 125 54 0.39 0.0577 0.0024 0.1161 0.0051 0.0146 0.0002 0.0049 0.0002 0.280 16 94.0 1.0 112 5 517 92 98 3 94.0 ± 1.0 
Zircon_24 227 114 0.46 0.0479 0.0016 0.0967 0.0042 0.0147 0.0002 0.0048 0.0003 0.250 0 94.0 1.0 94 4 94 76 97 6 94.0 ± 1.0 
Zircon_3 153 85 0.51 0.0520 0.0028 0.1055 0.0057 0.0148 0.0002 0.0048 0.0001 0.210 7 95.0 1.0 102 5 286 121 97 3 95.0 ± 1.0 
Zircon_16 142 64 0.41 0.0615 0.0019 0.1346 0.0045 0.0159 0.0002 0.0047 0.0002 0.380 21 101.0 1.0 128 4 658 68 96 4 101.0 ± 1.0 
Zircon_11 141 62 0.40 0.0524 0.0025 0.1194 0.0059 0.0166 0.0002 0.0052 0.0001 0.190 8 106.0 1.0 115 5 305 112 105 2 106.0 ± 1.0 
Zircon_33 127 62 0.44 0.0506 0.0021 0.1238 0.0053 0.0177 0.0002 0.0058 0.0002 0.230 5 113.0 1.0 119 5 220 98 116 4 113.0 ± 1.0 
Zircon_7 429 285 0.61 0.0484 0.0006 0.1374 0.0024 0.0206 0.0002 0.0066 0.0001 0.360 0 131.0 1.0 131 2 120 30 133 3 131.0 ± 1.0 
Zircon_6 335 107 0.29 0.0526 0.0019 0.1657 0.0063 0.0228 0.0002 0.0071 0.0002 0.240 6 146.0 1.0 156 5 310 86 142 4 146.0 ± 1.0 
Zircon_29 592 375 0.58 0.0512 0.0009 0.1879 0.0037 0.0266 0.0002 0.0087 0.0001 0.400 3 169.0 1.0 175 3 250 41 174 3 169.0 ± 1.0 
n = 34                  Weighted 

206
Pb/

238
U mean age = 

89.1 ± 0.7 

                    MSWD   =    2.0 

                    n = 22 

Sample L-9 Mount ICGEO-20 (January 2011)                  

Zircon_5 4330 16,211 3.41 0.0657 0.0013 0.0908 0.0022 0.0102 0.0002 0.0014 0.0000 0.620 26 65.2 1.0 88 2 797 38 29 1 65.2 ± 1.0 
Zircon_18 7347 3564 0.44 0.0728 0.0010 0.1069 0.0016 0.0107 0.0001 0.0026 0.0001 0.520 34 68.3 0.6 103 1 1007 25 51 2 68.3 ± 0.6 
Zircon_14 5870 25,537 3.96 0.1001 0.0039 0.1547 0.0070 0.0114 0.0003 0.0012 0.0001 0.510 50 73.0 2.0 146 6 1626 71 23 1 73.0 ± 2.0 
Zircon_23 5971 1871 0.29 0.0608 0.0023 0.1019 0.0042 0.0122 0.0001 0.0038 0.0000 0.300 21 77.9 0.5 99 4 633 77 76 1 77.9 ± 0.5 
Zircon_24 9254 9751 0.96 0.0470 0.0019 0.0822 0.0037 0.0127 0.0001 0.0040 0.0001 0.430 −2 81.3 0.5 80 3 49 81 81 1 81.3 ± 0.5 
Zircon_11 14,351 17,506 1.11 0.0602 0.0008 0.1064 0.0025 0.0129 0.0002 0.0039 0.0001 0.810 20 82.0 2.0 103 2 610 29 78 3 82.0 ± 2.0 
Zircon_1 13,614 17,435 1.16 0.0492 0.0021 0.0872 0.0044 0.0129 0.0001 0.0041 0.0000 0.590 3 82.4 0.9 85 4 155 94 82 1 82.4 ± 0.9 
Zircon_6 3603 1559 0.39 0.0541 0.0012 0.0971 0.0024 0.0130 0.0001 0.0041 0.0000 0.350 11 83.4 0.6 94 2 375 45 82 1 83.4 ± 0.6 
Zircon_30 8095 1810 0.20 0.0624 0.0006 0.1129 0.0019 0.0131 0.0002 0.0072 0.0004 0.820 23 84.0 1.0 109 2 688 20 145 7 84.0 ± 1.0 
Zircon_7 2560 2250 0.80 0.0587 0.0024 0.1074 0.0051 0.0133 0.0001 0.0041 0.0000 0.500 18 84.9 0.9 104 5 556 85 83 1 84.9 ± 0.9 
Zircon_16 4370 10,231 2.13 0.0943 0.0021 0.1729 0.0041 0.0133 0.0001 0.0021 0.0002 0.390 47 85.4 0.8 162 4 1515 39 41 3 85.4 ± 0.8 
Zircon_8 1664 1692 0.92 0.0769 0.0050 0.1420 0.0100 0.0134 0.0001 0.0040 0.0001 0.300 36 85.8 0.8 135 9 1118 126 81 1 85.8 ± 0.8 
Zircon_21 5365 7706 1.31 0.0758 0.0055 0.1403 0.0118 0.0134 0.0002 0.0040 0.0000 0.620 35 86.0 1.0 133 10 1089 138 82 1 86.0 ± 1.0 
Zircon_29 6811 5051 0.67 0.0868 0.0049 0.1599 0.0116 0.0134 0.0003 0.0040 0.0001 0.690 43 86.0 2.0 151 10 1356 104 80 2 86.0 ± 2.0 
Zircon_27 2489 1120 0.41 0.0505 0.0021 0.0974 0.0044 0.0140 0.0001 0.0044 0.0000 0.230 5 89.6 0.7 94 4 218 92 89 1 89.6 ± 0.7 
Zircon_13 11,769 16,888 1.31 0.0788 0.0010 0.1568 0.0027 0.0142 0.0002 0.0038 0.0001 0.650 39 91.0 1.0 148 2 1167 25 77 2 91.0 ± 1.0 
Zircon_31 7333 5924 0.73 0.0685 0.0008 0.1366 0.0018 0.0144 0.0001 0.0056 0.0001 0.400 29 92.0 0.4 130 2 884 23 113 1 92.0 ± 0.4 
                  Weighted 

206
Pb/

238
U mean age = 

89.1 ± 1.0 

                                 MSWD =   2.0 
= 

22 
                       n = 9   

Individual zircon ages in bold were used to calculate the weighted mean 206Pb/238U age and MSWD (Mean Square ofWeighted Deviates) using the computational program Isoplot (Ludwig, 2003). 

# U and Th concentrations (ppm) are calculated relative to analyses of trace-element glass standard NIST 612. 



 47 

† Isotopic ratios are corrected relative to PLE standard zircon for mass bias and down-hole fractionation (PLE, Plešovice = ~337 Ma; Sláma et al., 2008). Common Pb corrections were made using the Andersen Method (Andersen, 2002). 
*
 All errors in isotopic ratios and ages are absolute and given at the 1-sigma level except for theWeighted Mean 206Pb/238U age that is reported at the 2-sigma level. 

**
 Percentage discordance obtained using the following equation (100 ∗ [(age 207Pb / 235U)−(age 206Pb / 238U)] / age 207Pb / 235U). Positive and negative values indicate normal and inverse discordance, respectively.  


