












































Microsoft Word - Chicago_FinalVersion.docx


Analyzing Bicycle Sharing System User Destination Choice Preferences: An Investigation 
of Chicago’s Divvy System 

 

 

 

Ahmadreza Faghih-Imani 
PhD Student 

Department of Civil Engineering and Applied Mechanics 
McGill University 

Ph: 514-398-6823, Fax: 514-398-7361 
E-mail: seyed.faghihimani@mail.mcgill.ca  

 
 

 

Naveen Eluru* 
Assistant Professor 

Department of Civil Engineering and Applied Mechanics 
McGill University 

  Ph: 514-398-6823, Fax: 514-398-7361 
E-mail: naveen.eluru@mcgill.ca 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

*Corresponding author 

  



Abstract 

In recent years, there has been increasing attention on bicycle-sharing systems (BSS) as a viable 
and sustainable mode of transportation for short trips. However, due to relatively recent adoption 
of BSS there is very little research exploring how people consider these systems within the 
existing transportation alternatives. Given the recent growth of BSS across the world, there is 
substantial interest in identifying contributing factors that encourage individuals to use these 
systems. The current study contributes to the growing literature by examining BSS behavior at a 
trip level to analyze bicyclists’ destination preferences. Specifically, we study the decision 
process involved in identifying destination locations after picking up a bicycle at a BSS station 
using a random utility maximization approach in the form of a multinomial logit model (MNL). 
The quantitative frameworks developed have been estimated using data from Chicago’s Divvy 
system for 2013. In our modeling effort, we distinguish between BSS users with annual 
membership and short-term customers with daily passes. The developed model will allow 
bicycle-sharing system operators to better plan their services by examining the impact of travel 
distance, land use, built environment and access to public transportation infrastructure on users’ 
destination preferences. Using the estimated model we generate utility profiles as a function of 
distance and various other attributes allowing us to visually represent the trade-offs that 
individuals make in their decision process. To further illustrate the applicability of the proposed 
framework for planning purposes, destination station choice probability prediction is undertaken. 

 

Keywords: bicycle sharing systems, Divvy Chicago, destination choice, location choice, 
Multinomial logit model, bicycle infrastructure, land use and built environment 



1. Introduction 

In recent years, bicycle-sharing systems (BSS) have attracted increasing attention as a viable 
mode of transportation for short trips. Currently, there are about half a million public bicycles 
around the world; about 400 cities have installed or are planning to install a bicycle-sharing 
system (Fishman et al., 2013). Bicycle-sharing systems free the user from the need to secure their 
bicycles avoiding bicycle theft issues (van Lierop et al., 2013; Rietveld and Daniel, 2004). At the 
same time, the decision to make a trip can be made in a short time frame providing an 
instantaneously accessible alternative for a one-way or a round trip. Bicycle-sharing systems 
provide a healthier and affordable transport mode for the younger generation. These systems can 
enhance accessibility to public transportation systems by improving the last mile connectivity 
(Shaheen et al., 2010). Moreover, installing bicycle-sharing systems promotes active 
transportation that can enhance physical activity levels to obtain better health outcomes. 
Furthermore, the recent observed trends in travel behavior among the millennial generation (or 
millenials) demonstrate that the younger generation is willing to drive less. They are more 
environmentally conscious and incline more towards shared transportation systems (Benjamin et 
al., 2012; Dutzik and Baxandall, 2013).  

Cities, by installing bicycle-sharing systems, are focusing on inducing a modal shift to 
cycling, and subsequently decrease traffic congestion and air pollution. There is significant 
evidence from the travel behavior data in the United States to support bicycle-sharing system 
installation. According to data from the National Household Travel Survey (NHTS) 2009, about 
37.6% of the trips by private vehicles in the United States are less than 2 miles long. The NHTS 
data also indicates that about 73.6% of bicycle trips in the US are less than 2 miles long. Even if 
a small proportion of the shorter private vehicle trips (around dense urban cores) are substituted 
with bicycle-sharing system trips it offers substantial benefits to individuals, cities and the 
environment. A well designed and planned bicycle-sharing system can play a complimentary 
role to existing public transportation infrastructure.  

While cities are supporting bicycle-sharing systems as a more sustainable transport mode, 
due to their relatively recent adoption there is very little research exploring how people consider 
these systems within the existing transportation alternatives. Given the recent growth of bicycle-
sharing systems across major cities in China, Europe and US, there is a substantial interest in 
identifying contributing factors that encourage individuals to use these systems. Understanding 
the individuals’ decision processes in adoption and usage of bicycle-sharing systems will enable 
bicycle-sharing system operators to better plan their services. The current study contributes to the 
growing literature on bicycle-sharing systems by examining bicycle-sharing system behavior at a 
trip level to analyze bicyclists’ destination preferences. Specifically, we study the decision 
process involved in identifying destination locations after picking up the bicycle at a BSS station. 
The decision process formulated for the bicycle destination choice is analogous to the trip 
distribution step in the traditional four-step travel demand planning framework for vehicular 
demand. In the trip distribution module, given the origin locations of the trips, we apply a 
quantitative model to distribute the trips in the study region. The proposed research effort 
develops an equivalent framework within the realm of bicycle-sharing systems.  

The decision process is studied using a random utility maximization approach where 
individuals choose the destination that offers them the highest utility from the universal choice 
set of stations in the study region. In the random utility maximization approach, the destination 
station utility is affected by individual bicyclist attributes (such as age and gender), trip attributes 



(such as time period of the day) and destination attributes (such as distance from the origin 
station, bicycle infrastructure variables and land use and built environment attributes). There 
have been several location choice studies in traditional travel demand literature that adopt a 
random utility maximization approach for understanding destination/location preferences (for 
example see Chakour and Eluru 2014 for analysis of railway station choice; see Waddell et al. 
2007 for workplace and residential location choice; see Sivakamur and Bhat 2007 for  activity 
location choice). The current study adapts this approach to the bicycle-sharing system data. 

The proposed quantitative analysis is conducted employing trip data for Chicago’s Divvy 
bicycle-sharing system from July to December 2013. Chicago’s bicycle-sharing system was 
launched in June 2013 with 300 stations and 3000 bicycles. The trips information including 
origin and destination stations, time and duration of trips and type of user are available online on 
Divvy website (https://www.divvybikes.com/datachallenge). The Divvy trip database is 
augmented with temporal characteristics, bicycle infrastructure, land use, and built environment 
attributes allowing us to examine the influence of these factors on BSS users’ destination station 
choice. In our modeling effort, we distinguish between BSS users with annual membership and 
short-term customers with daily passes and present separate models for each of these rider types 
due to the inherent differences among the two bicycling groups. The random utility framework 
employed in our analysis takes the form of a multinomial logit model (MNL). The quantitative 
framework developed will allow bicycle-sharing system operators to examine the impact of 
travel distance, land use, built environment and access to public transportation infrastructure on 
users’ destination preferences. The estimated model is validated using a hold out sample data 
that has not been used for estimation. To illustrate the applicability of the proposed framework 
for planning purposes, destination station choice probability prediction is undertaken. Finally, a 
trade-off analysis to illustrate the relationship between important attributes affecting the 
destination choice process is also undertaken. 

The remainder of the paper is organized in the following order. A brief overview of 
earlier research is presented in Section 2. Section 3 describes the data and the sample formation 
procedures. In Section 4, model structure, estimation results are described. Section 5 describes 
model validation, prediction and elasticity profiles for important variables generated using the 
model developed. Finally, Section 6 summarizes and concludes the paper. 

 

2. Literature Review 

The first bicycle-sharing system was introduced in the 1960s in the Netherlands (DeMaio, 2009; 
Shaheen et al., 2010). However, these systems became popular and relatively successful around 
the world only over the past few years. The first generation of public bikes in the 1960s was free 
and without time limitation. This program failed because of many stolen and vandalized 
bicycles. Then, next generation of BSS introduced the coin-deposit systems. Unfortunately, this 
program was also unsuccessful because of the lack of time constraints and the issue of bicycle 
theft due to user anonymity (Shaheen et al., 2010). Adding the transaction kiosks to docking 
stations and limiting bicycle rental periods have helped these systems become quite successful 
around the world. In our literature review, we focus on research exploring the use of the latest 
generation of bicycle-sharing systems. The research is broadly based on two perspectives: (1) 
systems perspective and (2) user perspective.  



Under the systems perspective, earlier quantitative studies employed actual bicycle usage 
data to capture the determinants of BSS usage (Rixey, 2013; Faghih-Imani et al., 2014; Zhao et 
al., 2014). In these studies, usage is usually characterized as arrivals (depositing bicycles) and 
departures (removal of bicycles). These studies examine the influence of BSS infrastructure 
(such as number of BSS stations and stations’ capacity), transportation network infrastructure 
(such as length of bicycle facilities, streets and major roads), land use and urban form (such as 
presence of metro and bus stations, restaurants, businesses and universities), meteorological data 
(such as temperature and humidity), and temporal characteristics (such as time of day, day of the 
week and month) on BSS usage. Several studies demonstrate that increasing BSS infrastructure 
(number of stations and capacity) increases BSS usage (Wang et al., 2013; Faghih-Imani et al., 
2014). Land use and urban form variables such as higher job or population density also 
contribute to BSS usage (Rixey, 2013; Faghih-Imani et al., 2014). Studies that examined usage at 
a fine time resolution (within a day) highlighted that temporal characteristics affect BSS usage – 
with the peak usage observed during the evening peak hours (Faghih-Imani et al., 2014). These 
studies have also found that BSS usage is higher for weekdays compared to weekends indicating 
that BSS is used on weekdays for commuting purposes. The studies examining the impact of 
point of interests (such as restaurants, retail stores and universities) near BSS stations found 
evidence that BSS usage was higher for stations with higher number of point of interests in the 
vicinity (Rixey, 2013; Faghih-Imani et al., 2014). More recently, Faghih-Imani and Eluru, 2014 
considered the self-selection of bicycle-sharing system infrastructure installation in high bicycle 
usage areas. In their analysis, the authors found evidence for the self-selection hypothesis 
indicating that ignoring the installation decision process in modeling usage tends to over-
estimate the impact of bicycle-sharing system infrastructure and under-estimate the impact of 
land use, bicycle facilities and built environment attributes. To be sure, even after accounting for 
self-selection bias, increasing BSS infrastructure contributed to increased usage. 

The second set of studies focussed on the user perspective contributes to the literature by 
studying user behavior in response to bicycle-sharing systems. Examining Montreal’s bicycle-
sharing system using survey data, Bachand-Marleau et al. (2012) and Fuller et al. (2011) found 
that convenience of BSS as well as having a BSS station closer to home location significantly 
encouraged individuals to use the system. Fishman et al. (2014) investigated ridership and mode 
substitution data from BSS in 5 cities around the world. The authors examined if the reduction in 
vehicle kilometers travelled due to bicycle-sharing system usage was offset by the motor vehicle 
use for fleet redistribution and maintenance by program operators. They highlighted the 
importance of encouraging people to shift from car to BSS to reduce total vehicle kilometers 
traveled. Buck et al. (2013) studied the differences between regular cyclists, BSS short-term 
users and BSS annual members in Washington, D.C. and concluded that BSS’s implementation 
in the city could motivate new segments of the society to cycle and thus increase the overall 
bicycling mode share. Schoner and Levinson (2014) modeled the origin’s station choice of Nice 
Ride Minnesota bicycle-sharing system using survey data to study how people use bicycle-
sharing system and underscored the difference between preference of workers and non-workers. 

 

2.1. Current Study in Context 

As is evident from the literature review, the bicycle-sharing system literature is still in its infancy 
and there are several dimensions that are unexplored in earlier research. In our research, we 
focus on user based decision processes with a particular focus on destination station choice 



behavior. Specifically, we employ destination choice data from Chicago Divvy bicycle-sharing 
system to examine the factors that influence individuals’ destination choice behavior. The 
analysis process considers that an individual who picks a bicycle at one of the stations makes 
destination station choice based on a host of attributes including individual’s age and gender, 
time period of the day, and destination attributes such as distance from the origin station, points 
of interest, bicycle infrastructure, land use and built environment variables. While destination 
choice models are prevalent in transportation literature, we believe our study is the first attempt 
to accommodate for bicycle-sharing system destination choice behavior. While Schoner and 
Levinson (2014) research effort studies origin station choice, their analysis was based on survey 
data and not on revealed usage data. Furthermore, while using the system wide data, we need to 
examine a larger destination choice set. In summary, the current study contributes to bicycle 
literature in the following ways. First, we develop a model to quantify the impact of various 
attributes on bicycle-sharing system destination choice. Second, using the estimated model we 
generate utility profiles as a function of distance and various other attributes allowing us to 
visually represent the trade-offs that individuals make in their decision process. Finally, the 
model developed is employed to generate probability functions of trips originating at an origin 
station to various destinations – a very useful representation for understanding system wide 
usage patterns. 

 

3. Data 

3.1. Data Source  

Chicago’s Divvy system belongs to the latest generation of bicycle-sharing systems which has 
benefited from the recent advances in technology such as solar powered docking stations. 
Chicago is the third most populous city in the US and a host to millions of visitors every year. 
The Chicago downtown area is the second largest commercial business district in the US. 
According to NHTS 2009, bicycle trips accounts for 1.7% of total trips in Chicago while 80.6% 
of trips are pursued by private vehicles. About 44.8% of trips are less than 2 miles; within the 
trips less than 2 miles, share of private vehicles reduces to 66.3% while the share for bicycle 
mode increases to 2.9%.  The statistics clearly indicate the scope for shifting some of the urban 
core trips from private vehicle to shared bicycling. 

The data used in our research was obtained from Divvy website 
(https://www.divvybikes.com/datachallenge). The dataset consists of more than 750,000 trips 
with trip related information including origin and destination stations, start time and end time of 
trips, user types i.e. whether the user was a subscriber of system with annual membership or a 
customer with a 24hr pass, and the age and gender for members’ trips only. In addition, the 
dataset has the coordinates of Divvy system stations as well as the capacity of stations. The land 
use and urban form attributes such as road network, and bicycle routes are derived from City of 
Chicago data portal (https://data.cityofchicago.org/) while the socio-demographic characteristics 
are gathered from US 2010 census. 

 

3.2. Sample Formation 

The sample formation exercise involved a series of steps. First, trips with missing or inconsistent 
information were removed. Second, trips longer than 90 minutes in duration (only 1.8% of all the 



trips) were deleted considering that only the first 30 minutes of Divvy system is free and the 
users are encouraged to use bicycle-sharing systems for short trips. The trips longer than 90 
minutes are not typical bicycle-sharing rides and could also be a result of misplacing the bicycle 
when returning it to the station. At the same time, trips that had the same origin and destination 
were also eliminated. In most of these trips, it is very likely that the bicycle was not functioning 
well and the users returned them to the origin station. Therefore, we focus on trips that were 
destined outward. Further, we expected that the behavior of users with annual membership will 
differ from the behavior of customers with daily passes. Thus, we separated trips made by 
members and daily customers; about 53% of all the trips were made by members. To obtain a 
reasonable sample size for model estimation, 6000 trips by members and 6000 trips by daily 
customers were randomly selected.  

Divvy system has 300 stations across the city. From each origin station, individuals have 
299 other stations to choose to return the bicycle to. However, considering all the stations in the 
universal choice set will result in substantial computational burden. Hence, for the purpose of our 
modeling effort we resort to a sampled choice set. Specifically, for every destination choice 
record, we sample 30 alternatives from the universal choice set including the chosen alternative. 
The process of random sampling does not affect the parameter estimates in multinomial logit 
models (see McFadden, 1987). With the sampled choice set, information for the 30 stations is 
augmented with the individual trip records.  

 

3.3. Independent Variable Generation 

Several independent variables were generated to examine the users’ destination station choice 
process. These variables can be grouped into: 1) Trip attributes 2) Station attributes. Trip 
attributes include the street network distance between the origin and destination of every trip. 
This distance was computed using the shortest path between origin and destination stations to 
investigate the travel distance influence along with other attributes. While the actual trip might 
involve a different route, the shortest distance would be an appropriate indicator of the distance 
traveled. Moreover, for the users with annual membership, the gender and age information were 
available and were considered in our analysis. Also, considering the start time of the trips, five 
time periods were created: AM (6:00-10:00), Midday (10:00-16:00), PM (16:00-20:00), Evening 
(20:00-24:00), and Night (0:00-6:00) to capture the time of the day effect on trips.  

Destination station attributes considered in our analysis are: 1) Bicycle infrastructure 
variables 2) Land use and built environment attributes. The spatial variables included are at both 
the census track level and the buffer level. A 300 meter buffer around each station was found to 
be an appropriate walking distance considering the distances between Divvy stations (Shaheen et 
al., 2013). The length of bicycle facilities (bicycle lanes and bicycle paths) within the buffer was 
calculated to examine the effect of cycling facilities on the destination station preference. The 
length of minor roads (local streets and collectors) and major roads (arterials and highways) 
within 300 meter of stations were calculated to identify cyclist preference of routes. In addition 
to the destination station capacity, the number and capacity of Divvy stations in the 300 meter 
buffer (excluding the destination station) were computed to capture the influence of 
neighbouring stations.  

Land-use and built environment characteristics considered include distance from central 
business district (CBD), presence of transit in the 300 meter buffer, various points of interest, job 



and population density. To study the influence of the central business district (CBD), the distance 
from each station to the CBD was computed. Moreover, a categorical variable indicating the 
presence of station in the CBD was created. The presence of stations of bus and train system near 
a Divvy station and the length of train lines in the 300 meter buffer were generated to examine 
the influence of public transit on people preference of destination station. We included the rapid 
train system in city of Chicago, the L system, the regional train system in Chicago Metropolitan 
Area, Metra system, and Chicago Transit Authority (CTA) bus system in generation of public 
transit variables. We also considered three types of points of interest near each station: (1) the 
number of restaurants (including coffee shops and bars), (2) the number of grocery stores and (3) 
the area of parks in the buffer around the station. The elevation of stations was another 
characteristic taken into account. Population density and job density associated with each Divvy 
station was considered at the census track level.  

 

3.4. Descriptive Analysis 

To provide an illustration of the dataset, a descriptive summary of the sample is presented in 
Table 1. The average duration of trips is about 20.66 minutes and the average network distance 
between origins and destinations is about 2.54 km. Daily customers use Divvy system for longer 
trips compared to annual members. Within members, the median age is 34 years old and 79% of 
trips are made by males. However, while number of female members is less than their male 
counterparts, we observe that they pursue longer trips both in terms of duration and distance.  

In order to better understand the variation of destination choices from each origin in the 
Divvy system, we demonstrate the number of trips destined to every station from specific origins 
visually using a geographic information system. Since illustrating all trips for all the origins and 
destinations is quite undesirable in the context of this paper, we focus only on three types of 
stations; i.e. stations with number of trips originated equals to the 25, 50, 75 percentile of total 
trips (Figure 1). For this purpose, we identified three stations for trips made by members and 
three stations for trips made by daily customers (Figure 1). This way we present six stations that 
have different usage patterns and serve as a representation of the entire system. In Figure 1, we 
categorized the number of trips destined to each station in quartiles: Low (trips destined are less 
than 25% of total originated trips), Medium (trips destined are between 25-50% of total 
originated trips), High (trips destined are between 50-75% of total originated trips) and Very 
High (trips destined are more than 75% of total originated trips). Overall, the visualization 
provides a brief overview of bicycle flows in Chicago using the Divvy system. As can be seen in 
this figure, the chosen destination clearly depends on the distance from the origin station. 
Furthermore, we can observe that a subset of stations is typically chosen for trips originated from 
a station. However, stations in CBD area attract reasonable number of trips from farther origin 
stations from CBD. Further, we used the same stations to show the prediction applicability of the 
estimated MNL model (in Section 5).  

 

4. Analysis and Discussion 

4.1. Multinomial Logit Model 

The most common methodology employed to study location choice such as BSS’s destination 
station choice is the McFadden’s Multinomial Logit Model (MNL). The use of MNL model is 



common in such cases since the location choice can be hypothesized as a utility-maximization 
problem where BSS’s users choose the stations with the highest utility. A brief description of the 
MNL model is provided below.   

 Let s = 1, 2, …, 30 be an index to represent each station, q = 1, 2, …, Q be an index to 
represent the BSS users. Then, the random utility formulation takes the following form: 

	 ′                 (1) 

Where uqs is the utility obtained by user q by selecting station s from the choice set of 30 
stations. Xqs is the vector of attributes and β	is the model coefficients to be estimated. The random 
error term, ε, is assumed to be independent and identically Gumbel-distributed across the dataset. 
The BSS user q will choose the station as destination that offers the highest utility. With this 
notation, the probability expression takes the typical multinomial logit form given by: 

	

∑ 	
                (2) 

 The log-likelihood function can be defined as: 

	 ∑ ln	                     (3) 

By maximizing this log-likelihood function, the model parameters β are estimated. The 
maximum likelihood model estimation is programmed in GAUSS matrix programming 
language. 

  

4.2. Results 

In this section, we discuss the results of multinomial logit model estimation to understand the 
different factors influencing users’ choice of destination in the Chicago’s Divvy bicycle-sharing 
system. The final Log-likelihood values for the station destination choice’s multinomial logit 
model for the annual member and daily customer samples are -15740.44 and -15491.61, 
respectively. The corresponding value for equal probability model is -20407.18. The 
improvement in the data fit clearly illustrates the superiority of the MNL destination choice 
models (the log-likelihood ratio test-statistic value is 9333.48 and 9831.14, significantly higher 
than the corresponding chi-square value for 21 and 17 additional degrees of freedom for the 
annual member and daily customer, respectively). The reader would note that we considered 
several specifications but only the statistically significant results for members’ and daily 
customers’ destination choice models are presented in Table 2. As expected, there are distinct 
impacts of several contributing factors in decision making of customers and members towards 
destination station choice. 

 

4.2.1. Bicycle infrastructure variables 

People tend to choose stations with longer bicycle paths nearby as highlighted by the positive 
coefficient of the bicycle facility variable in both members’ and daily customers’ model. On the 
contrary, as the length of major roads increases around the station, it is less likely that Divvy 
users choose that station as destination of their trip. The number of stations and the capacity of 



stations within the buffer variables take into account the impact of neighbouring stations on 
destination choice; the results are different for daily customers and members models. The 
number of stations in the buffer has positive impact and the capacity of stations in the buffer has 
negative impact on the destination choice utility for members. The impact is opposite for daily 
customers; the number of stations in the buffer has negative impact and the capacity of stations 
in the buffer has positive impact. It is possible that daily customers are likely to be unfamiliar 
with the Divvy system and the presence of multiple stations close by serves as competition while 
on the other hand, for members, the presence of multiple stations reflects access to multiple 
opportunities thus encouraging them to use these parts of the system. This clearly shows the 
distinct behaviour of annual members and daily customers. It must be noted that the coefficients 
of number and capacity of stations in the buffer should be examined as a combination 
recognizing that as the number of stations in the buffer increases we simultaneously increase the 
capacity in the buffer. For members, the positive impact associated with the number of Divvy 
stations on likelihood of choosing a station as destination is about 20 times larger than the 
negative impact of capacity of stations in the buffer while for daily customers the negative 
impact of the number of stations in the buffer is about 80 times larger than the positive effect of 
buffer capacity. The results imply that from members standpoint, more stations with smaller 
capacity is preferable while from daily customers’ point of view, fewer stations with larger 
capacity is more desirable. Faghih-Imani et al. (2014), by examining the station level arrivals and 
departures at Montreal’s BIXI system, concluded that adding additional stations (either by 
relocating existing capacity from large stations or adding new bicycle slots) is more beneficial in 
terms of usage compared to adding capacity to existing stations. However, their study did not 
distinguish between annual members and daily customers. The Faghih-Imani et al. (2014) and 
current study differ in the bicycle-sharing system studied and dependent variable analyzed; 
hence, further investigation on the influence of number of stations and capacity of stations is 
required considering different bicycle-sharing systems and user types. In terms of the destination 
station, the stations with higher capacity are more likely to be chosen as they are likely to have 
more available docking stations. Moreover, people tend to easily remember larger stations.  

 

4.2.2. Land-use and built environment characteristics 

In this section, the results for parameters related to land-use and built environment characteristics 
are discussed. The Divvy stations near metro system and regional train system tend to be chosen 
as destination by members highlighting the support of BSS on use of public transport. However, 
the results is opposite for daily customers. Since the purpose of daily customers’ trips are more 
likely to be for recreational activities, the Divvy stations in the vicinity of parks are also more 
likely to be chosen by daily customers as highlighted by area of parks in the buffer variable. 
Interestingly, the parks variable for annual members has contrasting effect for trips during 
weekdays and weekends. During weekdays, there is a negative impact on choosing a destination 
near parks while during weekends, the Divvy stations near parks are more likely to be chosen. As 
expected, both short-term users and annual members incline towards Divvy stations with higher 
number of restaurants in the vicinity.  

 Members choose stations that bring them closer to CBD as highlighted by negative 
coefficient of destination station distance to CBD. This negative impact is about 3 times higher 
in the AM period while its effect becomes positive during the PM period, indicating the use of 
Divvy system for daily commute to/from work in downtown area. Daily customers are inclined 



towards the stations in CBD area as highlighted by the positive coefficient of destination in CBD 
variable. Daily customers use the system to get closer to CBD in the AM period and farther from 
CBD in the PM period. Population density variable has positive impact on likelihood of choosing 
a Divvy station by members in general. However, for both short-term users and annual members, 
during AM period, the Divvy stations with lower population density are more likely to be chosen 
since trips in AM period are mostly originated from home. During AM period, stations with 
higher job density are more likely to be chosen. The coefficients of population density, job 
density and station distance from CBD variables in AM and PM periods clearly demonstrate the 
use of Divvy system for daily commute to work in the morning and back to home in the evening 
especially for annual member users. 

Further, the results show that there is clear distinction in the use of Divvy system by daily 
customers and annual members. This provides further support to our hypothesis that separate 
behavior models are appropriate for daily customers and annual members.  

 

4.2.3. Trip level attributes 

The most important variable in destination station decision making process in a bicycle-sharing 
system is expected to be the distance of trip between origin and destination. For members we 
examined the distance of trips as well as age and gender effects while for daily customers we 
were limited to only trip distance variable due to lack of users’ information. In general, it is 
expected that the likelihood of choosing a station very close to origin station or very far from 
origin station is lower than stations in between. In order to better model the distance impact on 
the utility of choosing a station, we distinguish the very short distance and very far distance by 
dummy variables and a continuous variable for distance in between. We tried several different 
distance combinations determining thresholds for distance to define close and far stations from 
the origin. Dummy variables indicating stations within 500m or farther than 3000m of origin and 
a continuous form of distance for stations within 500m to 3000m from origin provided better 
results for members’ final model specifications. For daily customers’ model, stations within 
500m dummy and a continuous form for after 500m distance from origin yielded better results. 
As expected, the network distance variables have negative impact on likelihood of choosing a 
station as destination for both annual members and short-term users.  

  Moreover, gender and age effects were also considered in members’ model estimation. It 
is important to note that since the user attribute remains the same for all the destination station 
alternatives, these effects were captured by multiplying gender and age variables with distance 
variables. The age influence does not become statistically significant – this is intuitive given that 
annual members self-select themselves from the pool of active bicyclists. The gender impact, on 
the other hand, offers interesting results. The results show that male members are more likely to 
have shorter trips. This might be due the fact that in Chicago Divvy system, only about 21% of 
members are female. It is possible that women who join are actually regular bicyclists and are 
more likely to be fit and pursue longer trips. However, this result might be different in other 
bicycle-sharing systems especially in bicycle-friendlier cities.  

 

5. Validation and Elasticity Analysis 

5.1. Model Validation 



The model estimated is validated using the hold-out samples set aside i.e. 2000 trips for annual 
members and 2000 trips for daily customers. The same approach of choice set generation for 
estimation sample is exercised for validation sample. The utility and the probability of choosing 
a station are computed for 30 stations of choice set for each of the 2000 trips.  The predictive LL 
for members’ model is -5275.76 and for daily customers’ model is -5249.32 while the 
corresponding value for equal probability model is -6802.39 clearly indicating that the proposed 
model provides an improved fit. Subsequently, the predicted probability is compared with the 
actual observed destination station. We compute two metrics for this analysis: (1) percentage of 
correct prediction (correct prediction is defined as assigning the highest probability to the chosen 
alternative) and (2) average probability of the chosen station. For member and customers models, 
we observe that the probability of correct prediction is 21.7% and 22.0% respectively. The 
average of predicted probability of observed destination station is 11.52% and 11.72% which is 
about 4 times the 3.33% chance of the probability of prediction without any model (i.e. choosing 
a station among 30 stations). The two proposed measures highlight the improved fidelity of 
prediction with our proposed model as opposed to an equal likelihood prediction. 

To further highlight the applicability of estimated models, we illustrate the probability of 
choosing destination stations from the entire sample for the same stations discussed in Section 
3.4 in Figure 2. Again to better compare the results, we categorized the stations into 4 types 
considering the likelihood of station to be chosen: low probability stations (first quartile), 
medium probability stations (second quartile), high probability stations (third quartile), and very 
high probability stations (fourth quartile). The computed probability is for off-peak period on 
weekdays for male members and daily customers. Comparison of Figure 1 and Figure 2 clearly 
show the applicability of estimated results. The zero arrival trips in Figure 1 are mostly in lower 
predicted probability categories in Figure 2 while higher arrivals are mainly in higher predicted 
probability categories. 

 

5.2. Elasticity analysis 

In order to better understand the magnitude of the effects of variables on destination choice, 
Figure 3 illustrates the utility function trade-offs between origin and destination network distance 
and other attributes such as length of bicycle facilities in the buffer and destination station 
capacity. As is indicated from the model estimates, the utility decreases when the trips’ distance 
between origin and destination increases; while it increases with increase in the length of bicycle 
facilities near a station and station capacity. We can observe from the three dimensional 
relationship that the negative impact of distance is compensated to some degree by positive 
impact of bicycle facilities and station capacity. This is illustrated by how the utility for various 
distances remains the same with appropriate increase in the other two attributes. For example, 
moving a destination station from 1 km to 2 km farther from origin without changing other 
variables would result in about 0.65 and 0.45 unit reduction in utility for members and non-
members, respectively. Now if we want to keep the attraction of that station constant (i.e. keep 
the utility constant), we can compensate that reduction in utility by adding to existing bicycle 
routes or adding more capacity. To offset the utility reduction caused by increased distance of 1 
km we will need to increase bicycle facility length by about 2.6 km and 3.5 km for members and 
non-members, respectively. In terms of capacity, the 1 km increase in distance can be offset by 
increasing the capacity by 22 and 10 for members and non-members, respectively. Hence, one 
could argue that adding to bicycle capacity is an easier proposition. Of course, if the changes 



were made simultaneously only a 1 km increase in bicycle route length in conjunction with a 
capacity increase of 14 and 7 for members and customers can offset the 1 km increase in 
distance. The figures and the subsequent analysis illustrate the applicability of the proposed 
model for system operators in reallocating capacity or installing new capacity while regional 
planners can adopt the model to enhance land-use to encourage shared bicycling usage. 

. 

6. Conclusion 

Despite the growing installation of bicycle-sharing systems around the world, there is very little 
research exploring how people consider these systems within the existing transportation 
alternatives. This study examines the individuals’ decision processes in adoption and usage of 
bicycle-sharing systems. The current study contributes to growing literature on bicycle-sharing 
systems by examining bicycle-sharing system behavior at a trip level to analyze bicyclists’ 
destination preferences. The decision process is studied using a Multinomial Logit Model where 
the destination station utility is affected by individual bicyclist attributes (such as age and 
gender), trip attributes (such as time period of the day) and destination attributes (such as 
distance from the origin station, bicycle infrastructure variables and land use and built 
environment attributes). In our analysis, we distinguish between BSS annual users and daily 
customers. 

The proposed quantitative analysis is conducted employing trip data for Chicago’s Divvy 
bicycle-sharing system from July to December 2013. The model estimation results provide 
intuitive findings for both members and daily customers. It is observed that people tend to 
choose stations with longer bicycle paths nearby. In terms of the destination station, the stations 
with higher capacity are more likely to be chosen. The network distance between origin and 
destination station has negative impact on likelihood of choosing a station as destination for 
Divvy users. During AM period, stations with higher job density and stations with lower 
population density are more likely to be chosen. The coefficients of population density, job 
density and station distance from CBD variables in AM and PM periods clearly demonstrate the 
use of Divvy system for daily commute to work in the morning and back to home in the evening 
especially for annual member users. It is demonstrated that there is clear distinction in the use of 
Divvy system by daily customers and annual members. Specifically, the effects of number and 
capacity of neighbouring stations are opposite for daily customers and annual members.  

The model estimated is validated using hold-out samples. The validation exercise 
highlights the improved fidelity of prediction with our proposed model as opposed to an equal 
likelihood prediction. To further demonstrate the applicability of estimated models, we compute 
the probability of choosing destination stations from the entire sample. The zero arrival trips 
from the observed data are mostly in lower predicted probability categories while higher arrival 
trips from the observed data are mainly in higher predicted probability categories. In order to 
better understand the magnitude of the effects of variables on destination choice, the utility 
function trade-offs between network distance between origin and destination and other attributes 
such as length of bicycle facilities in the buffer and destination station capacity are also 
computed. It is observed that the negative impact of distance is compensated to some degree by 
positive impact of bicycle facilities and station capacity. Overall, our analysis provides a 
framework for planners and BSS operators a framework to examine the impact of changes to the 
system (BSS and land use) on user destination choice preferences. 



The model estimates generated have several applications. For example, the quantitative 
framework developed will allow bicycle-sharing system operators to examine the impact of 
travel distance, land use, built environment and access to public transportation infrastructure on 
users’ destination preferences. The model results will also be useful in determining time of day 
based bicycle demand profiles so as to better plan the bicycle availability (or empty slot 
availability) and rebalancing operations at bicycle stations. The model will also provide guidance 
on how the expansion of the existing bicycle-sharing system will affect the current station 
demand by providing potential destination locations to be used from the newly proposed bicycle 
stations. 

To be sure, the study is not without limitations. This paper does not account for the trips’ 
origin effects; the trips originating from one station might have common characteristics. We do 
intend to capture the origin’s common unobserved heterogeneity in our future research. In future 
research attempts a more comprehensive analysis considering the decision to make a trip by 
bicycle-sharing system, the origin station choice and the destination station choice 
simultaneously could be undertaken. Of course, to undertake such analysis, the bicycle-sharing 
trip data needs to be augmented with much more detailed information (such as home and work 
location) on BSS users. 

 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

The authors would like to acknowledge financial support from Natural Sciences and Engineering  
Research Council (NSERC) of Canada under the Discovery Grants program. The authors would 
like to extend their sincere appreciation to Prof. Ahmed M. El-Geneidy for pointing us toward 
the Divvy trips data and many subsequent discussions about the research. 
 
 
 
 
  



References 

Bachand-Marleau, J., B. Lee, and A. El-Geneidy. Better Understanding of Factors Influencing 
Likelihood of Using Shared Bicycle Systems and Frequency of Use. Transportation Research 
Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board, No. 2314, 2012, pp. 66-71. 

Buck, D., D. Buehler, P. Happ, B. Rawls, P. Chung, and N. Borecki. Are Bikeshare Users 
Different from Regular Cyclists? A First Look at Short-Term Users, Annual Members, and Area 
Cyclists in the Washington, D.C., Region. Transportation Research Record: Journal of the 
Transportation Research Board, No. 2387, 2013, pp. 112–119. 

Chakour V. and N. Eluru, "Analyzing Commuter Train User Behavior: A Decision Framework 
for Access Mode and Station Choice, Transportation, Vol. 41 (1), 2014, pp. 211-228. 

City of Chicago Data portal, https://data.cityofchicago.org 

Davis, B., T. Dutzik and P. Baxandall. Transportation and the new generation: Why young 
people are driving less and what it means for transportation policy, Frontier Group. 2012. 

DeMaio, P. Bike-sharing: History, Impacts, Models of Provision, and Future. Journal of Public 
Transportation. Vol. 12, 2009, pp. 41-56. 

Divvy Bikes, https://www.divvybikes.com/datachallenge 

Dutzik, T. and P. Baxandall. A new direction: Our changing relationship with driving and the 
implications for America’s future. U.S. PIRG Education Fund and Frontier Group. 2013. 

Faghih-Imani A. and N. Eluru, Role of Bicycle Sharing System Infrastructure on Usage: 
Evidence from Montreal, Presented at the 5th Innovations in Travel Modeling Conference, 
Baltimore, MD, 2014. 

Faghih-Imani A., N. Eluru, A. El-Geneidy, M. Rabbat, and U. Haq. How does land-use and 
urban form impact bicycle flows: Evidence from the bicycle-sharing system (BIXI) in Montreal, 
forthcoming Journal of Transport Geography http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jtrangeo.2014.01.013, 
2014. 

Fishman, E., S. Washington and N. Haworth. Bike share’s impact on car use: Evidence from the 
United States, Great Britain, and Australia, Transportation Research Part D: Transport and 
Environment, Vol. 31, 2014, pp. 13-20. 

Fishman, E., S. Washington, N. Haworth. Bike Share: A Synthesis of the Literature. Transport 
Review Vol. 33, 2013, pp. 148-165. 

Fuller, D., L. Gauvin, Y. Kestens, M. Daniel, M. Fournier, P. Morency, and L. Drouin. Use of a 
new public bicycle share program in Montreal, Canada. American journal of preventive 
medicine, Vol. 41, No. 1, 2011, pp. 80-83. 

McFadden, D. Modeling the Choice of Residential Location. In Spatial Interaction Theory and 
Planning Models (A. Karlqvist et al., eds.), North Holland Publishers, Amsterdam, 
Netherlands,1978. 

NHTS, U.S. Department of Transportation, Federal Highway Administration, National 
Household Travel Survey 2009. URL: http://nhts.ornl.gov. 

Rietveld, P. and V. Daniel, Determinants of bicycle use: do municipal policies matter? 
Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice Vol. 38, 2004, pp. 531-550. 



Rixey, R. Station-Level Forecasting of Bikesharing Ridership: Station Network Effects in Three 
U.S. Systems. Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board, 
No. 2387, 2013, pp. 46-55.  

Schoner, J. E. and D. M. Levinson. Which Station? Access Trips and Bike Share Route Choice. 
Presented at 93rd Annual Meeting of the Transportation Research Board, Washington, D.C., 
2014. 

Shaheen, S., A. Adam, P. Cohen and E. W. Martin. Public Bikesharing in North America. 
Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board, No. 2387, 
2013, pp. 83-92. 

Shaheen, S., S. Guzman and H. Zhang. Bikesharing in Europe, the Americas, and Asia Past, 
Present, and Future. Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research 
Board, No. 2143, 2010, pp. 159-167. 

Sivakumar, A., and C.R. Bhat. A Comprehensive, Unified, Framework for Analyzing Spatial 
Location Choice," Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research 
Board, No. 2003, 2007, pp. 103-111 

van Lierop, D., M. Grimsrud, and A. El-Geneidy. Breaking into bicycle theft: Insights from 
Montreal, Canada. Forthcoming International Journal of Sustainable Transportation, 2013.  

Waddell, P., C.R. Bhat, N. Eluru, L. Wang and R.M. Pendyala. Modeling the Interdependence 
in Household Residence and Workplace Choices, Transportation Research Record: Journal of 
the Transportation Research Board, No. 2003, 2007, pp. 84-92 

Wang, X., G. Lindsey, J. Schoner and A. Harrison. Modeling Bike Share Station Activity: the 
Effects of Nearby Businesses and Jobs on Trips to and from Stations. Paper presented at the 
92nd Transportation Research Board Annual Meeting, Washington, DC, 2013.  

Zhao, J., W. Deng and Y. Song. Ridership and effectiveness of bikesharing: The effects of urban 
features and system characteristics on daily use and turnover rate of public bikes in China. 
Transport Policy, Vol. 35, 2014, pp. 253-264. 

  



         

         

 

 

Figure 1: Bicycle-Sharing Trips in Chicago’s Divvy System  

 

  

A
n

n
u

a
l S

u
b

scrib
er T

rips 
D

a
ily C

u
sto

m
er T

rip
s 



       

       

 

 

Figure 2: Probablity of Choosing a Station in Chicago’s Divvy System 

 

 

A
n

n
u

a
l S

u
b
scrib

er P
ro

b
a
b
ility 

D
a

ily C
u

stom
ers P

ro
b

ab
ility 



 

  

Figure 3: The Variation of Utility with respect to Distance, Bike Route Length and Station Capacity 

0.05

1.6

‐3.50

‐3.00

‐2.50

‐2.00

‐1.50

‐1.00

‐0.50

0.00

0.50

1.00
0
.0
5

0
.5 1

1
.5 2

2
.5 3

3
.5

U
ti
lit
y 
M
al
e 
M
em

be
rs

Distance (km)

0.50‐1.00

0.00‐0.50

‐0.50‐0.00

‐1.00‐‐0.50

‐1.50‐‐1.00

‐2.00‐‐1.50

‐2.50‐‐2.00

‐3.00‐‐2.50

‐3.50‐‐3.00 0.05

1.6

‐1.50

‐1.00

‐0.50

0.00

0.50

0
.0
5

0
.5 1

1
.5 2

2
.5 3

3
.5

U
ti
lit
y 
D
ai
ly
 C
us
to
m
er
s

Distance (km)

0.00‐0.50

‐0.50‐0.00

‐1.00‐‐0.50

‐1.50‐‐1.00

10

28

46

‐3.00

‐2.50

‐2.00

‐1.50

‐1.00

‐0.50

0.00

0.50

1.00

1.50

0
.0
5

0
.5 1

1
.5 2

2
.5 3

3
.5

U
ti
lit
y 
M
al
e 
M
em

be
rs

Distance (km)

1.00‐1.50

0.50‐1.00

0.00‐0.50

‐0.50‐0.00

‐1.00‐‐0.50

‐1.50‐‐1.00

‐2.00‐‐1.50

‐2.50‐‐2.00

‐3.00‐‐2.50 10

28

46

‐1.00

‐0.50

0.00

0.50

1.00

1.50

2.00

2.50

0
.0
5

0
.5 1

1
.5 2

2
.5 3

3
.5

U
ti
lit
y 
D
ai
ly
 C
us
to
m
er
s

Distance (km)

2.00‐2.50

1.50‐2.00

1.00‐1.50

0.50‐1.00

0.00‐0.50

‐0.50‐0.00

‐1.00‐‐0.50



Table 1: Descriptive Summary of Sample Characteristics 

Trip Attributes 

Members and 
Daily Customers

Members Daily Customers 

Mean 
Std. 

Deviation 
Mean 

Std. 
Deviation 

Mean 
Std. 

Deviation
Annual Membership 53% -     
Male     79% -   
Age     36.15 10.44   
Network Distance (km) 2.54 1.99 2.40 1.72 3.02 2.12 

Network Distance (male only)     2.31 1.73   

Network Distance (female only)     2.52 1.77   

Duration (min) 20.66 45.96 11.19 7.11 22.70 14.04 

Duration (male only)     11.53 23.66   

Duration (female only)     13.94 26.71   

 

Station Attributes Mean Std. Deviation 

Elevation (m) 185.16 5.68 
Station Distance to CBD (km) 5.27 2.99 
Length of Bicycle Facility in 300m Buffer (km) 1.00 0.63 
Length of Major Roads in 300m Buffer  (km) 1.31 0.95 
Length of Minor Roads in 300m Buffer (km) 4.79 1.35 
Length of Metra Lines in 300m Buffer (km) 0.11 0.25 
Length of L Lines in 300m Buffer (km) 0.31 0.43 
Number of Bus Stops in 300m Buffer 11.67 7.40 

Area of Parks in 300m Buffer (km2) 0.017 0.037 
Number of Restaurants in 300m Buffer 21.17 27.82 
Number of Grocery Stores in 300m Buffer 0.44 0.70 
Number of Divvy stations in 300m Buffer 0.54 0.95 
Capacity of Divvy stations in 300m Buffer 11.29 22.82 
Station Capacity 16.7 4.67 
Population Density (people per m2 ×1000)  6.89 4.55 
Job Density (jobs per m2 ×1000) 13.76 32.21 
Station in CBD area 20.7% - 
Presence of Metra Station in 300m Buffer 7.7% - 
Presence of L Station in 300m Buffer 28.3% - 

 

  



Table 2: Model Estimation Results 

Parameter 
Members Customers 

Coefficient t-statistic Coefficient t-statistic 
Bicycle Infrastructure Variables     
Length of Bicycle Facility in 300m Buffer 0.2491 10.465 0.1259 5.42 
Length of Major Roads in 300m Buffer -0.2243 -7.306 -0.0771 -2.313 
Number of Divvy Stations in 300m Buffer 0.1078 2.042 -0.344 -6.023 
Capacity of Divvy Stations in 300m Buffer -0.0053 -2.554 0.0042 1.82 
Destination Station Capacity 0.029 10.496 0.0456 18.204 
      
Land-use and Built Environment Characteristics     
Presence of L System Station in 300m Buffer 0.16 4.631 -0.0937 -2.067 
Length of L System Lines in 300m Buffer - - -0.2585 -5.908 
Presence of Metra System Station in 300m Buffer 0.2965 6.363 -0.2833 -5.354 
Area of Parks in 300m Buffer -0.1129 -2.178 1.04 37.736 
Area of Parks in 300m Buffer *Weekend 0.4635 5.105 - - 
Number of Restaurants in 300m Buffer 0.2721 5.017 0.6583 12.087 
Destination Station in CBD - - 0.6548 14.206 
Destination Station Distance to CBD -0.055 -5.145 - - 
Destination Station Distance to CBD*AM -0.164 -8.336 -0.0901 -2.998 
Destination Station Distance to CBD*PM 0.0612 4.653 0.0263 2.046 
Population Density 0.015 4.623 - - 
Population Density*AM -0.0188 -2.929 -0.0287 -2.742 
Job Density -0.0067 -11.286 - - 
Job Density*AM 0.0096 12.087 0.0029 2.212 
     
Trip Attributes      
Dummy Network Distance to Destination < 500m -0.6868 -6.706 -0.3793 -3.507 
Network Distance (500m< &<3000m) -0.6503 -25.415 - - 
Dummy Network Distance to Destination > 3000m -2.9221 -38.702 - - 
Network Distance (500m<) - - -0.4472 -57.153 
Male* Dummy Network Distance to Destination > 
3000m 

-0.1623 -2.096 - - 

 

 


