






































Bike sharing: A review of evidence on impacts and processes of implementation and operation


Research in Transportation Business & Management 15 (2015) 28–38

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Research in Transportation Business & Management
Bike sharing: A review of evidence on impacts and processes of
implementation and operation
Miriam Ricci ⁎
Centre for Transport & Society, Department of Geography and Environmental Management, University of the West of England, Bristol BS16 1QY, United Kingdom
⁎ Tel.: +44 117 32 83798; fax: +44 117 32 83002.
E-mail address: miriam.ricci@uwe.ac.uk.

http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.rtbm.2015.03.003
2210-5395/© 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
a b s t r a c t
a r t i c l e i n f o
Article history:
Received 13 February 2015
Received in revised form 29 March 2015
Accepted 30 March 2015
Available online 17 April 2015

Keywords:
Bike sharing
Cycling policy
Evidence
Evaluation
Despite the popularity of bike sharing, there is a lack of evidence on existing schemes andwhether they achieved
their objectives. This paper is concernedwith identifying and critically interpreting the available evidence onbike
sharing to date, on both impacts and processes of implementation and operation. The existing evidence suggests
that bike sharing can increase cycling levels but needs complementary pro-cycling measures and wider support
to sustainable urbanmobility to thrive. Whilst predominantly enabling commuting, bike sharing allows users to
undertake other key economic, social and leisure activities. Benefits include improved health, increased transport
choice and convenience, reduced travel times and costs, and improved travel experience. These benefits are un-
equally distributed, since users are typically male, younger and in more advantaged socio-economic positions
than average. There is no evidence that bike sharing significantly reduces traffic congestion, carbon emissions
and pollution. From a process perspective, bike sharing can be delivered through multiple governance models.
A key challenge to operation is network rebalancing, while facilitating factors include partnership working and
inclusive scheme promotion. The paper suggests directions for future research and concludes that high-quality
monitoring impact/process data, systematically and consistently collected, as well as innovative and inclusive
evaluation methods are needed.

© 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction

This paper is concernedwith identifying and critically interpreting the
available evidence on bike sharing to date, on both impacts and processes
of implementation and operation. The aim is twofold. First, the paper
seeks to determine evidence gaps and limitations that need further inves-
tigation. Secondly, by drawing on the evidence review, it attempts to
identify the enabling conditions for the occurrence and transferability of
beneficial impacts and positive implementation and operation processes.
By critically reviewing and reflecting on the available evidence on both
impacts and processes, rather than on impacts alone as other existing re-
views have done, this paper advances the current body of knowledge on
bike sharing and contributes to the ongoing academic and policy dis-
course on this increasingly popular cycling measure.

Bike sharing involves the provision of a pool of bicycles across a net-
work of strategically positioned ‘bike sharing stations’, typically distrib-
uted in an urban area, which can be accessed by different types of users
(i.e., registered members or occasional/casual users) for short-term
rentals allowing point-to-point journeys. Bike sharing is often named
in different ways according to the geographical area of application,
e.g., ‘cycle hire’ in the UK, ‘public bicycle’ in China and ‘bicycle sharing’
in North America (ITDP, 2013).
Bike sharing schemes (BSSs) have existed for almost fifty years but
only in the last decade have they significantly grown in prevalence
and popularity to include over 800 cities across the world and a global
fleet exceeding 900,000 bicycles (Meddin, 2015). In their historical de-
velopment BSSs have progressed through so-called ‘generations’ (see
Beroud & Anaya, 2012 and DeMaio, 2009 for a detailed historical analy-
sis). Modern 3rd generation BSSs share a few key features (Anaya &
Castro, 2012; ITDP, 2013; OBIS, 2011; TDG & PBIC, 2012):

• The bicycles can be checked-in and out through the use of a personal
‘smart card’ using radio-frequency identification (RFI) technology, or
a ‘key’. Most modern systems are largely automated in this respect;

• Each bike sharing station, i.e., the station where bikes can be checked
in and out of their docking points, can be equipped with terminals,
also termed ‘kiosks’, where users can get information on the scheme,
view the local and overall station network map, communicate with
customer service, and in some cases make the payment for use;

• Wireless communication technology, e.g., general packet radio service
(GPRS), allows real-time monitoring of occupancy rates at each sta-
tion. If the bicycles are equipped with global positioning system
(GPS), their movement through the network can be monitored.

• BSSs incentivise short-term rental hence maximise the number of
times each bicycle is used, by allowing users to have, typically, the
first 30 min free of charge (within their specific subscription for
which they are charged upfront) and then increasing the charges

http://crossmark.crossref.org/dialog/?doi=10.1016/j.rtbm.2015.03.003&domain=pdf
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.rtbm.2015.03.003
mailto:miriam.ricci@uwe.ac.uk
Journal logo
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.rtbm.2015.03.003
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/journal/


1 http://bike-sharing.blogspot.co.uk/.
2 http://www.mobiped.com/vls_public-bicycles_bike-sharing_en.html.
3 http://oobrien.com/bikesharemap/.
4 https://www.capitalbikeshare.com/.
5 https://www.niceridemn.org/.
6 http://www.tfl.gov.uk/info-for/open-data-users/our-feeds. It must be noted that dur-

ing the writing of this paper there was a change of sponsorship to the London scheme,
which is now called ‘Santander Cycles’.

7 The author contributed to an in-depth impact and process evaluation of a bike sharing
demonstration scheme in Bath, U.K., co-funded by the CIVITAS Plus Renaissance project,
2008–2012. The evaluation report is to be published by the European Commission.

29M. Ricci / Research in Transportation Business & Management 15 (2015) 28–38
rather substantially after that period. In this sense bike sharing is very
different from a bike rental service: the former is about using the
shared bikes to make short-term point-to-point journeys, the latter
involves the renting, and private use, of a bicycle for a given amount
of time. Users are generally required to provide credit or debit card de-
tails, which serve both as a deposit, aswell as payment for registration
and usage fees.

According to policy documents and various grey and academic liter-
atures, BSSs are expected to contribute to a number of different objec-
tives, including:

• To reduce single occupancy car journeys and ease traffic congestion;
• To reduce CO2 emissions and to improve air quality by reducing other
pollutant emissions from motorised traffic;

• To improve public health and increase levels of physical activity;
• To increase cycling levels, and help normalise and promote cycling
(for example, by removing barriers associated with bike ownership,
e.g., concerns about theft and parking);

• To improve accessibility and support flexible mobility, through en-
hanced transport choices and opportunities for multi-modality and
inter-modality (for example, by acting as a ‘first’ or ‘last mile’ solution
in connection with public transport);

• To improve road safety, in particular for cyclists;
• To enhance the image and liveability of cities and to support local
economies and tourism.

The reviewof evidence provided here sheds light onwhether, and to
what extent, the aforementioned effects of bike sharing have been
assessed, andwithwhat results. The rest of the paper is organised as fol-
lows. Section 2 provides a critical overview of the increasing number of
information sources and growing body of knowledge about bike shar-
ing, and explains the rationale for the evidence review on which the
present paper is based. Sections 3 and 4 summarise the evidence on
users, usage and impacts of bike sharing, and discuss the results' signif-
icance and limitations. Section 5 provides a summary of the evidence
aroundmanaging the business of bike sharing froma process evaluation
perspective, in particular in terms of drivers, barriers and lessons learnt.
Section 6 concludes the paper by discussing how the evidence present-
ed here can be helpful in enhancing and transferring positive results in
terms of impacts and processes of implementations to other contexts,
and identifies key areas that merit further investigation.

2. Sources of information and evidence onbike sharing: an overview

Reflecting the rapid growth of bike sharing especially in the past ten
years, a number of very different sources of information and evidence
about bike sharing have appeared. These include:

• Guidelines and manuals for bike sharing operation, such as the hand-
book developed by the EU-funded OBIS project (OBIS, 2011) and two
planning guides to bike share implementation, one focused on theU.S.
context and experience (TDG & PBIC, 2012), and the second on the
global experience to date (ITDP, 2013). Other important analyses of
existing systems include an overview of Spanish BSSs by Anaya and
Castro (2012), in Spanish but with a short summary of recommenda-
tions in English; and an analysis of BSS implementation and operation
governance with particular attention to French and Spanish schemes
(Beroud & Anaya, 2012). Relevant platforms for sharing results and
good practice also comprise international conferences such as the
European Cyclists' Federation's Velocity conferences and the
European Transport Conference series.

• Websites, comprising both those offering general information on bike
sharing and those set up by BSS operators and/or projects, which
sometimes include scheme-specific data on operational/financial per-
formance and customers' profile and satisfaction. Well-known
examples amongst the former category are: The Bike-sharing Blog,1

Mobiped2 and Suprageography3 (in particular the Bike Sharing Map
section) which keep track of all the BSSs across the globe and act as
points of contact and reference for stakeholders involved in BSSs
and, more broadly, anyone interested in this cycling measure.
Amongst the BSS operators that make performance data and/or re-
ports readily available in the public domain are: Capital Bikeshare,4

Washington DC; Nice Ride Minnesota5; and Barclays Cycle Hire,6

London. Other schemes may supply performance data and reports
on request, including tender documents and contracts of operation.

• Reports and scholarly publications, including peer-reviewed journal
articles, exploring one or more aspects and/or effects of bike sharing
and focusing on one specific scheme or a range of schemes for
which data are available. Most of these publications have appeared
in the past five years, suggesting that this is still an emerging but po-
tentially prolific area of research.

The review of evidence for this paper draws on a literature search
aimed at identifying studies that met two requirements. First, these
studies needed to provide some form of evaluation, assessment or ap-
praisal of existing BSSs, involving the collection and/or generation of
data on issues such as usage, impacts, and processes of implementation
and operation. Second, the studies needed to be supported by well-
explained and robust conceptual and methodological approaches.

The search was carried out by the author through a variety of schol-
arly databases and internet engines, and using a combination of key-
words connected with bike sharing, evidence, impacts and evaluation
(only documents in English were considered). Several considerations
can be made in relation to the availability, relevance and significance
of the range of the available evidence identified on this cyclingmeasure.

First, itmust be noted that although bike sharinghas recently started
to attract attention from commentators around the globe, including ac-
ademic researchers, independent and peer-reviewed in-depth evalua-
tions of existing schemes are not readily and publicly available. No
single BSS (of a sufficient scale7) appears to have been fully and inde-
pendently evaluated along an extensive range of impact and process di-
mensions (for an overview of different impact evaluation approaches,
see Hills & Junge, 2010; for process evaluation, see Bloor & Wood,
2006). More frequently, the existing studies look at one particular as-
pect or a set of characteristics of one or more schemes, with different
methodological approaches. As a result, the available evidence is some-
how patchy and does not easily lend itself to comparative analysis.
However, the increasing availability of usage/performance data such
as origin–destination journeys and station occupancy, often through ex-
plicit ‘open data’ policies, has stimulated the growth of academic litera-
ture on BSSs and has the potential to enable better comparative
assessment of schemes (O'Brien, Cheshire, & Batty, 2014).

Secondly, the evidence available on bike sharing does not generally
offer a clear understanding of the specific objectives that a particular
scheme had sought to achieve. This makes it difficult to assess whether,
and to what extent, a scheme has been ‘successful’. This is particularly
relevant when interpreting the results of academic studies of specific
BSSs, which often reflect the authors' own research objectives and line
of academic inquiry, rather than provide an evaluation of the scheme's
success against its original objectives.

http://bike-sharing.blogspot.co.uk/
http://www.mobiped.com/vls_public-bicycles_bike-sharing_en.html
http://oobrien.com/bikesharemap/
https://www.capitalbikeshare.com/
https://www.niceridemn.org/
http://www.tfl.gov.uk/info-for/open-data-users/our-feeds


30 M. Ricci / Research in Transportation Business & Management 15 (2015) 28–38
The available evidence is relatively recent and generally refers to
established schemes that have been operational for a whilst. Major
schemes in North America (especially the U.S. and Canada) and
Europe (the U.K., Ireland, Spain and France) appear to have attracted
themost interest and scrutiny, followed by schemes in China (currently
the largest in the world) and Australia.

The studies identified for the review include a variety of documents,
with differentmethodological approaches and objectives. One is a review
of the available evidence to date (Fishman, Washington, & Haworth,
2013), which helped identify original sources of evidence. The others in-
volve the collection and analysis of operator data onusers andusage char-
acteristics, in a few caseswith the use of models, and/or the generation of
quantitative and qualitative data, through surveys conducted with users,
non-users, operators, stakeholders and businesses, via self-completion
and/or researcher-administered questionnaires.

The evidence presented in these studies concerns threemain aspects
of BSSs.

The first is about by whom, why and how BSSs are used, as this pro-
vides an understanding of how successful the schemes are in attracting
customers, and thus generating cycling journeys and revenue. Evidence
on how BSSs attract different typologies of users is also connected to is-
sues around equity of access.

The second broad aspect is about the direct and indirect impacts as-
sociated with BSS implementation and use. These include change in
travel attitudes and behaviours, effects on multi-modality and inter-
modality, and environmental, health and economic impacts.

Finally, the third aspect concerns issues around implementation and
operation of BSSs, which however have attracted academic research
scrutiny, in the form of quantitative and/or qualitative process evalua-
tion, to a relatively lesser degree.

The evidence on these broad aspects of BSSs is thematically exam-
ined in the following three sections.
8 http://www.nyc.gov/html/dcp/pdf/transportation/bike_share_part5.pdf.
3. Evidence on users and usage of bike sharing

3.1. Users' socio-economic profile and equity of access

In terms of users' socio-economic and demographic characteristics,
there is now an established and broadly consistent body of evidence.
Overall BSSs seem to attract a particular profile of user: male, white,
employed and, compared to the average population in which BSSs are
implemented, younger, more affluent, more educated and more likely
to be already engaged in cycling independently of bike sharing
(Fishman, Washington, & Haworth, 2014a; Shaheen, Martin et al.,
2012; Shaheen, Martin et al, 2014).

According to a study of Dublinbikes, Dublin (Ireland), users are pre-
dominantly male (78%), young (58.8% are between the ages of 25–36)
and on higher incomes (57.3% of respondents earn a salary of more
than €40,000) than the resident population (Murphy & Usher, 2015).
In London, real usage data revealed that women account for less than
20% of total bike sharing trips (Goodman & Cheshire, 2014) and that
under 45 s account for an estimated 78% of all bike sharing travel time
(Woodcock, Tainio, Cheshire, O'Brien, & Goodman, 2014). Similarly, a
2013 online survey of BSSmembers in five North American cities (Mon-
treal, Toronto, Salt Lake City, Minneapolis-Saint Paul, and Mexico City)
revealed that, overall, the dominant age category was the 25–34 year
old demographic and most members were of Caucasian ethnicity
(Shaheen et al., 2014).

In Beijing, Shanghai andHangzhou, bike sharing users were found to
have a higher level of car ownership than non-users, which seems to be
something unique to the Chinese context (reviewed by Fishman et al.,
2013).

Overall, evidence on users' average profile suggests that bike sharing
largely reproduces unequal patterns of participation associated more in
general with cycling, reflecting gender, class and ethnic differences in
cycling practices found in countries with low cycling levels (Steinbach,
Green, Datta, & Edwards, 2011).

Although lack of a debit/credit card has been highlighted as a barrier
to a more equitable use of BSSs by several scholars (Goodman &
Cheshire, 2014; Murphy & Usher, 2015), other more fundamental fac-
tors are likely to be at play in shaping the skewed composition of bike
sharing user base.

One of these factors concerns the scheme's geographical coverage. A
study of bike sharing in Lyon, France, for example, highlighted the un-
even spatial distribution of Vélo'v stations, with the offer concentrated
in socio-economically active areas, near multimodal transport inter-
change hubs and universities. Vélo'v's rapid success in attracting
customers, therefore, appears linked to the socio-demographic charac-
teristics of the people resident or working in such areas, i.e., students,
qualified professionals and one-person households. Nevertheless, the
relative affordability of the annualmembership (€15 in 2011) combined
with public transport integration, spatially and through the pricing pol-
icy, are also relevant to understand the scheme's success in generating
cycling journeys.

The importance of BSS geographical coverage and price in shaping
the profile of users is also acknowledged by the only two studies,
amongst those identified by this review, which specifically focus on eq-
uity of access. Both use Barclays Cycle Hire (BCH) in London, U.K., as a
case study (Goodman & Cheshire, 2014; Ogilvie & Goodman, 2012).

Overall, this evidence indicates that residents in less affluent areas
can and do use bike sharing systems if these are made available in
their local areas. In fact, Ogilvie and Goodman (2012) found that trip
rates amongst registered userswere higher amongst residents in poorer
areas after adjusting for the fact that these poorer areas were less likely
to be near a BCH docking station.

Using actual BCH usage data over three years, Goodman and
Cheshire (2014) investigated whether and to what extent the scheme
is contributing to the Mayor of London's policy aim of encouraging cy-
cling amongst a broad variety of Londoners, from different gender and
socio-economic backgrounds. The research took into account: the geo-
graphic extension of the BCH to East London inMarch 2012, with the in-
clusion of more deprived areas; and the doubling of BCH prices in
January 2013. Overall, the evidence shows that the scheme did become
more equitable over time, with the introduction of casual use which en-
couraged women to use the scheme, and with the eastern extension
which increased the share of trips made by residents of poorer areas.
However it also found that women and residents from poorer areas
remained under-represented, partly reflecting BCH use by affluent,
male commuters from within and outside London. The proportion of
trips made by users from poorer areas increased from 2.9% to 4.3%
across the study period, from July 2010 to July 2013. The doubling of
BCH prices however appears to have partially offset these positive out-
comes, with an overall decline in casual use observed after the price in-
crease that may have disproportionately occurred amongst users living
in poorer areas.

Although a comparative study of equity of access across all existing
systems is not readily available, the geographical location of bike shar-
ing stations can be plausibly regarded as a key explanatory factor to
the socio-economic profile of the scheme's users. Incidentally, station
location is mentioned as an important aspect underpinning overall
scheme profitability in qualitative surveys of BSS stakeholders
(Shaheen et al., 2012, 2014, discussed in Section 4.8) and in most bike
sharing information sources, such as those listed in Section 2. There is
also evidence that some of the most recent systems, such as City Bike
in New York City,8 have used the experience of other more established
schemes to position stations in strategic locations (e.g., areas with
intense cultural, social and economic activity) to maximise use. It is
not surprising, then, that the resulting bike sharing offer may

http://www.nyc.gov/html/dcp/pdf/transportation/bike_share_part5.pdf


31M. Ricci / Research in Transportation Business & Management 15 (2015) 28–38
disproportionally favour a particular socio-economic profile, when such
profile is concentrated precisely in the areas usually targeted by BSSs.

3.2. Determinants of and barriers to bike sharing use

Evidence on the barriers and determinants of bike sharing use ap-
pears to be growing but there are limitations in the range of case studies
examined and methodologies used.

According to user surveys conducted in different cities and coun-
tries, bike sharing can improve the experience, accessibility and afford-
ability of personal travel, through greater transport choice, reduced
journey times and reduced mobility costs. In short, the evidence sug-
gests that “convenience” in its broadest meaning consistently emerges
as the key motivating factor for bike sharing use. This has been found
by a number of studies looking at BSSs in North America, China and
Australia (Fishman et al., 2013; Shaheen et al., 2014) and other cities,
as follows.

A survey of active users of the London BCH scheme showed that the
main reasons for joining were “health/fitness”, “speed” and “conve-
nience” (Transport for London, 2015).

“Travel time savings” were mentioned as a reason to use Capital
Bikeshare (CaBi), Washington DC, by 73% of users, followed by “enjoy-
ment” (42%), “exercise” (41%) and “travel cost savings” (25%). Joining
to save money had a significant positive association with new trips, in-
dicating that bike sharing can help meet suppressed demand for travel
and make urban travel more affordable (Buehler & Hamre, 2014)

Similarly, bike sharing was perceived as cost saving by a sample of
Valencia University students, who also considered it effective to address
bicycle security/theft concerns (Molina-García, Castillo, Queralt, & Sallis,
2013). Avoidance of private bike theft and maintenance was also men-
tioned as amotivation to use BIXI inMontreal (Bachand-Marleau, Lee, &
El-Geneidy, 2012).

Barriers to joining and using bike sharing systems have been ex-
plored to a lesser extent and predominantly in an Australian context.

A qualitative study of cyclists, including BSS users, and non-cyclists
in Brisbane identified the following reasons for the relatively low
usage of CityCycle, the local BSS: mandatory helmet legislation, over-
night closure, barriers to instant access, lack of cycle infrastructure and
road safety concerns, which are also amajor barrier to cycling in general
(Fishman,Washington, &Haworth, 2012). The study found thatmanda-
tory helmets were negatively perceived by both users and operators.
Moreover, BSS users tended not to use a helmet and considered them
an inconvenience and barrier to spontaneous journeys. However,
when helmets were provided with the bike, usage was shown to in-
crease. A further quantitative study of bike sharing use in Australian cit-
ies (Fishman, Washington, Haworth, & Mazzei, 2014b) found that
inconvenience compared to other motorised transport and distance
from home, work or other key destinations were key barriers to join
and use the BSSs.

In terms of factors that increase the likelihood of bike sharing use,
proximity of residence to docking stations appears to be strongly corre-
lated with use, as well as socio-economic characteristics and travel
behaviours.

Two independent survey-based studies of Montreal residents, in-
cluding users and non-users of BIXI, showed that people living within
250 m of a docking station were over twice as likely to become users
of the bike sharing system as those living further away (Fuller et al.,
2011), and those living within 500 m of a docking station were three
times as likely (Bachand-Marleau et al., 2012).

Additionally, Fuller et al. (2011) reported that being aged 18–
24 years, being university educated and using cycling as the primary
mode of transport to work correlated with bike sharing use. This reso-
nates with other findings on users' profile reported in Section 3.1.

The survey conducted by Bachand-Marleau et al. (2012) revealed
that different factors were at play in influencing a. the likelihood and
b. the frequency of using BIXI. In particular, spatial factors and travel
habits appeared to determine likelihood, whilst users personal prefer-
ences, such as annual membership, aversion to bike maintenance and
positive opinion about BIXI bike design, correlatedmorewith frequency
of use.

Similarly, a before-after survey-based study of a sample of Valencia
University students (Molina-García et al., 2013), examining change in
cycling behaviour including use of the Valenbisi BSS, found that those
most likely to become users were students who had one or more sta-
tionswithin 250mof home,were already contemplating to start cycling
and perceived fewer infrastructural and safety barriers to active
commuting.

3.3. Usage characteristics: bike sharing rates, patterns and purpose of use

In terms of usage rates, Fishman et al. (2013) found discrepancies in
the evidence provided bydifferent sources on the same scheme. Overall,
reported usage rates vary from 3–8 trips per day per bike, and these
have been found to increase significantly in conjunction with disrup-
tions to the public transport systems. Some schemes, such as BCH in
London and Capital Bikeshare (CaBi) in theWashington DC area, report-
ed high usage levels, with each bike producing on average 3 trips per
day (Fishman et al., 2014a). BCH was launched in July 2010, currently
comprises over 10,000 bicycles across 100 km2 at more than 750 loca-
tions, and has generated over 32 million cycling trips to date
(Transport for London, 2014). CaBi opened in September 2010, with
over 2500 bicycles at more than 300 stations (Buehler & Hamre,
2014). Other schemes are comparably less used thus less successful in
attracting customers, e.g., in Australia with 0.3–0.4 trips per day per
bike (Fishman et al., 2013).

Several studies have addressed usage patterns and their characteri-
sation focusing on different BSSs. This area of research, which is
attracting growing academic interest, is likely to be fuelled by the in-
creased availability of large datasets on BSS users, bicycles and stations
on one side, and the parallel enhancement of visual analytic and data
mining techniques on the other. These can achieve enhanced results
by processing and overlaying data from multiple sources, for example
by linking spatio-temporal bicycle movement data to the data of the
BSS users responsible for them. These combined advances have signifi-
cantly expanded the research opportunities on bike sharing and have
the potential to significantly contribute to scheme planning, operation,
monitoring and evaluation.

Applying data mining techniques to a large dataset from the London
scheme, Lathia, Ahmed, and Capra (2012) found that a change to the
BCH access policy in December 2010, which allowed ‘casual’ users ac-
cess the scheme for spontaneous journeys without the need to register
for an annual membership, affected the system's usage patterns
throughout the city but with great spatio-temporal variations. Whilst
generally reinforcing week-day commuting trends, the policy change
also generated greater weekend usage and determined a complete re-
versal of usage in a number of stations. This implies that different
types of users, in this case annual members and more occasional
users, can have distinctive preferences and patterns of use.

Varied usage patterns can also become apparent within the same
user category, e.g., annual members, with gender emerging as a key
variable. Vogel et al. (2014) developed a segmentation of Vélo'v
users according to the intensity and regularity of their bike sharing
behaviours, ranging from ‘users of heart’ to ‘sporadic users’, which
echoes more general typologies of cyclists. Significant in these find-
ings was the distinctively gendered characterisation of the resulting
user typologies, with the intensity of cycling practice strongly linked
to being male.

Using a large smart-card-based dataset from Nanjing, China, Zhao,
Wang, and Deng (in press) were able to detect significant gender and
temporal variations in bike sharing travel time and trip chain patterns.
Women in particular were more likely to make multiple-circle bike
sharing trip chains (i.e., with multiple destinations but same start and



32 M. Ricci / Research in Transportation Business & Management 15 (2015) 28–38
end point) than men, especially on week days. This is consistent with
more general gender differences in travel patterns, which see women
undertake more complex trip chaining to carry out household and
childcare related tasks.

Gender and temporal variables also emerged as important di-
mensions in a study of group-cycling (i.e., journeys made by two or
more users together in space and time) using data from the London
BCH (Beecham & Wood, 2014a). The research found that group-
cycling fitted a general and expected pattern associated with discre-
tionary activities, with group journeys more likely to occur at week-
ends, late evenings and lunchtimes; generally taking place within
more pleasant parts of the city; and between individuals apparently
known to each other. With respect to gender, female cyclists were
found to be more likely to make late evening journeys when cycling
in groups and women were very significantly overrepresented
amongst so-called ‘first time group cyclists’, i.e., users for whom
the very first BCH journey was a group journey.

Studying the spatio-temporal context under which bike sharing
journeys are made on the London scheme, another study by the
same authors (Beecham & Wood, 2014b) found that women's jour-
neys were highly spatially structured. Even for utilitarian cycle
trips, routes involving large, multi-lane roads were comparatively
rare, with female users preferentially selecting areas of the city asso-
ciated with slower traffic and more segregated cycle routes.

A study using real usage data from BIXI, Montreal, combined with
a general statistical modelling technique (Faghih-Imani, Eluru, El-
Geneidy, Rabbat, & Haq, 2014) identified the following key correlates
to bicycle flows: weather conditions, with users more likely to bike-
share under good weather conditions; time of day/week: during the
weekends the bicycle usage reduced, however Friday and Saturday
nights were positively correlated to arrival and departure rates; the
provision of cycle infrastructure, with bicycle flows and usage of
the BSS increasing with cycle lanes/paths nearby a BIXI station; and
the characteristics of the built environment around the stations,
with bicycle flows decreasing further away from the core business
district. Accessibility indicators appeared to be correlated to bicycle
usage for every BIXI station. Restaurants, other commercial enter-
prises and universities in the vicinity of a station significantly influ-
enced the arrival and departure rates of the BIXI station. Population
density and job density around bike sharing stations appeared to in-
fluence demand and usage rates at different times of the day/week.

The BIXI system variables, i.e., number of stations and capacity,
were shown to have a complex relationship with arrivals and depar-
tures. The model found that reallocating capacity by adding a further
BIXI station had a stronger impact on bicycle flows compared to in-
creasing one station's capacity. This means that dense bike sharing
station networks may have a beneficial effect on usage levels. In-
creasingly sophisticated techniques are being developed to estimate
the optimal location and capacity of stations, for example using GIS-
based models (García-Palomares, Gutiérrez, & Latorre, 2012)

As in the BIXI study, the importance of cycling infrastructure in
supporting bike sharing journeys is also reported in a study of CaBi,
Washington DC, which showed a significant relationship between
bike share activity and the presence of bike lanes (reviewed by
Fishman et al., 2013).

Combining usage data with members' residence data, Ogilvie and
Goodman (2012) found that proximity of residence to bike sharing
stations significantly increased frequency of use of the London BCH
scheme. This contrasts with the evidence provided by Bachand-
Marleau et al. (2012), which identified users' personal preferences
as a key determinant of frequency of use, but this is likely to be due
to the different BSS under study and methodology/data used.

Work-related purposes dominate bike sharing use, as the avail-
able evidence on journey purpose suggests. However, the prevalence
of different purposes may be influenced by gender and temporal var-
iables, such as time of the day and day of the week.
Commutingwas themost common purpose found in a survey-based
study of four North American schemes in 2011/12, namelyWashington
DC, Minneapolis-Saint Paul, Montreal and Toronto (Shaheen et al.,
2012).

Similarly, work-related purposes (commuting and travel on
employer's business) dominate the use of Barclays Cycle Hire in
London (Transport for London, 2014). Moreover, according to
Beecham andWood (2014b), purpose of use of the London BCH is high-
ly gendered. Usage amongst men was found to be highly regular, sug-
gesting a strong commuter function, whilst recreational journeys over
weekends and within London parks appeared to be more dominant
for female members.

Trip purpose profiles in Dublin were found to be different between
am peak (7:30–10:00) and pm off-peak (19:00–21:30), with commut-
ing dominating peak times (85.3%) and non-work purposes more prev-
alent in non-peak times, chiefly leisure (48.3%). No significant
difference was found between the income levels and age profile of
users during the peak and off-peak times (Murphy & Usher, 2015).

4. Evidence on the impacts of bike sharing

4.1. Transport mode substitution

This area of impacts has received comparably more attention and
there are now several studies looking at this issue across different
BSSs. Fishman et al. (2013) report that the ability of bike sharing to at-
tract trips previously made by private vehicles remains a key challenge,
with the available evidence exposing relatively low mode substitution
rates and suggesting that bike sharing is predominantly used instead
of walking and public transport.

For example, although Dublinbikes users reported considerable be-
havioural change, the prevailing trend showed a large modal shift
(80.2%) from sustainable modes of travel to the bicycle, particularly
from walking (45.6%) and including transfer from bus (25.8%) and rail
(8.8%). The scheme was much less successful at achieving modal shift
from the private car (19.8%)whichwas attributed to the relatively com-
pact space in which the scheme operates. Statistical analysis showed
that modal shift amongst higher income earners was most likely to be
from car to bicycle or from rail to bicycle, whilst for lower income
groups modal shift to the bicycle was more likely to occur from bus to
bicycle or from walking to the bicycle (Murphy & Usher, 2015).

Similarly, findings from a variety of user surveys suggest that modal
shift from the private car occurs only for a minority of bike sharing
users. Amongst European examples are:

• London BCH, UK — 2% of car trips substituted for (Fishman et al.,
2014a);

• Vélo'v, Lyon, France— 7% (Fishman et al., 2013);
• Bicing, Barcelona, Spain — 9.6% (Rojas-Rueda et al., 2011).

Examples outside Europe include:

• BIXI Montreal, Canada— 2% (Bachand-Marleau et al., 2012);
• Capital Bikeshare, Washington DC, US — 7%
• Nice RideMinnesota in the twin cities ofMinneapolis-Saint Paul, US—
19.3%

• Melbourne Bike Share, Australia — 19%
• CityCycle Brisbane, Australia 21% (all reported in Fishman et al., 2013,
2014a).

On their own, however, these mode substitution results do not offer
detailed information on the magnitude of further impacts, such as on
traffic levels and public health, including that of the users. This is be-
cause other important data are needed, notably the frequency of car
journeys substituted for, their previous duration and route, which are



33M. Ricci / Research in Transportation Business & Management 15 (2015) 28–38
not normally collected. Specific data on newly generated journeys, i.e.,
not previously made at all, including their purpose and frequency, are
important to capture the broader benefits of bike sharing on the overall
well-being of users. However, this type of information is not always and
consistently collected in scheme users' surveys.

4.2. Broader changes in users' travel behaviours

In addition tomode substitution effects, bike sharing has been found
to influence and change the wider travel behaviour of users, but with
differing results in different contexts and in respect of different trans-
port modes.

With respect to cycling, bike sharing appears to increase the fre-
quency in which a bicycle (personal or shared) is used, thus contribut-
ing to promote cycling behaviour and increase overall cycling levels.
As BSS users don't generally use helmets or other dedicated cycling
clothing, bike sharing can potentially normalise the image of cycling
(Goodman, Green, & Woodcock, 2014).

A before–after study examining whether exposure to Montreal's
BIXI scheme was associated with an increase in total cycling, including
cycling on BIXI and personal bicycles, and accounting for both utility
and leisure cycling, found that BIXI led to greater likelihood of cycling
amongst people living in areas where shared bicycles were made avail-
able. In particular, a greater likelihood of cyclingwas observed for those
exposed to the BSS after the second season of implementation whilst
controlling for weather, built environment, and individual variables
(Fuller et al., 2013).

A recent survey of active users of the London BSS showed that 78%
reported starting to cycle or cycling more as a result of the scheme
(Transport for London, 2015).

Eight months after scheme implementation, 19% of the sampled Va-
lencia University students had become BSS users; cycling as the main
mode of transport to university had increased from 7 to 11%; and the
proportion of participants engaged in cycling increased by 14.6%.
There was no change in behaviour for students who had always access
to car/motorbike, lived further than 5 km from the university and had
no bike sharing stations within 250 m from home (Molina-García
et al., 2013).

The Dublin schemewas reported to promote the use of the bicycle as
a transport mode beyond bike sharing and encourage users to purchase
a bike. 68.4% of sampled users claimed not to have cycled for their cur-
rent trip prior to the launch of Dublinbikes, and 63.4% who own their
own private bicycle said they purchased it as a result of using the
scheme (Murphy & Usher, 2015).

Most BSS users surveyed in 2011/12 in four North American cities
(Shaheen et al., 2012) reported an increase in their cycling levels (72%
cycling more, 22% the same, 5% less) as a result of bike sharing. Similar
results were found by a 2013 survey of BSS members in five North
American cities (Montreal, Toronto, Salt Lake City, Minneapolis-Saint
Paul, and Mexico City) (Shaheen et al., 2014).

Considering changes in car driving, the available evidence suggests
that bike sharing can reduce car use. Across the four North American
schemes surveyed by Shaheen et al. (2012), 40% of users overall re-
duced car use, with the remaining 60% reporting no change. In their
most recent study, Shaheen et al. (2014) found that the share of respon-
dents who reported driving less as a result of bike sharing ranged from
29% in Montreal and 35% in Toronto to over 50% in Mexico City,
Minneapolis-Saint Paul, and Salt Lake City. It is worth noting that the
share of members who did not drive prior to joining the bike sharing
scheme varied greatly across the cities, from 8% in Salt Lake City to
51% in Montreal.

Evidence on behaviour change inwalking anduse of public transport
modes as a result of bike sharing is more mixed and appears to depend
upon the particular schemeattributes, transport infrastructure, built en-
vironment and population characteristics/travel patterns/preferences in
the cities implementing the schemes.
The study by Shaheen et al. (2012) found the followingmodal shifts
across the four North American schemes: bus (56% no change, 38% re-
duced use, 7% increased use), rail (48%, 43%, 9%), walking (43%, 34%,
23%).

In their second study, Shaheen et al. (2014) found similar results
overall but also different patterns of behavioural change across the sam-
pled cities. Most members in the North American cities surveyed either
reduced their use of the bus or did not change their behaviour, except in
Salt Lake City. Rail usage increased as a result of bike sharing in
Minneapolis-Saint Paul and Salt Lake City. In contrast, a decrease in
rail usage was found in both Canadian cities and Mexico City, justified
by the larger population size and denser rail networks. Across all cities
surveyed, the main reasons for using the bus/rail less were reduced
cost and faster travel offered by bike sharing and, for bus users, a desire
to get exercise. The most common response to increasing bus/rail use
due to bike sharing was better access both to and from a bus/rail line.
The evidence around walking behaviour change was more mixed in
this study, with only Mexico City respondents markedly increasing
their walking levels as a result of bike sharing. By overlaying actual
usage data of Nice Ride Minnesota for 2013 to the survey data, the
study found that those respondents shifting away the most from any
modes tended to use bike sharing with greater frequency.

The main weakness of this body of evidence on travel behaviour
change is the lack of reliable quantitative data on the extent, in terms
of frequency and magnitude, of the change in overall motorised travel
on one hand and active travel on the other. As a result, the available ev-
idence on travel behaviour outcomes cannot currently be used to ro-
bustly determine direct and indirect impacts, for example on public
health and the environment.

The reviewed studies offer a number of possible explanations for the
different patterns of behaviour change across different BSSs. For exam-
ple, Fishman et al. (2013) suggested that BSS users in cities with rela-
tively high car modal share exhibited a higher car mode substitution
rate than BSS users in cities with an already low car modal share. How-
ever, robust statistical analysis of data from existing schemes is needed
to check whether this observation can be supported.

Other contextual factors identified as possible reasons for differen-
tial patterns of change in relation to public transport use include the
quality, level of service and patronage of the available public transport
options (Shaheen et al., 2014). To shed light on these issues, Martin
and Shaheen (2014) further interrogated the users' survey datasets ob-
tained in two North American cities (Washington DC and Minneapolis)
bymapping geocoded home andwork locations of respondents. Behav-
ioural shifts away from public transport in response to bike sharing
were found to be most prominent in core urban environments
characterised by high population density, whilst shifts towards public
transport were most common in lower density areas on the urban pe-
riphery. The authors suggest that, for those users living in areas with
less available/frequent public transport options, bike sharing can gener-
ate public transport journeys by acting as a first or last mile connection.

4.3. Effects on and synergies with public transport use

Bike sharing can, at the same time, connect to and substitute for pub-
lic transport. The exact outcome of this combination is the result of a
complex interrelationship amongst various factors, such as the charac-
teristics of the scheme, its users and the locationwhere it is implement-
ed, including public transport infrastructure attributes and population
travel behaviours and preferences. An increasing number of studies
have started to link together data on all the above factors to better un-
derstand the patterns of bike share and public transport interaction.

An analysis of bike sharing usage in Melbourne, revealed that the
number of trips was significantly higher for docking stations located in
areas with relatively less accessible public transit opportunities, sug-
gesting that the BSS was potentially substituting for public transport
rather than connecting to it (Fishman et al., 2014b).



34 M. Ricci / Research in Transportation Business & Management 15 (2015) 28–38
This contrasts with evidence from other cities such as London
(Goodman & Cheshire, 2014), Washington DC and Paris (Shaheen et al.,
2014), where bike sharing usage was significantly higher in correspon-
dence to rail stations (London and Washington DC) and Metro stations
(Paris). The direction of the bicycle flows is a key variable in this respect.
For example, statistical and visual analytic techniques applied to the BSS
in Nanjing, China, allowed Zhao et al. (in press) to ascertain that rail sta-
tions attracted bike sharing trips the most, whilst docking stations in res-
idential areas produced outward bike sharing trips the most.

In London, Goodman and Cheshire (2014) found the BCH to be rela-
tively popular with non-Londoners from commuter towns with a cy-
cling culture such as Oxford and Cambridge, suggesting that strategic
marketing of a BSS in rail-connected commuter towns with an existing
cycling culture could potentially increase participation and support
bike-rail integration. It must be noted here that women were found to
be particularly under-represented in this group of non-resident com-
muters (Beecham & Wood, 2014b)

In Dublin, a sizable minority of BSS users (39%) reported using the
scheme in conjunction with another mode to complete their trip, pri-
marily public transport: 56.3% rail and 35.2% bus. Overall the scheme
appears to support cycle-only journeys starting and ending in the cen-
tral area, however it also helps users to connect to rail and bus, which
are reported to be largely segregated within the wider Dublin transport
network (Murphy & Usher, 2015).

Similarly, evidence on BIXI in Montreal (Bachand-Marleau et al.,
2012) suggests that the scheme supports single journeys (for 57% of
survey respondents) as well as inter-connected journeys, in particular
those combining bike sharing with metro (30%). Bike–bus integration
was less prevalent (12%).

4.4. Impacts on attitudes to cyclists

The impact of BSSs on attitudes to cyclists has received very little at-
tention to date thus evidence is particularly limited. The study of
Dublinbikes reported that bike sharing can contribute towards raising
awareness and acceptance of cyclists, and increasing road safety for cy-
clists. Over 80% of survey respondents were also car drivers. Of these,
93.8% said that using the Dublinbikes scheme had raised their aware-
ness of cyclists on the road whilst driving (Murphy & Usher, 2015).
Fishman et al. (2012) found that BSS users in Brisbane perceived better
behaviour from motorists when riding the shared bikes than when cy-
cling with their own bikes.

4.5. Environmental impacts

Many commentators and publications supportive of bike sharing
provide estimates of the CO2 emission savings resulting from bike
share use to suggest positive environmental impacts. However the sig-
nificance of these results is questionable because such estimates are
not normally substantiated with robust evidence from usage data and/
or user surveys, but rest on the invalid assumption that all bike sharing
journeys substitute for car journeys.

One study, amongst the ones reviewed, attempted to conduct a
more realistic, indirect, assessment of the environmental impacts of
bike sharing. Using data fromBSSs in London (UK),Melbourne and Bris-
bane (Australia), Washington DC and Minnesota in the U.S., Fishman
et al. (2014a) examined the net changes to motor vehicle use as a con-
sequence of bike sharing, by looking at substitution rates for car modal
share but, crucially, also accounting for the impact of anymotor vehicles
used for bike re-distribution (also called re-balancing) and mainte-
nance. Re-distribution of bicycles is necessary to correct any imbalance
in the number of available bikes and free docking points across the
network.

The findings suggest that bike sharing can increase rather than re-
duce overall motor vehicle usage, when the effect of bike maintenance
and re-distribution is accounted for. The single factor thatmostly affect-
ed overall motor vehicle use in this study was rate of car substitution.

More in detail, bike sharing reduced the overall distance travelled by
motor vehicle except in London, where for each km saved there were
2.2 km generated by the re-distribution fleet, with associated negative
environmental impacts. The study estimated that if car substitution
rate in London was 10% (instead of 2%), then the overall impact would
be reversed. Looking at all the cities combined, the impact was negative,
as London accounted for most of the redistribution fleet's travelled
kilometres. This study suggests that BSSs can be successful in reducing
motorised vehicle use but this depends on the combined effect of mem-
bers' usage of the scheme and the scheme's redistribution fleet and
maintenance operations.

A key limitation of this study relates to the inability to include the
contribution of casual users, who have been shown to have a different
pattern of use than those of members (Lathia et al., 2012).

No evidence on life-cycle analysis of bike sharing compared with
other measures or scenarios has been identified.

4.6. Health impacts

Health impacts from bike sharing have recently started to attract at-
tention and a few studies are now available, which collectively suggest
that bike sharing can have health benefits. However the differentmeth-
odological approaches used do not allow for reliable comparative
assessments.

A before–after study of BIXI,Montreal, found increased cycling levels
amongst those who lived in proximity of docking stations, suggesting
that BSSs can lead to increased cycling thus indirectly promoting public
health. However, this study does not indicate whether, and to what ex-
tent, the increase in cycling levels is accompanied by a decrease in other
forms of physical activity, such as walking, as a result of bike share use
(Fuller et al., 2013).

Commuting by Valenbisi was found to provide about half the recom-
mendedweekly physical activity (150min) and a small reduction in the
students' Body Mass Index (BMI) was reported. These results suggest
that BSSs can have a positive role in the promotion of healthy weight,
potentially preventing 2 kg/academic year of weight gain (Molina-
García et al., 2013). Similarly, a survey of Capital Bikeshare users found
that, of over 3100 responses, 31.5% reported reduced stress, and about
30% indicated they lost weight as a result of using the scheme
(Shaheen et al., 2014). However, the study of Dublinbikes reported
that health benefits to users were likely to be minimal given the signif-
icant modal shift from walking (Murphy & Usher, 2015).

Positive health benefits from bike sharing have been reported by
two health impact studies using different modelling techniques, data
and assumptions.

The most recent, based on actual data from the London BCH, mea-
sured the change in lifelong disability adjusted life years based on one
year impacts on incidence of disease and injury, modelled through me-
dium term changes in physical activity, road traffic injuries, and expo-
sure to air pollution. Overall the research estimated a positive health
impact, but not currently accruing equally to the different social groups
using the scheme (Woodcock et al., 2014). The benefits were clearer for
men than for women, because of higher cycle injury rates for females,
and for older users than for younger users. A limitation of this study is
that it only modelled health benefits from short-medium term behav-
iour change, without accounting for the possibility that cycling at a par-
ticular age increases cycling across the life course, or otherwise affects
disease incidence at older ages. According to the authors, reliable data
on such long term effects are limited and their omission in the model
may have underestimated the lifetime health benefits to those who
start cycling at young ages.

The other health impact study, using Bicing in Barcelona as a case
study (Rojas-Rueda, de Nazelle, Tainio, & Nieuwenhuijsen, 2011), esti-
mated 69.2 deaths averted per million users per year, significantly



35M. Ricci / Research in Transportation Business & Management 15 (2015) 28–38
higher than the results obtained by the London study, which generated
estimates of 3.3 to 10.9. This is due to the different schemes and cities
under consideration, models used and assumptions made.

4.7. Economic impacts on users and local businesses

Only two studies seeking to quantify the local economic impacts of
bike sharing have been identified. This arguably limited evidence is
however consistent and suggests that bike sharing can generate eco-
nomic benefits at the neighbourhood level and contribute to enhancing
local economies. Themagnitude of such benefits, and associated level of
confidence, is however limited. Other types of economic benefits, such
as on employment and to the stakeholders involved in BSS delivery
and operation, have not been considered by the reviewed studies.

Buehler and Hamre (2014) investigated potential economic benefits
of CaBi, Washington DC, at the neighbourhood level through a survey of
users and businesses proximate to bike sharing stations. Only a minority
of surveyed users (23%) reported spending more money because they
used CaBi. Statistical analysis found that income levelwas positively asso-
ciated with new trips, spending levels, and spending during new trips.
The literatures reviewed by this study suggest that cycling and bike shar-
ing are associated with consumer spending and some induced travel and
that cycling facilities can attract customers to nearby businesses. The busi-
ness survey showed that whilst 70% identified a positive impact of BSS on
the neighbourhood, only 20% reported a positive direct impact of bike
sharing on sales. In addition, 61% would have either a positive or neutral
reaction to replacing car parking in front of their business with a bike
sharing station butwere less favourable towards converting the sidewalk.
These attitudes, the authors suggest,may depend on the characteristics of
the area. InWashingtonDC, possibly because of traffic congestion and rel-
atively extensive public transport, businesses may be more used to non-
driving customers and would agree with converting part of the parking
spaces to bike sharing spaces. Businesses that perceived a positive impact
on sales from the BSS were more likely to support the expansion of the
system and the replacement of car parking with bike sharing stations.

The other study, by Schoner, Harrison, andWang (2012) and looking
at Nice Ride Minnesota, also found positive economic impacts and esti-
mated that BSSs can generate additional economic activity in the prox-
imity of bike stations. An average of US$1.29 per week was reported,
which would equate to US$29,000 over the season April to November.

Limitations of both studies include survey administration at a partic-
ular time of the year, which affects the results obtained, and the fact that
both the user and business surveys collected estimated spending infor-
mation based on subjective assessments and perceptions, rather than
actual monetary transactions.

As discussed earlier in Section 3.2, bike sharing can further benefit
users by reducing both transport costs and travel time.Whilst the former
type of benefit has not been assessed quantitatively, a few studies have
tried to estimate the latter, which has relevant economic implications.

Using actual usage data on bike sharing journeys, including duration
and distance, Jensen, Rouquier, Ovtracht, and Robardet (2010) found
that most journeys on the Lyon scheme were shorter than a trip by
car and calculated a 13% reduction in travel time compared to using a
car for the same journey. In their study of the health impacts of the
London BCH,Woodcock et al. (2014) estimated a 20% average time sav-
ing for trips made using the shared bikes as opposed to the alternative
modes used previously. Although these estimates for time saving have
not been translated into monetary benefits by the respective studies, a
report by Transport for London (2014) provides a calculation of these
and other benefits as part of a broader economic appraisal of the
London BCH. This is discussed in the following section.

4.8. Financial viability and wider economic benefits

An important area of ‘success’ emerging from various guides to bike
sharing implementation is the ability of BSSs to generate revenue, hence
reducing the amount of public funding or other subsidies and sponsor-
ships necessary to run these schemes. According to the specific BSS
governance model, local governments can support bike sharing directly
with a subsidy or indirectly by allowing operators to advertise on the bi-
cycles, stations or other public spaces. Overall, the readily available evi-
dence on the financial viability of existing bike sharing systems is
limited and predominantly anecdotal or qualitative in nature. This may
be due to the commercial sensitivity of such information and the specific
BSS contractual arrangements. Only one quantitative economic appraisal
has been identified amongst the publicly available literature (Transport
for London, 2014).

Interviews with North American scheme operators (Shaheen et al.,
2012, 2014) found that membership fees, usage fees, and sponsorships
account for the vast majority of operating income. Additionally, four key
factors impactingprofitabilitywere identified: the location of bike sharing
stations, in particular near tourist attractions and public transport, and in
mixed-use areas; the ability to retain registered members, e.g., annual
members; providing a range of discounts; and, finally, the ability to find
new revenue sources. The interviewed operators also stressed that whilst
securing a strong core of annual members was important to success, tai-
loring the system to encourage occasional/casual use was imperative for
a system's long-term economic viability, especially in lieu of public
subsidy.

A recent economic appraisal of the Barclays Cycle Hire by Transport
for London (2014) found a Benefit-To-Cost Ratio (BCR) of 0.7:1 based on
outturn costs, revenues and benefits realised to date plus forecasts up to
2017/18. The monetised benefits realised to 2013/14 accounted for
£55.3 m of the expected total of £129.4 m to 2017/18 and included:
journey time savings of £26 m (£61.2 m expected overall to 2017/18);
health benefits of £22.5 m (£70 m overall); ambience benefits of
£7.4 m (£20.6 m overall). Ambience benefits include the provision of
way-finding at stations, the value of a new bicycle andmaintained bicy-
cle, improvements in bicycle and docking point availability and the
value of CCTV and lighting at docking stations. The total cost of the
scheme to date is £133 m, including both capital and operating costs.

In purely economic terms, the results of this appraisal look
unfavourable (O'Brien, 2015). However, these results reflect the as-
sumptions made in selecting and attributing monetary values to the
benefits of bike sharing. An important question arises: since standard
economic appraisal techniques have been developed, and hence are
more suitable, for evaluating large transport infrastructure projects,
how can they adequately capture the ‘value’ of bike sharing interven-
tions for a variety of beneficiaries, and especially given the current lim-
ited range and depth of the evidence around bike sharing benefits? This
issue is discussed in the concluding section of the paper in relation to
developing evaluation frameworks that are suitable for bike sharing.

5. Evidence on the process of bike sharing implementation and
operation

Only two studies (Shaheen et al., 2012, 2014) appear to have system-
atically collected and analysed the views of BSS operators and stake-
holders to understand the ‘process’ of bike sharing implementation and
operation, such as drivers, barriers and lessons learnt. However, these
studies concern only the North American context. Other commentaries
and analyses of bike sharing, such as those listed in Section 2, provide rec-
ommendations based on the collective knowledge and practical experi-
ence of the authors. Importantly in this discussion of processes, Beroud
and Anaya (2012) offer a detailed analysis of the different models of BSS
governance according to the specific roles played by the public and pri-
vate sectors in scheme promotion, equipment provision and scheme op-
eration. The particular governance arrangement, including the specific
and legally-binding service contracts between the parties involved, is cru-
cial to understand the financial, regulatory, organisational and legal con-
texts within which each scheme operates. In turn, knowledge of these
contexts is essential to understand howBSSs can evolve and be improved,



36 M. Ricci / Research in Transportation Business & Management 15 (2015) 28–38
and crucially howmore systematic and consistentmonitoring data collec-
tion/generation could be achieved.

In-depth process evaluations of existing schemes, using robust
methodologies to survey all the involved stakeholders and taking into
account the different governance models, are needed to improve
knowledge of what works, and under what circumstances, in delivering
and operating BSSs.

Most importantly, the available ‘process evidence’ suggests that bike
sharing is dependent upon political, policy and public support to sustain-
able travel and cycling in particular. Positive cycling culture, growing cy-
cling levels and pro-cycling policy measures, such as the provision of
quality cycle infrastructure, have all been identified as important comple-
mentary factors that can sustain bike sharing during and after
implementation.

The London scheme, for example, was conceived and implemented
in the broader context of the Mayor's Transport Strategy, the Mayor's
‘Cycling Revolution’ and effectively contributes to deliver the Mayor's
Vision for Cycling in London (Transport for London, 2014).

Moreover, this and other successful schemes, such as Dublinbikes in
Ireland and Bixi in Montreal, were implemented alongside improve-
ments in the cycling infrastructure and in the context of sustained pos-
itive cycling trends (Fuller et al., 2013; Murphy & Usher, 2015).

According to the stakeholders' survey conducted by Shaheen et al.
(2012, 2014), challenges to delivery and operation include bicycle re-
distribution, which can be a complex and costly task to organise; address-
ing negative perceptions of cycling as unsafe and, in certain cultures (e.g.,
Mexico City), associated with being poor; mandatory helmet legislation;
insurance and other legal issues. Vandalism and theft were both reported
to negligible, as were bike sharing accident rates (4.3 accidents per year
for schemes with over 1000 bikes are reported).

Drivers, i.e., facilitating factors, include: establishing partnerships
within local government and with community stakeholders; marketing
and public outreach prior to and after launch, e.g., by engaging the pub-
lic through public fora and online-based ‘suggest-a-station’ platforms;
locating bike sharing stations through appropriate spatial analysis to
support system use; employing mobile station technology that can be
easily relocated according to usage patterns; the use of advanced tech-
nologies to track bicycles, understand user behaviour, deter bike theft
and support system management, for example through pay-as-you-go
services; and facilitating membership portability and interoperability.

Similar recommendations are provided by Transport for London
(2014), in particular around the value of enhanced partnership working
with London Boroughs; the adoption of appropriate project management
tools to control costs and improve scheme delivery; detailed launchman-
agement; accounting for customer feedback; adopting a system software
with enhanced asset management, automated job scheduling capabilities
and improved billing and customer self-service processes.

Amongst the challenges experienced in the delivery, operation and
evaluation of the Barclays Cycle Hire, Transport for London (2014) high-
lights the lack of performance benchmarks specifically for bike sharing
at the time of scheme implementation, and the need for improved
bike sharing modelling/appraisal techniques and tools.

6. Discussion and conclusion

This review has found that the overall evidence on the impacts, and
especially on thebenefits, of bike sharing is growingbut is still limited in
terms of the range of case studies available, the methods used, the data
collected and/or generated, and the range of characteristics and impacts
that have been examined. Further research is needed to allow for sys-
tematic comparative analysis of schemes and to increase the level of
confidence associated with the results.

Similarly, this review has found a very limited range of robust evi-
dence on the ‘process’ of setting up and operating BSSs. In-depth pro-
cess evaluations, using robust methodologies to survey all the
involved stakeholders, are needed to improve knowledge of what
processes work and under what circumstances, including the role of
the specific governancemodel. Such process evaluationswould also ad-
vance knowledge of the characteristics that support or hinder the con-
tinuing ‘success’ of a scheme. Crucially, evidence on whether schemes
are successful according to their original objectives is also lacking.

In what follows, key results in terms of impact and process evi-
dence are summarised and used to make recommendations for
both urban sustainable mobility policy and academic inquiry. In
terms of policy, some of the available evidence is helpful to under-
stand how particular beneficial impacts, or positive implementation
and operation processes, could be replicated or optimised in other
locations wishing to introduce bike sharing. In terms of academic in-
quiry, the strengths and limitations of the reviewed evidence can be
used to sketch a future research agenda for evaluation, by suggesting
possible directions concerning topics of investigation, data to be
used and research methods.

Perhaps the most significant consideration to be drawn from the all
reviewed evidence, on impacts and processes, is that bike sharing benefits
from, and is dependent upon, clear political, policy and public support to
sustainable mobility and cycling in particular. The development of a pos-
itive cycling culture, growing cycling levels and pro-cycling policy mea-
sures, such as the provision of quality cycle infrastructure, have all been
identified as important complementary, and in some cases determining,
factors that can sustain bike sharing during and after implementation.
Process evidence also identified partnership working and continuing in-
volvement of stakeholders and local communities as facilitators to bike
sharing implementation.

Bike sharing, in turn, has the potential to further promote the image
and the practice of cycling, through increasing cycling levels and contrib-
uting to normalise cycling, as some of the evidence shows. Further inves-
tigation that would enhance this area of evidence includes studying the
effects of bike sharing on thewider population, through a survey address-
ing perceptions of the schemes and attitudes to cycling and cyclists,which
would improve understanding of whether and to what extent BSSs can
act as catalysts for private bike riding and help normalise cycling as a
transport mode.

Obviously, the potential to promote the image and the practice of cy-
cling can only be realised if BSSs generate a considerable amount of cy-
cling journeys and become highly visible in the areas where they are
implemented. In other words, achieving high usage rates and a large
user base are often used as the metrics to judge, as a rule of thumb,
whether BSSs are effective and successful. This is also linked to the abil-
ity of schemes to generate revenue.

Some of the evidence on impacts (e.g., studies of BIXI and Vélo'v) and
processes (e.g., on North American schemes) reviewed here suggests that
such goals can be achieved by establishing bike sharing as a dense net-
work in areaswith intense social, cultural, leisure and economic activities,
and in connection with public transport networks. Meanwhile, the in-
creasing availability and quality of detailed data at the level of the user, bi-
cycle and station, coupledwith the ongoing development of sophisticated
datamining, visualisation andprocessing techniques, are dramatically en-
hancing the ability to understand what factors contribute to boost usage
rates and membership levels. Over-reliance on these factors as principal
indicators of success, however, can lead to neglect other important
aspects.

Achieving success in terms of cycle journey generation, for example,
does not guarantee that BSSs are also socially inclusive. An established
and broadly consistent body of evidence suggests that bike sharing
tends to attract a particular profile of user: male, white, employed
and, compared to the average population, younger, more affluent,
more educated and more likely to be already engaged in cycling inde-
pendently of bike sharing.

If promoters and operators of BSSs wish to achieve equity of access,
then schemes need to be made available, accessible, affordable and at-
tractive to a variety of social groups and types of users (e.g., registered
members and occasional users). For example, by developing special



37M. Ricci / Research in Transportation Business & Management 15 (2015) 28–38
pricing policies/discounts for low-income or other target groups, aswell
as providing multiple types of cycles suitable for different uses.

More fundamentally however, bike sharing systems cannot become
more socially inclusive if they are persistently designed andmarketed to
appeal to the sensibilities and interests of particular types of users, and
made available predominantly in areas where such types of users hap-
pen to live, work or visit. Although systems can evolve to cover more
disadvantaged areas, as the London scheme has done, it remains prob-
lematic to reconcile the need to demonstrate financial and usage suc-
cess on one hand, and social inclusivity on the other. Nevertheless,
showing a commitment to be more inclusive may also help BSS pro-
moters and operators secure wider public support and more convinc-
ingly justify the resources needed to fund such schemes. This paper
argues that an open debate on these issues would be helpful.

The results on BSS average user profile and associated access in-
equalities help identify a key area where more research is needed.
This concerns the perceptions, attitudes and preferences of the social
groups that are currently under-represented amongst bike sharing
users, such as those who are able to ride a bicycle but do not cycle, eth-
nic minorities, disadvantaged social groups, women and older people.
Methods that could be employed to address these gaps include quanti-
tative and qualitative surveys, as well as more participatory types of re-
search, conducted with users and non-users belonging to under-
represented categories. This could be especially useful in locations
where bike sharing is viewed as a ‘public service’ and equity of access
is regarded as an important objective. Furthermore, the evidence on en-
abling factors to bike sharing operation suggests that effective and on-
going public engagement, including challenging negative perceptions
of cycling, may help attract and maintain a diverse range of users.

Whilst arguably a valuable goal in its own right, making bike sharing
more socially inclusive can also have an important function: it can con-
tribute to a more equitable distribution of the key positive outcomes
identified by this review. These comprise in particular health benefits,
improved travel experience, enhanced accessibility through greater
and more sustainable transport choice, reduced journey times and in-
creased affordability of personal travel through reduced mobility costs.
Health benefits in particular can be enhanced by improving road safety
for cyclists, so that cycling injury rates are reduced.

According to personal preferences and needs, bike sharing enables
users, individually or in groups, to undertake a variety of social, eco-
nomic and leisure activities,where commuting constitutes an important
but not exclusive component. Drawing on this evidence, further re-
search could explore, through in-depth surveys of different typologies
of users, how BSSs enhance users' capabilities to access life-chances,
and affect their overall quality of life and well-being. This would allow
building a more complete and articulated picture of the multiple bene-
fits of bike sharing at the level of the individual and for different catego-
ries of users, including under-represented ones, which in turn could be
used to develop better assessments of the ‘value’ and ‘success’ of BSSs.

There is currently no evidence suggesting that bike sharing produces
significant reductions in urban congestion levels and CO2 emissions, or
improvements in air quality, at least in the short-medium term. The avail-
able evidence on mode substitution is established and consistent: rather
than substituting for car journeys, bike sharing is predominantly used in-
stead of walking and public transport. Moreover, when the effect of using
motorised fleets for bike maintenance and re-distribution is accounted
for, bike sharing can increase rather than reduce overall motor vehicle
usage and emissions, with associated negative environmental and air
quality impacts. Re-balancing the bike network has also been identified
as a key operational challenge.

This has important research and policy implications. Deploying low
or zero emission re-distribution vehicles could be one possible solution
to improve the environmental credentials and impact of BSSs, for exam-
ple through policy mechanisms providing incentives to operators to do
so. However, more sophisticated and potentially fully-automated tech-
niques could be developed. Further research could involve, for example,
the development of a system of incentives and/or dynamic pricing to
users based on real-time assessment of the re-balancing needs of the
network, combined with real-time data on users' needs and prefer-
ences, collected through mobile media. As a result, BSSs might become
more self-rebalancing and need less external intervention.

Evidence on broader travel behaviour change as a result of bike shar-
ing is mixed and varies according to the specific context of implementa-
tion and in respect of different transport modes. Overall, cycling
behaviour is shown to increase whilst driving to decrease, albeit for a
smaller proportion of users. However, whilst cycling levelsmay increase
as a result of bike sharing, the potential displacement of physical activity
through walking should be borne in mind when supporting the intro-
duction of bike sharing on public health grounds.

Future research could develop better frameworks to map out and
evaluate the effects of bike sharing on users' travel behaviour, for exam-
ple by using innovative research methods combining detailed users'
travel behaviour history and patterns as a result of bike sharing, socio-
demographic data and actual bicycle movements.

Bike sharing can, at the same time, connect to and substitute for pub-
lic transport for different types of trips and users. The exact outcome of
this combination is the result of a complex interrelationship amongst
various factors, such as scheme attributes, user preferences and the
characteristics of the area of implementation, including travel patterns,
public transport infrastructure and level of service.

Research is needed to further explore how these multiple factors
play out in different contexts and take into account the specific bike
sharing governance model on one side, and the regulatory framework
underpinning public transport ownership/operation on the other. This
in turn has a significant policy implication, connected to the possibility
of using bike sharing to help manage public transport demand, for ex-
ample reducing overcrowding on some services, promoting use of
others or helping integrate different public transport modes. An im-
proved understanding of the mutual synergies between bike sharing
and public transport, in different governance settings and regulatory
frameworks, could also contribute to better assess the differential out-
comes of this interaction for BSS users, public transport users, transport
operators, local authorities and the wider population as a whole. This
area of investigation relies on the availability of performance data on
different public transport modes.

Bike sharing can generate economic benefits to users, through re-
duced travel time and costs, and contribute to enhancing local econo-
mies, by connecting people to employment, retail and other places
where economic activity takes place. However the evidence is very lim-
ited and the magnitude of such benefits appears to be modest. Further
research addressing economic impacts is necessary, alongwith research
exploring wider impacts of BSSs on urban liveability, city image and
tourism, through surveys of residents, businesses and visitors.

Evidence on broader economic benefits including financial viability
and profitability issues is also very limited, with the only economic ap-
praisal available, based on the London scheme, reporting an unfavourable
‘value for money’.

Two considerations can bemade on this issue. First, the suitability of
standard economic assessments commonly used to evaluate large
transport infrastructure projects is questionable, especially given the
limited range and significance of the evidence currently available on
bike sharing. Parallel to extending and improving the evidence base,
further research is necessary to develop innovative evaluation frame-
works and methods that are specific to bike sharing, able capture their
full range of impacts and not just thosewhich are directly andmore eas-
ily quantifiable. Multi-criteria analysis could be a useful starting point.

Secondly, it is essential that bike sharing evaluations begin from iden-
tifying the objectives that a scheme seeks to achieve, through an in-depth
consultation of all the stakeholders, rather than undertake generic assess-
ments without a clear operational, and agreed upon, definition of ‘suc-
cess’. In the London case, for example, the improved equity of access
following the Eastern extension, and the consequent more equitable



38 M. Ricci / Research in Transportation Business & Management 15 (2015) 28–38
distribution of positive outcomes, were not explicitly included amongst
the expected monetary benefits in the overall appraisal. In explaining
the background to the scheme, however, widening participation in cy-
cling was mentioned as a key policy goal (Transport for London, 2014).

Developing assessment tools, identifying objectives and determining
metrics for evaluating bike sharing ‘success’ raise questions about
whose voices, values and interests should be included in these decisions.
Following Banister (2008), this paper argues that realising sustainable
mobility in practice requires a ‘paradigm shift’ in decision-making pro-
cesses, with more open and active involvement of society as a whole.

A final reflection concerns the data that is needed to support the var-
ious strands of inquiry, suggested in this paper, to achieve better evalu-
ation of bike sharing impacts and processes. As mentioned earlier,
remarkable progress is being made towards better monitoring data as
well as more sophisticated computer-based data visualisation and pro-
cessing techniques. Further evaluation and robust comparative assess-
ments of schemes are therefore dependent upon the future availability
and quality of awide range ofmonitoring BSS data, but also on financial,
performance and process-type indicators, which should be systemati-
cally and consistently collected across different schemes. Presumably,
the specific bike sharing governance model and contractual arrange-
ments might dictate the range and quality of data that can be released
in the short-term. Nevertheless, a commitment to better, consistent
and transparent monitoring and evaluation is necessary if bike sharing
is to be considered an effective element of sustainable urban mobility
strategies.

Acknowledgements

The review of evidence undertaken for this paper was supported by
the author's involvement in the evaluation of the CIVITAS Plus Renais-
sance project in Bath (2008-12) and the ongoing EVIDENCE project
(2014-17), both financially supported by the European Commission.
The author wishes to thank two anonymous reviewers, whose insightful
comments and helpful suggestions significantly contributed to improve
this paper.

References

Anaya, E., & Castro, A. (2012). Balance General de la Bicicleta Pública en España. Fundación
ECA— BUREAU VERITAS ([Online] https://bicicletapublica.files.wordpress.com/2013/
03/balance-general-de-la-bp-en-espac3b1a.pdf [Accessed 09/01/2015]).

Bachand-Marleau, J., Lee, B.H.Y., & El-Geneidy, A.M. (2012). Better understanding of fac-
tors influencing likelihood of using shared bicycle systems and frequency of use.
Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation Research Board, 2314,
66–71. http://dx.doi.org/10.3141/2314-09.

Banister, D. (2008). The sustainable mobility paradigm. Transport Policy, 15(2), 73–80.
Beecham, R., & Wood, J. (2014a). Characterising group-cycling journeys using interactive

graphics. Transportation Research Part C, 47, 194–206.
Beecham, R., & Wood, J. (2014b). Exploring gendered cycling behaviours within a large-

scale behavioural data-set. Transportation Planning and Technology, 37(1), 83–97.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/03081060.2013.844903.

Beroud, B., & Anaya, E. (2012). Private interventions in a public service: An analysis of
public bicycle schemes. In J. Parkin (Ed.), Cycling and sustainability. London: Emerald.

Bloor, M., & Wood, F. (2006). Keywords in qualitative methods. London: Sage.
Buehler, R., & Hamre, A. (2014). Economic benefits of capital bikeshare: A focus on users and

businesses. U.S.: Mid-Atlantic Universities Transportation Centre ([Online] http://ntl.
bts.gov/lib/51000/51900/51965/VT-2013-06.pdf [Accessed 09/01/2015]).

DeMaio, P. (2009). Bike-sharing: History, impacts, models of provision, and future. Journal
of Public Transportation, 12(4), 41–56.

Faghih-Imani, A., Eluru, N., El-Geneidy, A.M., Rabbat, M., & Haq, U. (2014). How land-use
and urban form impact bicycle flows: Evidence from the bicycle-sharing system
(BIXI) in Montreal. Journal of Transport Geography, 41, 306–314.

Fishman, E., Washington, S., & Haworth, N. (2012). Barriers and facilitators to public bicy-
cle scheme use: A qualitative approach. Transportation Research Part F: Traffic
Psychology and Behaviour, 15(6), 686–698.

Fishman, E., Washington, S., & Haworth, N. (2013). Bike share: A synthesis of the litera-
ture. Transport Reviews, 33, 148–165.

Fishman, E., Washington, S., & Haworth, N. (2014a). Bike share's impact on car use: Evi-
dence from the United States, Great Britain, and Australia. Transportation Research
Part D: Transport and Environment, 31, 13–20.

Fishman, E., Washington, S., Haworth, N., & Mazzei, A. (2014b). Barriers to bikesharing:
An analysis from Melbourne and Brisbane. Journal of Transport Geography, 41,
325–337. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jtrangeo.2014.08.005.
Fuller, D., Gauvin, L., Kestens, Y., Daniel, M., Fournier, M., Morency, P., et al. (2011). Use of
a new public bicycle share program in Montreal, Canada. American Journal of Preven-
tive Medicine, 41(1), 80–83.

Fuller, D., Gauvin, L., Kestens, Y., Daniel, M., Fournier, M., Morency, P., et al. (2013). Impact
evaluation of a public bicycle share program on cycling: A case example of BIXI in
Montreal, Quebec. American Journal of Public Health, 103(3), 85–92.

García-Palomares, J.C., Gutiérrez, J., & Latorre, M. (2012). Optimizing the location
of stations in bike-sharing programs: A GIS approach. Applied Geography, 35, 235–246.

Goodman, A., & Cheshire, J. (2014). Inequalities in the London bicycle sharing system
revisited: Impacts of extending the scheme to poorer areas but then doubling prices.
Journal of Transport Geography, 41, 272–279.

Goodman, A., Green, J., & Woodcock, J. (2014). The role of bicycle sharing systems in nor-
malising the image of cycling: An observational study of London cyclists. Journal of
Transport & Health, 1(1), 5–8. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jth.2013.07.001.

Hills, D., & Junge, K. (2010). Guidance for transport impact evaluations. Choosing an
evaluation approach to achieve better attribution. London: Tavistock Institute & Aecom.
Prepared for Department for Transport ([Online] http://www.tavinstitute.org/projects/
report-new-guidance-for-evaluation-in-the-transport-sector/ [Accessed 15/05/13]).

Institute for Transportation & Development Policy (2013). The bike-share planning guide.
[Online] https://www.itdp.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/07/ITDP_Bike_Share_
Planning_Guide.pdf (Accessed 09/01/2015)

Jensen, P., Rouquier, J. -B., Ovtracht, N., & Robardet, C. (2010). Characterizing the speed
and paths of shared bicycle use in Lyon. Transportation Research Part D, 15(8),
522–524. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.trd.

Lathia, N., Ahmed, S., & Capra, L. (2012). Measuring the impact of opening the London
shared bicycle scheme to casual users. Transportation Research Part C: Emerging
Technologies, 22, 88–102.

Martin, E.W., & Shaheen, S.A. (2014). Evaluating public transit modal shift dynamics in re-
sponse to bikesharing: A tale of two U.S. cities. Journal of Transport Geography, 41,
315–324.

Meddin, R. (2015). The bike sharing world — 2014 — Year end data. [Online] http://bike-
sharing.blogspot.co.uk/2015/01/the-bike-sharing-world-2014-year-end.html (Accessed
09/01/2015)

Molina-García, J., Castillo, I., Queralt, A., & Sallis, J.F. (2013). Bicycling to university: Eval-
uation of a bicycle-sharing program in Spain. Health Promotion International. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1093/heapro/dat045 ([online] [Accessed 28/06/2013]).

Murphy, E., & Usher, J. (2015). The role of bicycle-sharing in the city: Analysis of the Irish
experience. International Journal of Sustainable Transportation, 9(2), 116–125.

O'Brien, O. (2015). Seeing red: 15 ways the Boris bikes of London could be better. [On-
line] http://oobrien.com/category/bike-share/ (Accessed 20/03/2015)

O'Brien, O., Cheshire, J., & Batty, M. (2014). Mining bicycle sharing data for generating
insights into sustainable transport systems. Journal of Transport Geography, 34, 262–273.

OBIS (2011). Optimising bike sharing in European cities: A handbook. Intelligent Energy
Europe ([Online] http://ec.europa.eu/energy/intelligent/projects/sites/iee-projects/
files/projects/documents/obis_handbook_en.pdf [Accessed 09/01/2015]).

Ogilvie, F., & Goodman, A. (2012). Inequalities in usage of a public bicycle sharing scheme:
Socio-demographic predictors of uptake and usage of the London (UK) cycle hire
scheme. Preventive Medicine, 55(1), 40–45.

Rojas-Rueda, D., de Nazelle, A., Tainio, M., & Nieuwenhuijsen, M.J. (2011). The health risks
and benefits of cycling in urban environments compared with car use: Health impact
assessment study. British Medical Journal, 343, 4521.

Schoner, J., Harrison, A., & Wang, X. (2012). Sharing to grow: Economic activity associated
with nice ride bike share stations.Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota ([Online]
http://www.cts.umn.edu/sites/default/files/files/publications/Catalyst/2012/july/24-
schoner.pdf [Accessed 09/01/2015]).

Shaheen, S.A., Martin, E.W., Chan, N.D., Cohen, A.P., & Pogodzinski, M. (2014). Public
bikesharing in North America during a period of rapid expansion: Understanding busi-
ness models, industry trends and user impacts. San Jose, CA: Mineta Transportation In-
stitute ([Online] http://transweb.sjsu.edu/PDFs/research/1131-public-bikesharing-
business-models-trends-impacts.pdf [Accessed 09/01/2015]).

Shaheen, S., Martin, E., Cohen, A.P., & Finson, R. (2012). Public bikesharing in North America:
Early operator and user understanding. San Jose, CA: Mineta Transportation Institute
([Online] http://transweb.sjsu.edu/PDFs/research/1029-public-bikesharing-
understanding-early-operators-users.pdf [Accessed 09/01/2015]).

Steinbach, R., Green, J., Datta, J., & Edwards, P. (2011). Cycling and the city: A case study of
how gendered, ethnic and class identities can shape healthy transport choices. Social
Science & Medicine, 72, 1123–1130.

Toole Design Group and the Pedestrian and Bicycle Information Center (2012). Bike Shar-
ing in the United States: State of the practice and guide to implementation. Federal High-
way Administration ([Online] http://www.pedbikeinfo.org/pdf/Programs_Promote_
bikeshareintheus.pdf [Accessed 09/01/2015]).

Transport for London (2014). Cycle hire implementation — Phase 2 and CHEI project
close. [Online] https://www.tfl.gov.uk/cdn/static/cms/documents/fpc-20141014-
part-1-item-14-cycle-hire-imp-chei-close.pdf (Accessed 05/02/2015)

Transport for London (2015). Barclays Cycle Hire customer satisfaction and usage survey:
Members only: Wave 9 (Quarter 3 2014/15). [Online] http://www.tfl.gov.uk/cdn/
static/cms/documents/bch-members-q3-2014-15.pdf (Accessed 05/02/2015)

Vogel, M., Hamon, R., Lozenguez, G., Merchez, L., Abry, P., Barnier, J., et al. (2014). From bicy-
cle sharing system movements to users: A typology of Vélo'v cyclists in Lyon based on
large-scale behavioural dataset. Journal of Transport Geography, 41, 280–291.

Woodcock, J., Tainio, M., Cheshire, J., O'Brien, O., & Goodman, A. (2014). Health effects of the
London bicycle sharing system: Health impact modelling study. British Medical Journal,
348, 425.

Zhao, J., Wang, J., & Deng, W. (2015). Exploring bikesharing travel time and trip chain by
gender and day of the week. Transport Research Part C (in press).

https://bicicletapublica.files.wordpress.com/2013/03/balance-general-de-la-bp-en-espac3b1a.pdf
https://bicicletapublica.files.wordpress.com/2013/03/balance-general-de-la-bp-en-espac3b1a.pdf
http://dx.doi.org/10.3141/2314-09
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2210-5395(15)00014-0/rf0005
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2210-5395(15)00014-0/rf0010
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2210-5395(15)00014-0/rf0010
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/03081060.2013.844903
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2210-5395(15)00014-0/rf0020
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2210-5395(15)00014-0/rf0020
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2210-5395(15)00014-0/rf0025
http://ntl.bts.gov/lib/51000/51900/51965/VT-2013-06.pdf
http://ntl.bts.gov/lib/51000/51900/51965/VT-2013-06.pdf
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2210-5395(15)00014-0/rf0030
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2210-5395(15)00014-0/rf0030
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2210-5395(15)00014-0/rf0035
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2210-5395(15)00014-0/rf0035
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2210-5395(15)00014-0/rf0035
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2210-5395(15)00014-0/rf0050
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2210-5395(15)00014-0/rf0050
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2210-5395(15)00014-0/rf0050
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2210-5395(15)00014-0/rf0045
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2210-5395(15)00014-0/rf0045
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2210-5395(15)00014-0/rf0040
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2210-5395(15)00014-0/rf0040
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2210-5395(15)00014-0/rf0040
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jtrangeo.2014.08.005
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2210-5395(15)00014-0/rf0060
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2210-5395(15)00014-0/rf0060
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2210-5395(15)00014-0/rf0060
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2210-5395(15)00014-0/rf0055
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2210-5395(15)00014-0/rf0055
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2210-5395(15)00014-0/rf0055
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2210-5395(15)00014-0/rf0065
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2210-5395(15)00014-0/rf0065
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2210-5395(15)00014-0/rf0070
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2210-5395(15)00014-0/rf0070
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2210-5395(15)00014-0/rf0070
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jth.2013.07.001
http://www.tavinstitute.org/projects/report-new-guidance-for-evaluation-in-the-transport-sector/
http://www.tavinstitute.org/projects/report-new-guidance-for-evaluation-in-the-transport-sector/
https://www.itdp.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/07/ITDP_Bike_Share_Planning_Guide.pdf
https://www.itdp.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/07/ITDP_Bike_Share_Planning_Guide.pdf
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.trd
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2210-5395(15)00014-0/rf0080
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2210-5395(15)00014-0/rf0080
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2210-5395(15)00014-0/rf0080
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2210-5395(15)00014-0/rf0085
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2210-5395(15)00014-0/rf0085
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2210-5395(15)00014-0/rf0085
http://bike-sharing.blogspot.co.uk/2015/01/the-bike-sharing-world-2014-year-end.html
http://bike-sharing.blogspot.co.uk/2015/01/the-bike-sharing-world-2014-year-end.html
http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/heapro/dat045
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2210-5395(15)00014-0/rf0090
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2210-5395(15)00014-0/rf0090
http://oobrien.com/category/bike-share/
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2210-5395(15)00014-0/rf0095
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2210-5395(15)00014-0/rf0095
http://ec.europa.eu/energy/intelligent/projects/sites/iee-projects/files/projects/documents/obis_handbook_en.pdf
http://ec.europa.eu/energy/intelligent/projects/sites/iee-projects/files/projects/documents/obis_handbook_en.pdf
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2210-5395(15)00014-0/rf0100
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2210-5395(15)00014-0/rf0100
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2210-5395(15)00014-0/rf0100
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2210-5395(15)00014-0/rf0105
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2210-5395(15)00014-0/rf0105
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2210-5395(15)00014-0/rf0105
http://www.cts.umn.edu/sites/default/files/files/publications/Catalyst/2012/july/24-schoner.pdf
http://www.cts.umn.edu/sites/default/files/files/publications/Catalyst/2012/july/24-schoner.pdf
http://transweb.sjsu.edu/PDFs/research/1131-public-bikesharing-business-models-trends-impacts.pdf
http://transweb.sjsu.edu/PDFs/research/1131-public-bikesharing-business-models-trends-impacts.pdf
http://transweb.sjsu.edu/PDFs/research/1029-public-bikesharing-understanding-early-operators-users.pdf
http://transweb.sjsu.edu/PDFs/research/1029-public-bikesharing-understanding-early-operators-users.pdf
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2210-5395(15)00014-0/rf0110
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2210-5395(15)00014-0/rf0110
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2210-5395(15)00014-0/rf0110
http://www.pedbikeinfo.org/pdf/Programs_Promote_bikeshareintheus.pdf
http://www.pedbikeinfo.org/pdf/Programs_Promote_bikeshareintheus.pdf
https://www.tfl.gov.uk/cdn/static/cms/documents/fpc-20141014-part-1-item-14-cycle-hire-imp-chei-close.pdf
https://www.tfl.gov.uk/cdn/static/cms/documents/fpc-20141014-part-1-item-14-cycle-hire-imp-chei-close.pdf
http://www.tfl.gov.uk/cdn/static/cms/documents/bch-members-q3-2014-15.pdf
http://www.tfl.gov.uk/cdn/static/cms/documents/bch-members-q3-2014-15.pdf
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2210-5395(15)00014-0/rf0115
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2210-5395(15)00014-0/rf0115
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2210-5395(15)00014-0/rf0115
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2210-5395(15)00014-0/rf0120
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2210-5395(15)00014-0/rf0120
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2210-5395(15)00014-0/rf0120
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2210-5395(15)00014-0/rf0210
http://refhub.elsevier.com/S2210-5395(15)00014-0/rf0210

	Bike sharing: A review of evidence on impacts and processes of implementation and operation
	1. Introduction
	2. Sources of information and evidence on bike sharing: an overview
	3. Evidence on users and usage of bike sharing
	3.1. Users' socio-economic profile and equity of access
	3.2. Determinants of and barriers to bike sharing use
	3.3. Usage characteristics: bike sharing rates, patterns and purpose of use

	4. Evidence on the impacts of bike sharing
	4.1. Transport mode substitution
	4.2. Broader changes in users' travel behaviours
	4.3. Effects on and synergies with public transport use
	4.4. Impacts on attitudes to cyclists
	4.5. Environmental impacts
	4.6. Health impacts
	4.7. Economic impacts on users and local businesses
	4.8. Financial viability and wider economic benefits

	5. Evidence on the process of bike sharing implementation and operation
	6. Discussion and conclusion
	Acknowledgements
	References


