

















































































Understanding Bike-Sharing Systems using Data Mining: Exploring Activity Patterns


Available online at www.sciencedirect.com

Procedia Social and Behavioral Sciences 20 (2011) 514–523

14th EWGT & 26th MEC & 1st RH 

Understanding Bike-Sharing Systems using Data Mining:  
Exploring Activity Patterns 

Patrick Vogela,*, Torsten Greisera, Dirk Christian Mattfelda 
a University of Braunschweig, Decision Support Group, Mühlenpfordtstraße 23, D-38106 Braunschweig, Germany 

 

Abstract 

In this paper we analyze extensive operational data from bike-sharing systems in order to derive bike activity patterns. A 
common issue observed in bike-sharing systems is imbalances in the distribution of bikes. We use Data Mining to gain insight 
into the complex bike activity patterns at stations. Activity patterns reveal imbalances in the distribution of bikes and lead to a 
better understanding of the system structure. A structured Data Mining process supports planning and operating decisions for the 
design and management of bike-sharing systems. 

Keywords: Bike-Sharing; Data Mining; Activity Patterns 

1. Introduction 

Bikes receive increasing attention in city transportation, mainly because they “provide the missing link between 
existing points of public transportation and desired destinations” (Midgley, 2009). Bike-sharing can be described as 
a short-term bicycle rental service for inner-city transportation providing bikes at unattended stations. In recent 
years, bike-sharing systems (BSS) have rapidly emerged in major cities all over the world. 

Bike-sharing providers have to ensure high bike availability in order to satisfy customers. A challenging task, 
because movements of customers are highly dynamic and redistributing bikes is expensive. According to recent 
studies, the analysis of rides show spatio-temporal dependencies in bike usage (Borgnat et al., 2010, Froehlich et al., 
2009, Kaltenbrunner et al., 2010). In addition, one-way use and short rental times lead to imbalances in the spatial 
distribution of bikes. There are different measures for overcoming imbalances, e. g. location planning of bike 
stations. With the help of Geographical Business Intelligence (Geo BI), ride data can be analyzed and processed in 
order to support location decisions (Feix, 2007).  

 

* Corresponding author. Tel.: +49-531-391-3215; fax: +49-531-391-8144. 
E-mail address: p.vogel@tu-bs.de. 

 

© 2011 Published by Elsevier Ltd. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
Selection and/or peer-review under responsibility of the Organizing Committee. 

1877–0428 © 2011 Published by Elsevier Ltd. Open access under CC BY-NC-ND license.
Selection and/or peer-review under responsibility of the Organizing Committee
doi:10.1016/j.sbspro.2011.08.058

http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/


Patrick Vogel et al. / Procedia Social and Behavioral Sciences 20 (2011) 514–523 515

 
This paper makes the following contributions: A taxonomy for measures alleviating bike imbalances in BSS is 

given in Section 2. A Geo BI process which includes data mining (DM) methods for location planning is presented 
in the following section. Furthermore, two years of operational ride data from Vienna’s BSS “Citybike Wien” is 
analyzed according to the Geo BI process. We present results from an exploratory data analysis and from clustering 
stations according to their pickup and return activity to understand temporal and spatial causes of imbalances. 

2.  Design and Management of BSS 

Over the last decades, traditional bike rental for leisure activities have evolved to modern BSS offering 
environment-friendly, individual urban mobility. According to Shaheen et al. (2010), primary goals of BSS are 
reduction of congestion and pollution, improvement of public health, increase in bike use and enhancement of public 
transport options. However, bikes are mainly suited for short trips and bike use strongly depends on weather and 
topography. Typically, stations are spread over the city providing free bikes or free boxes, respectively. Easy and 
quick city wide access of BSS is provided by information and communication technology that supports automated 
bike rentals and stores cyclists’ rental activities for billing and control purposes.  

Bike-sharing providers comprise transport agencies, local governments, profit and non-profit organizations as 
well as advertising companies (DeMaio, 2009). Advertising companies are the most common type of provider. They 
receive rights from municipalities to advertise on street furniture. In exchange a BSS is provided. In contrast to 
traditional rental services, BSS’ pricing models are linear or progressive. The first minutes of a ride are often for 
free. After that, fees increase progressively in certain time steps, e. g. every 30 minutes. This is an incentive for 
customers to keep rental times short, making the bikes available for others to reach a high bike turnover.   

The availability of free bike and boxes is crucial for the usage and acceptance of BSS. For instance, the provider 
of Arlington’s BSS has to ensure that stations are not full of bicycles for more than 60 minutes during daytime and 
180 minutes during nighttime (Zahory, 2009). Ensuring high availability is not an easy task. A common issue 
observed in BSS is imbalances in the spatial distribution of bikes at stations over time due to one-way use and short 
rental times. The number of bike boxes at stations is limited. It is impossible to return bikes at full stations and pick 
up bikes at empty stations. We identify three design and management measures alleviating these imbalances divided 
into different planning horizons: 
 Strategic (long-term) network design comprising decisions about the location, number and size of stations. 
 Tactical (mid-term) incentives for customer based distribution of bikes. For example, the Parisian BSS “Vélib’” 

grants 15 extra minutes for returning bikes at uphill stations (DeMaio, 2009).  
 Operational (short-term) provider based repositioning of bikes. Here, staff relocates bikes from full to empty 

stations. E. g. costs for reposition of a bike in the “Vélib” amount to 3 $ (DeMaio, 2009). 
Decisions on the strategic level have a great impact on the following levels. Once location and size of a station is 

implemented, it cannot be changed on a short-term basis. Unsophisticated design decisions have to be compensated 
by extensive effort on the tactical and operational level. Therefore fluctuations of pickups and returns on the 
operational level have to be anticipated and considered in the design phase. In this paper we present a Geo BI 
process for BSS design. On the one hand, the process consists of a DM part to gain insights into the complex bike 
operations at stations. On the other hand, an approach is presented how to incorporate the gained knowledge in BSS 
design decisions. 

3. Using Data Mining to improve BSS design 

Planning and operating of BSS receives attention in academia as well as in practice. However, scientific literature 
in this field is still rather scarce. A literature overview of DM and OR articles on BSS is given as follows: 
 Borgnat et al. (2010) use DM to analyze the dynamics of bike movements in Lyon’s BSS. Temporal patterns in 

the system-wide bike usage are examined. Weekdays show usage peaks in the morning, at noon and late 
afternoon, whereas usage is concentrated in the afternoon on weekend days. A statistical model for the prediction 
of the number of rentals on a daily and hourly basis is given. Furthermore spatial patterns are examined by 
clustering bike flows between stations. Spatial and temporal dependencies exist between stations of clusters 
interchanging many bicycles.  



516  Patrick Vogel et al. / Procedia Social and Behavioral Sciences 20 (2011) 514–523

 Froehlich et al. (2009) have data about the number of available bikes and vacant bike boxes from Barcelona’s 
BSS. Stations are clustered according to the number of available bikes and an activity score in the course of day. 
Visualization of the stations show spatial dependencies, e. g. uphill stations tend be empty and less active stations 
are located at the edge of the bike-sharing network.  

 Kaltenbrunner et al. (2010) detect bike usage patterns in data from Barcelona’s BSS. Results are similar to 
Froehlich at el (2009). Also a statistical model is presented that predicts the number of free bikes and boxes at 
stations some minutes ahead in time.  

 From an OR perspective, Lin and Yang (2011) present a mathematical decision model to determine an adequate 
number and location of bike stations considering bike availability at stations. Also the network structure of bike 
paths between the stations and travel paths for users between their origin and destination are determined. 
Artificial bike demand data is used for testing the model. 
Recent work either focuses mining of bike-sharing data or building decision models without incorporating real 

world BSS behavior. For instance, Lin and Yang (2011) only consider the availability of bikes and not the 
availability of boxes. In contrast to observations from real world BSS, hourly fluctuations in rentals are ignored in 
Lin and Yang’s model. We present an integrated approach of DM and OR. DM provides information about the 
system structure which is used to determine attributes serving as input for a decision model or to refine the decision 
model structure (Meisel and Mattfeld, 2010). From a strategic point of view it is necessary to at least understand 
bike activities at stations on the operational level. Ignoring these operational activities can lead to suboptimal 
location decisions (Salhi and Rand, 1989). Location and size of station have to be determined in such way that 
fluctuations do not cause full or empty stations. Therefore, anticipating operational bike activities in long-term 
location planning is crucial for the actual bike availability at stations. 

For anticipation of bike activities, a Geo BI approach for location planning in BSS is presented. Geo BI is based 
on knowledge discovery in databases (KDD) (Fayyad et al., 1996) extended by spatial analysis and visualization. 
Novel and understandable patterns are derived from data including spatial relations. Geographical information 
technology and DM methods are used to structure company internal and external data. Identified patterns are 
visualized with the aim of supporting business decisions (Feix, 2007). Potentially, DM can generate a multitude of 
patterns. Domain knowledge is necessary to separate interesting from uninteresting patterns. A pattern is interesting 
e. g. if it validates a hypothesis that sought to be confirmed (Han and Kamber, 2006). Concerning location planning 
in BSS, we are looking for spatial relations between bike usage at stations and location of stations. This leads to the 
following hypothesis: Pickups and returns at bike stations as well as the type of customers using certain stations 
depend on the stations’ surroundings. If this assumption is valid, bike usage can be mapped to new stations 
according to their location.  

With the help of the Geo BI process this hypothesis is evaluated. The bike activity at every station is derived 
from BSS ride data. This bike activity comprises stations’ pickups and returns aggregated on a suitable timescale. 
Cluster analysis yields distinct groups of stations showing similar activity patterns. Also customer behavior is 
examined with cluster analysis leading to customer segments with different rental behavior. Furthermore location 
factors are derived from the stations’ surroundings. Bike stations are clustered according to their location factors. 
These factors include e.g. access of stations to public transport, population, housing or commercial area. If station 
and customer clusters match the location clusters, the hypothesis can be confirmed.     

 
 



Patrick Vogel et al. / Procedia Social and Behavioral Sciences 20 (2011) 514–523 517

  

Figure 1. Geo BI process in style of Feix (2007) 

When setting up or expanding a BSS, the pickups and deliveries at potential locations have to be anticipated. 
Location factors can be ascertained for every possible new location. Activity patterns and customer segments for 
already existing stations are then mapped to potential locations based on location factors. In a following location 
decision model an adequate number, location and size of stations have to be determined whereas the anticipated 
operating activities and bike availability have to be considered. The Geo BI depicted in Figure 1 process comprises 
DM and OR in the following steps: 
 Preprocessing: In the preprocessing phase ride and customer data as well as location factors in terms of external 

geographical data are gathered. To make the data suitable for DM it has to be properly cleaned and selected. Also 
aggregation and normalization of data assures a solid basis for DM algorithms.  

 Data Mining: With the help of cluster analysis station activity and location factor patterns as well as customer 
segments are identified. First, cluster validation is necessary in order to determine the clustering tendency of the 
data set by distinguishing whether there is a non-random structure in the data or not. Second, a cluster algorithm 
determines groups in which objects are similar. Last, cluster validation measures the adequacy of the cluster 
analysis. 

 Postprocessing: The results from the cluster analysis have to be validated in a postprocessing step. Visualizing 
clusters with a geographical information system is needed for a spatial interpretation of clusters. 

 Operations Research: Knowledge about the system structure and processed data from DM serves as input for the 
OR phase. The obtained knowledge and data lead to sophisticated OR models. The adequate number, size and 
location of stations are output of location decision models. 
With the help of Geo BI, bike activity at stations and customer behavior can be anticipated at potential locations. 

This can improve the quality of strategic decisions. The following case study gives insight into temporal and spatial 
dependencies of bike pickups and returns at stations.  

4.  Case Study: Exploring Activity Patterns 

In this section ride data is analyzed based on the Geo BI process. Since imbalances in the distribution of bikes 
have temporal and spatial reasons, the ride data is examined for spatio-temporal activity patterns. Therefore, bike 
stations are clustered according to pickups and returns in the course of day. Analysis of the stations surroundings 
validates determined clusters and gives insight into possible causes for imbalances in the distribution of bikes. The 



518  Patrick Vogel et al. / Procedia Social and Behavioral Sciences 20 (2011) 514–523

analyzed data covers two years of operational ride data from Vienna’s BSS “Citybike Wien” (http://citybikewien.at). 
The system is operated by “Gewista Werbegesellschaft m. b. H.” and consists of more than 60 bike stations. 
Rapidminer Community Edition from Rapid-I GmbH (http://rapid-i.com) is used for data analysis. Results are 
visualized with the Geographical Information System Google Earth (http://earth.google.com). 

4.1. Preprocessing 

The provided data sets consist of ride information in form of pickup station and timestamp as well as return 
station and timestamp (cf. Table 1). The data covers approximately 760’000 rides of the years 2008 and 2009. Trip 
durations are calculated by subtracting pickup from return timestamps. Also geographical coordinates are available 
for every station.  

Table 1. Structure of ride data 

Pickup station Pickup timestamp Return station Return timestamp 
1074 2008-01-01 17:13:27 1052 2008-01-01 17:25:54 

 
According to the preprocessing phase, data objects that show the following characteristics are removed: 

 Rides that start or end at test stations. 
 Rides where bikes are reported as defect or stolen. 
 Rides that show negative drip durations. This can happen if an error occurs at the bike box while returning a bike. 
 Rides that last less than 60 seconds which start and end at the same station. This indicates that a bike is 

immediately returned after being picked up. An actual ride does not take place.  
 Stations with only a few pickups or returns. These stations could show non-typical return and pickup patterns 

which distorts the clustering.  
After removing the affected data sets, the number of data sets declines by 2 % to approximately 743’000. The 

number of stations drops to 59. Because of the extensive amount of data, an inspection of single rides does not lead 
to a general impression of bike activities. When looking for temporal patterns in bike activities, rides have to be 
aggregated at a suitable timescale. The tradeoff is the following: the smaller the time windows, the larger the 
fluctuations, whereas larger time windows might smooth relevant observations. Citybike Wien grants that the first 
60 minutes of a ride a free of charge. This is the case for more than 90% of all trips. An average trip lasts 29 
minutes, whereas the median trip duration is 15 minutes. A first glance at the data shows that bike activities are 
highly fluctuant with respect to time of day, day of week and type of day, e.g. holidays. That is why ride data is 
aggregated for 24 time windows per day of the week, leading to 168 values representing the two years of data. These 
time windows correspond to common approaches of traffic systems analysis (Pinkofsky 2006). 

The total number of rented bikes in the course of week is depicted in Figure 2. Patterns for working days and 
weekends can be observed. Working days show three and weekend days two peaks during the course of day. On 
working days, the night peak occurs from 0-2 a.m. A reason for this might be that the subway stops service between 
0-1 a.m. The least active hour is at 5 a.m. Due to morning commuters there is a peak in the number of rentals 
between 8-10 a.m. Another peak is situated in the late afternoon hours. Here, commuting and leisure activities 
overlap. On weekends, the night peak is more distinct, whereas the morning peak is absent. This indicates that the 
Citybike is predominantly used for leisure activities at weekends. 

According to our hypothesis, bike pickups and returns depend on the stations’ locations. Therefore it is necessary 
to break down the system wide usage patterns to station related pickups and returns activities. Since all working 
days and all weekend days show similar usage patterns, pickups and returns are aggregated for every station on an 
hourly basis. Working days and all weekend days are considered separately. Public holidays are excluded from the 
aggregation. Normalization of data is needed in order to compare the activity at stations. Thus, the activity at 
stations is defined by the proportion of pickups or returns in a certain hour of day divided by the total daily number 
of pickup or returns. This leads to 48 attributes describing the daily pickup and return activity for every station. An 
example for a station activity data set is stated in Table 2.  

 



Patrick Vogel et al. / Procedia Social and Behavioral Sciences 20 (2011) 514–523 519

 

Figure 2. Number of rides in the course of week 

Table 2: Normalized activity for station 1020 in the course of day 

Station Pickups 0-1 … Pickups 23-0 Returns 0-1 … Returns 23-0 
1020 0.065148353 … 0,035205517 0,05418259 … 0,038980892 

4.2. Data Mining  

The normalized activity at stations serves as input for the DM phase. Here, cluster analysis is used in order to 
group stations according to their normalized bike pickup and return activity. The outcome in form of temporal 
patterns are spatially examined to discover location dependent reasons for activity patterns. First, the clustering 
tendency of the ride data is determined. Then, different cluster algorithms are applied and evaluated with validation 
measures. Visualization and interpretation of clusters complete this section. 

Almost every cluster algorithms will find clusters, even if the data has no natural cluster structure (Tan et al., 
2006). Thus, cluster validation is necessary in order to determine the clustering tendency of the data set by 
distinguishing whether there is a non-random structure in the data or not. With the help of the Hopkins-Statistic (Tan 
et al., 2006) the ratio of nearest neighbor distances between randomly generated and actual data points are 
calculated. Values near to 0.5 indicate randomly distributed data whereas values close to 0 or 1 indicate that data is 
highly clustered or regularly distributed. The Hopkins-Statistic applied to the normalized pickups and returns at 
stations yields a value of 0.743. This indicates that the data set is suitable for cluster analysis.  

Cluster analysis is used to group stations according to their pickup and return activity. The goal is that data 
objects within a group are similar to each other and different from objects in other groups (Tan et al., 2006). Tan et 
al. (2006) suggest comparing the outcome of different cluster algorithms for a varying number of clusters. Therefore 
k-means (KM) (Tan et al., 2006), Expectation Maximization (EM) (Tan et al., 2006) and sequential Information-
Bottleneck (sIB) (Slonim et al., 2002) are applied for cluster analysis. KM is one of the most well-known partitional 
cluster algorithms. Due to the high dimensionality, partitional cluster algorithms seem to be a promising approach 
(Berkhin, 2006). Here data objects are assigned to k clusters whereas the number of clusters has to be chosen 
beforehand. Based on an initial partitioning, objects are relocated by minimizing the distances of objects within 
clusters and maximizing the distance of objects in different clusters. The EM algorithm extends the KM paradigm. 
Each object is assigned to a cluster on basis of a weight that represents the probability of membership. sIB is an 
agglomerative clustering method originally designed for cluster analysis of documents. sIB is used because it is 
capable of dealing with high dimensional data. Cluster validation indices measure if a structure found with cluster 
analysis is adequate. No reference to external information is taken into account by the applied measures. The 
Davies-Bouldin-Index (Jain and Dubes, 1988), Dunn-Index (Abonyi and Feil, 2007) and Silhouette-Index (Tan et 



520  Patrick Vogel et al. / Procedia Social and Behavioral Sciences 20 (2011) 514–523

al., 2006) determine the cohesion and separation of clusters according to the distance between data sets among each 
other and their clusters. The higher the value for Dunn and Silhouette Index the better the clustering. The opposite 
holds for the Davies-Bouldin-Index. Cohesion and separation get better with ascending number of clusters. 
Therefore a first (local) optimum in the indices` values, called elbow, indicates a reasonable clustering (Tan et al., 
2006). EM, KM and sIB are applied to the normalized activity data for k varying from two to ten. The best result of 
100 iterations with different seeds for each algorithm is chosen using the Euclidian distance as similarity measure. A 
maximum of 500 steps is performed in every iteration. The additional parameter for EM is the minimum standard 
deviation for normal density computation set to 1E-10. For sIB the number of different solutions is two and the 
minimum number of changes in a single step is zero. The computed results are validated with three indices. 

 

0,15

0,20

0,25

0,30

0,35

0,40

0,45

0,50

1,00

1,10

1,20

1,30

1,40

1,50

1,60

1,70

1,80

1,90

2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

D
un

n,
 S

ilh
ou

et
te

D
av

ie
s-

Bo
ul

di
n

Number of clusters

EM: Davies-Bouldin KM: Davies-Bouldin sIB: Davies-Bouldin

EM: Dunn KM: Dunn sIB: Dunn

EM: Silhouette KM: Silhouette sIB: Silhouette
 

Figure 3. Index values for different cluster algorithms 

Cluster validation values for working days are depicted in Figure 3. A clear elbow indicated by a drop in the 
Davies-Bouldin-Index and peaks for Dunn und Silhouette can be identified for the EM-Algorithm with 5 clusters. 
According to the elbow criterion, sIB and KM also yield the best clustering for k = 5. A comparison of cluster 
algorithms among each other shows that EM outperforms sIB and KM. Since cluster validation indices only 
determine the cohesion and separation of clusters, an interpretation of clusters themselves is needed. Results are 
discussed in the following section.  

4.3. Temporal and spatial validation of clusters  

According to our hypothesis, daily bike activity depends on the stations location. Thus, results of the EM 
algorithm for five clusters are temporally and spatially validated. The following validation is conducted in close 
consultation with the operator of the BSS. The centroid of every cluster is used for a temporal validation of clusters. 
A centroid represents the average point in space for a cluster. Regarding the activity at stations, the centroid is the 
average pickup and return proportion for every single hour of all stations belonging to the same cluster. The 
centroids are depicted in Figure 4. At blue cluster stations at average 6% of the total daily returns occur between 8 
and 9 a.m., for example. 



Patrick Vogel et al. / Procedia Social and Behavioral Sciences 20 (2011) 514–523 521

 

 

 

Figure 4. Activity patterns for pickups and returns in the daily course for working days 

Five different patterns in the temporal pickup and return activity at stations are distinguished. For a better 
understanding clusters are labeled according to their daily pickup and return patterns: 
 16 stations are assigned to cluster Returns Morning Pickups Evening (RMPE). These stations show a higher 

return activity in the morning compared to pickup activity (6 % vs. 2 %). In the evening, pickup activity is 
slightly higher than return activity.  

 Cluster Pickups Morning Returns Evening (PMRE) consists of 13 stations which feature the opposite pattern. 
Morning return activities are four times higher than pickup activities whereas return activities dominate in the 
evening hours. 

 The 12 stations of the cluster Active Night Pickups Morning (ANPM) shows the highest activity of all clusters at 
nighttime. Morning activities are slightly increased comparing to PMRE. 

 The biggest cluster with 19 stations is labeled AVG because it reflects average pickup and return activities. When 
averaging the activity of all stations, the outcome is very similar to the pattern of this cluster.  

 Cluster Active Daytime (AD) is the smallest cluster with only 3 stations. This cluster’s pickup and return activities 
dominate over the other clusters during daytime.  
With the help of a clustering algorithm stations are grouped according to their temporal activities. For location 

planning purposes it is necessary to examine if these activities depend on spatial factors. That is why the clusters’ 
geographical distribution is visualized in Figure 5. Stations within the same cluster tend to be located in neighboring 
areas. Exploratory analysis of the clusters’ surroundings leads to the following findings: 
 The blue RMPE stations are all located in the inner city area which offers a high number of working places 

compared to other districts (Vienna Statistical Yearbook, 2009). This supports the assumption that workers use 
the Citybike for commuting. Also tourist attractions are found in the city center. Tourists and workers might be 
the cause for the high pickup and return activity in the evening hours.  

 In the middle of cluster RMPE lays station 1021 of the orange AD cluster. Citybike tourist cards are handed out 
near this station. The other two AD stations are located near the famous tourist attractions castle Schoenbrunn in 
the southwest and the Prater carnival in the northeast. This confirms the high daily and low nightly activity of 
these stations which might be caused by tourists.  

 Stations of the night active red ANPM cluster tend to be located at the edge of the network and close to the city 
center. For example, popular night clubs and bars lay in the immediate vicinity of station 1041 Falkostiege and 
1042 Pilgramgasse causing high nightly activity. 

 Cluster PMRE shows a similar activity pattern to ANPM, but is more active during the morning and evening. 
Green stations are even more located at the periphery with residential buildings.  

 Although AVG stations are randomly spread over the network, they still occur in small groups. One reason for 
this might be that spatial factors overlap at these stations. 
 



522  Patrick Vogel et al. / Procedia Social and Behavioral Sciences 20 (2011) 514–523

 

Figure 5. Geographical distribution of clusters (aerial view of the city of Vienna) 

The presented findings from the spatio-temporal analysis show that reasons for certain pickup and return 
activities at bike stations are complex and diverse. The presumption that activity patterns and the station’s location 
are correlated seems promising according to first results from the Geo BI process. A further investigation of the 
stations surroundings is needed to fully support the hypothesis. 

5. Conclusion and Outlook 

BSS enhance inner-city public transport options. Ensuring high bike availability is crucial for the acceptance of 
such systems. Due to one-way use and short rental times imbalances in the spatial distribution of bikes occur. One 
measure alleviating imbalances is a suitable location planning of bike stations with OR. A Geo BI process is 
presented to gain insights into the complex bike activity. This leads to better hypotheses about BSS structure and 
increases OR effectiveness. 

We hypothesize that bike activity and demanding customers depend on the stations’ locations. With the help of 
Geo BI, exploratory and cluster analysis of ride data reveal spatio-temporal dependencies of pickup and return 
activity patterns at bike stations. This supports the stated hypothesis. In future research, customer profiles and 
clustering of stations according to their location factors have to be determined with the aim of further supporting the 
hypothesis. Also ride data has to be adequately processed for the incorporation in location planning models. 

Acknowledgements 

We thank „Gewista Werbegesellschaft m.b.H.“ for providing data from their project “Citybike Wien” and 
discussing related issues and results.  

References 

Abonyi, J. & Feil, B. (2007).Cluster Analysis for Data Mining and System Identification. Birkhäuser Verlag AG. 
Berkhin, P. (2006). A Survey of Clustering Data Mining Techniques. In: Grouping Multidimensional Data. 25 – 71. 



Patrick Vogel et al. / Procedia Social and Behavioral Sciences 20 (2011) 514–523 523

Borgnat, P., Robardet, C., Rouquier, J.-B., Abry, P., Fleury, E. & Flandrin, P.  (2010). Shared Bicycles in a City: A Signal Processing and Data 
Analysis Perspective. 

DeMaio, P. (2009). Bike-sharing: History. Impacts. Models of Provision. and Future. In: Journal of Public Transportation. Vol. 12. No. 4. 2009. 
Fayyad, U. M., Piattetsky-Shapiro, G., Smyth, P. (1996). From Data Mining to Knowledge Discovery: An Overview. In: Fayyad, U. M., 

Piatetsky-Shapiro, G., Smyth, P., Uthurusamy, R. (Ed.): Advances in Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining. AAAI Press, Menlo Park, 1–
34. 

Feix, C. (2007). Bedeutung von "Geo Business Intelligence" und Geomarketing zur Entscheidungsunterstützung unternehmerischer 
Planungsprozesse im Kontext wirtschaftlicher Liberalisierung. Freie Universität Berlin. 

Froehlich, J., Neumann, J. & Oliver, N. (2008). Sensing and Predicting the Pulse of the City through Shared Bicycling. (Proceedings of the 
International Workshop on Urban. Community. and Social Applications of Networked Sensing Systems). 

Han, J. & Kamber, M. (2006). Data Mining: Concepts and Techniques. Morgan Kaufmann. San Francisco. 
Jain, A. K. & Dubes, R. C. (1988). Algorithms for clustering data. Prentice-Hall. 
Kaltenbrunner, A., Meza, R., Grivolla, J., Condina, J. & Banchs, R. (2010). Urban cycles and mobility patterns: Exploring and predicting trends 

in a bicycle-based public transport system. Pervasive and Mobile Computing. 6(4). 455–466. 
Lin, J.-R. &Yang, T.-H. (2011). Strategic design of public bicycle sharing systems with service level constraints. In Transportation Research 

Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review 47 (2), pp. 284–294. 
Meisel, S. & Mattfeld, D. C. (2010). Synergies of Operations Research and Data Mining. European Journal of Operational Research. 206(1). 1–

10. 
Midgley, P. (2009). The Role of Smart Bike-sharing Systems. In: Urban Mobility. Journeys. May. 23 – 31. 
Pinkofsky, L. (2006). Typisierung von Ganglinien der Verkehrsstärke und ihre Eignung zur Modellierung der Verkehrsnachfrage. Dissertation. 

Technische Universität Carolo-Wilhelmina zu Braunschweig. Institut für Verkehr und Stadtbauwesen.  
Salhi, R. & Rand, G. K. (1989). The effect of ignoring routes when locating depots. European Journal of Operations Research 39 (1989). 150 – 

156. 
Shaheen, S., Guzman, S. & Zhang, H. (2010). Bikesharing in Europe. the Americas. and Asia: Past. Present and Future. Transportation Research 

Record. 
Slonim, N., Friedman, N. & Tishby, N. (2002). Unsupervised document classification using sequential information maximization. In: Beaulieu. 

M. (Ed.): SIGIR 2002. Tampere. Finland. 129 – 136. 
Tan, P.-N., Steinbach, M. & Kumar,V. (2006). Introduction to Data Mining. Pearson Addison-Wesley. 
Vienna Statistical Yearbook (2009). http://www.wien.gv.at/statistik/pdf/bezirksportraets09.pdf 
Zahory, M. N. (2009). Tendering for the BSS in Arlington. www.metrobike.net/index.php?s=file_download&id=18. 


