






































Real time exploration and management of large medical volumetric datasets on small mobile devicesﾗEvaluation of remote volume rendering approach


Please cite this article in press as: Hachaj, T. Real time exploration and management of large medical volumetric datasets on
small  mobile devices—Evaluation of remote volume rendering approach. International Journal of Information Management (2013),
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2013.11.005

ARTICLE IN PRESSG ModelJJIM-1289; No. of Pages 8
International Journal of Information Management xxx (2013) xxx– xxx

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

International  Journal  of  Information  Management

j ourna l ho me pa ge: www.elsev ier .com/ locate / i j in fomgt

Real  time  exploration  and  management  of  large  medical  volumetric
datasets  on  small  mobile  devices—Evaluation  of  remote  volume
rendering  approach

Tomasz  Hachaj ∗

Pedagogical University of Krakow, Institute of Computer Science and Computer Methods, 2 Podchorazych Ave, 30-084 Krakow, Poland

a  r  t i  c  l  e  i  n  f  o

Article history:
Available online xxx

Keywords:
Remote volume rendering
Medical support systems
Mobile devices
Remote interface protocol
Image data transmission

a  b  s  t  r  a  c  t

In this  paper  I present  the  architecture  of  system  that  can  be  used  for real  time  exploration  and  manage-
ment  of large  medical  volumetric  datasets.  The  new  state  of the  art  solution  presented  in  this  paper  is
an  example  of visual  data  management  system.  System  prototype  evaluation  proved  that  it  is  possible  to
use  low-powered  (and  cheap)  up-to-date  mobile  devices  with programmable  GPUs  as  the  remote inter-
faces for  exploration  of  large  volumetric  medical  data. The  implementation  was  done  with  high-level
programming  language  that  enables  portability  between  different  hardware  models.  The  lack of  lossy
compression  enables  to display  high  quality  medical  images  visualizations  without  any  simplifications
and  noises  in frequency  domain.  The  prototype  of  system  is capable  to remotely  render  and  send  to  a
client  (for example  cell  phone  or tablet)  rendered  data  with  frequency  30  fps with  limited  resolution
during  interaction.  One  second  after  the  interaction  is  finished  client  machine  receives full resolution
image.  The  evaluation  of  the  system  was  performed  on  volumetric  computed  tomography  angiography
image  with  approximate  size  5123 voxels.

© 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction

Computer science is a strongly interdisciplinary branch of
knowledge. In informatics, each new scientific and technical
achievement that has potential to become valuable commercial
product is very quickly deployed into multiple different disciplines
of science. Because of this the rapid development in computer
science often stimulates the progress of associated disciplines.
This influence is especially visible in contemporary medicine and
medical systems. Paper (Hachaj & Ogiela, 2013) presents selected
applications of computer methods in the field of contemporary
medical informatics. The remarkable impact of computer science
and telecommunication on medicine is visible in the field of so-
called Picture Archiving and Communication Systems (PACS). PACS
system is a medical imaging technology that provides econom-
ical storage of and convenient access to images from multiple
modalities (source machine types) (Mehmet, 2012). The concept
of PACS was initiated in 1982, since then PACS have been matured
to become an everyday clinical tool for image archiving, commu-
nication, display, and review (Huang, 2011). In some cases it is
not necessary or not possible for doctor to have direct access to
complicated PACS workstations or even face-to-face contact with

∗ Tel.: +48 12 662 63 22.
E-mail address: tomekhachaj@o2.pl

particular patient (Hachaj & Ogiela, 2013). Report (Kho, Henderson,
Dressler, & Kripalani, 2006) suggests that over the past decade,
handheld computers (or personal digital assistants – PDAs) have
become popular tools among medical trainees and physicians.
Many medical students and residents use PDAs for educational
purposes or patient care. Most of the studies included described
PDA use for patient tracking and documentation, medical text-
books, medication references, and medical calculators as the most
useful applications. A PDA can also supply physician with an inter-
face for PACS system however in this case some very serious
methodological and technological obstacles have to be overcome.
One of the most remarkable problems is real-time visualization
of patients’ volumetric datasets. Those datasets are mostly prod-
ucts of computed tomography (CT), magnetic resonance (MR),
single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) or positron
emission tomography (PET). Medical 3D visualization is considered
real-time if it gives physician capability to interact with visual-
ization by changing the position of observation, declaring clipping
planes and modifying transparencies and colors of tissues without
noticeable latency. In order to achieve this functionalities scientists
and engineers has to incorporate they knowledge about remote
rendering, data transmission and mobile devices programming.

This paper proposes system architecture, implementation of
prototype and its evaluation that uses small mobile devices (cell
phone, tablets, etc.) for real time exploration of large medical
datasets. The new state of the art solution presented in this paper

0268-4012/$ – see front matter ©  2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2013.11.005

dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2013.11.005
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2013.11.005
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/journal/02684012
http://www.elsevier.com/locate/ijinfomgt
mailto:tomekhachaj@o2.pl
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2013.11.005


Please cite this article in press as: Hachaj, T. Real time exploration and management of large medical volumetric datasets on
small  mobile devices—Evaluation of remote volume rendering approach. International Journal of Information Management (2013),
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2013.11.005

ARTICLE IN PRESSG ModelJJIM-1289; No. of Pages 8
2 T. Hachaj / International Journal of Information Management xxx (2013) xxx– xxx

is an example of visual data management system. This particular
type of dataset was chosen because it seems to be one of the most
challenging modalities to visualize (because of size and complexity)
and also it is commonly used in imaging based diagnosis processes
(Ogiela, 2008). In the next sections of this section the state of the
art of remote rendering, data transmission and mobile devices pro-
gramming will be presented. Then I will summarize papers about
existing systems with similar capabilities as my  proposition. I will
also show advantage of my  new solution over existing ones.

1.1. Remote rendering

CPU computing in MIMD  model (multiple instruction–multiple
data) does not allow to obtain sufficient rendering speed for most
of real medical volumetric imaging data. Because of that visual-
izations of that kind are done with algorithm tailored to fit SIMD
programming model (single instruction–multiple data). Contem-
porary mobile devices like cell phones or tablets have its own
programmable GPU units that are used for graphic rendering. Mod-
ern direct volume rendering algorithms (Hachaj & Ogiela, 2012a,
2012b) enables high performance rendering of volumetric medi-
cal datasets on consumers hardware. However those algorithms
required big amounts of GPU memory (normally the whole dataset
to be visualized should be put into GPU RAM), also they utilize
the specialized hardware capabilities like tri-linear interpolation
of three-dimensional textures. Those crucial capabilities are inac-
cessible on low powered mobile GPUs. All of those factors force
computer scientist to use different approaches of volumetric data
visualization. One of the most common is to use different work-
station for image rendering while PDA is used for remote display
with touch interface for the user. Multiple approaches of remote
rendering were introduced in the past years. First attempts to
remote volume rendering techniques were undertaken when there
were no dedicated GPU SIMD processors. At the very beginning
those types of visualization required employing computer clus-
ters (Hancock & Hubbold, 1997; Renambot, van der Schaafa, Bala,
Germansb, & Spoelderb, 2003; Schulze & Lang, 2003; Todd Elvins,
1996). More recently most of common 3D graphic can be rendered
on commercial GPU, however there are still cases when remote ren-
dering techniques are utilized: the first case is when amount of data
is too large to obtain sufficient frame rate on consumer’s GPU and
the second case is when we have hardware limitation (for exam-
ple while rendering on mobile low-power devices). According to
Okamoto, Oishi, and Ikeuchi (2011) recent advances in sensing and
software technologies enable us to obtain large-scale, yet fine 3D
mesh models (nearly 2 × 107 input triangles), however, such large
models cannot be displayed interactively on consumer computers
because of the performance limitation of the hardware. In paper
(Okamoto et al., 2011) authors propose an interactive rendering
system for large 3D mesh models, stored on a remote environment
through a network of relatively small capacity machines, based on
the cloud computing concept. On the server, the 3D models are
rendered by the model-based method using a hierarchical data
structure with level of detail (LOD). On the client, an arbitrary view
is constructed by using a novel image-based method, referred to
as the Grid-Lumigraph, which blends colors from sampling images
received from the server. The problem of remote visualization of
massive geographical data is also described in Zhang et al. (2005).
That paper illustrates the ellipsoidal quadtree technique for rapid
access multi-scale and multiple level geographical data, integrates
the streaming with level-of-detail rendering method for transmit-
ting the data on the network, and implements large-scale terrain
surface simplification using M-band wavelet transforms and multi-
resolution triangulations. Paper (Chityala, Pudipeddi, Arensten, &
Hui, 2013) reports usage of a specialized high-end remote visualiza-
tion system for visualization of dataset that was more than 50 GB in

size with more than 6000 2048 × 2048 slices. In paper (Wua, Gaob,
& Chenc, 2009) authors propose an optimized image composit-
ing scheme with linear pipeline and adaptive transport to support
efficient image delivery to a remote client. The proposed scheme
arranges an arbitrary number of parallel processors within a clus-
ter in a linear order and divides the image into a carefully selected
number of segments, which flow through the linear in-cluster
pipeline and wide-area networks to the remote client consecu-
tively. In work (Bao, Li, Zhang, & Dong, 2012) authors present a new
framework for rendering large-scale forest scenes realistically and
quickly that integrates extracting level of detail (LOD) tree models,
rendering real-time shadows for large-scale forests, and transmit-
ting forest data for network applications. Experiments show that
large-scale forest scenes can be rendered with smooth shadows
and in real time.

1.2. Data transmission

The amount of data to be transfer by the net by visualiza-
tion systems can often be too large to enable efficient sending
new list of polygons or rendered frames. Because of that trans-
ferring problems are often solved by simplifications of the data
model and/or data compression (lossy and lossless). In order to
transmit the polygon data to the client efficiently, paper (Zhang
et al., 2009) proposes a node-layer data model to manage the 3D
scene. A client/server architecture including progressive transmis-
sion methods and multi-resolution representations, together with
the spatial index, are developed to improve the performance.

The modern network-oriented computer games (as being
multimedia network systems) often introduce very interesting
communications solutions. Paper (Preda, Villegas, Morán, Lafruit,
& Berretty, 2008) describes a framework to develop distributive,
multiplayer 3D games. Scalability at the level of content (adapta-
tion and coding) is exploited to achieve the best trade-offs between
complexity and quality. Paper (Ohta, Kitahara, Kameda, Ishikawa,
& Koyama, 2007) proposes a method to realize a 3D video system
that can capture video data from multiple cameras, reconstruct 3D
models, transmit 3D video streams via the network (after apply-
ing simplifications of captured data), and display them on remote
PCs. All processes are done in real time. The teleimmersive envi-
ronment presented in (Kurillo & Bajcsy, 2013) provides a venue for
collaborative work on 3D data such as medical imaging, scientific
data and models, archeological datasets, architectural or mechani-
cal designs, remote training. Authors perform network transfer by
reducing the size of the 3D video packets and by implementing var-
ious network transmission schemes (mostly triangles and colors
coding).

Thin wireless mobile devices are unable to handle the com-
plexity of 3D graphics at interactive frame rates. In research work
(Boukerche, Pazzi, & Feng, 2008) authors propose efficient end-
to-end streaming and rate control protocols. Approach consists of
moving the demanding geometry-rendering task to a dedicated
remote rendering server that streams the rendering output to a
client, leaving only the displaying and certain minor image-based
rendering tasks to the local, less powerful mobile hardware.

It can be concluded that proper data exchanging and transmis-
sion management might be a key point for obtaining real-time
speed of interaction between mobile devices and rendering work-
station.

1.3. Mobile devices programming

In case of mobile devices programming (especially when those
devices are part of large multimedia systems) system architect has
to struggle with limitations of hardware resources. However, when
there is access to net many tasks can be computed remotely and

dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2013.11.005


http://isiarticles.com/article/20195

