

























































EUROGRAPHICS 2017/ A. Bousseau and D. Gutierrez Tutorial

Mobile Graphics

Marco Agus 1,3, Enrico Gobbetti 1, Fabio Marton 1, Giovanni Pintore 1, and Pere-Pau Vázquez 2

1 Visual Computing, CRS4, Italy
2 Computer Science Department, Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya, Spain

3 Visual Computing Center, King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Saudi Arabia

Abstract
The increased availability and performance of mobile graphics terminals, including smartphones and tablets with high resolu-
tion screens and powerful GPUs, combined with the increased availability of high-speed mobile data connections, is opening
the door to a variety of networked graphics applications. In this world, native apps or mobile sites coexist to reach the goal
of providing us access to a wealth of multimedia information while we are on the move. This half-day tutorial provides a tech-
nical introduction to the mobile graphics world spanning the hardware-software spectrum, and explores the state of the art
and key advances in specific application domains, including capture and acquisition, real-time high-quality 3D rendering and
interactive exploration.

Keywords. Mobile Rendering, Massive Models, Ambient Occlusion, Global Illumination, Rendering Pipeline, Indoor Scene
Reconstruction, Omnidirectional Images, Mobile mapping, Camera Control, Volume Rendering

1. Tutorial details

1.1. Format and prerequisites

Format Half day (2x90min).

Necessary background The tutorial is at the beginner-
intermediate level. Basic programming and interactive graphics
background is a pre-requisite.

Intended audience The tutorial targets researchers and practition-
ers with an interest in developing visual computing applications on
mobile devices.

1.2. Detailed tutorial outline

In last decades, worldwide mobile phone subscriptions grew to over
seven billion, penetrating 100% of the global population and reach-
ing even the bottom of the economic pyramid. Of these subscrip-
tions, about 3.5 billions have internet access, and the ability to ex-
change information is continuing to grow exponentially, with multi-
media data taking a large share. Hence, it is expected that the future
of computing in general, and visual computing in particular, will be
dramatically affected by this scenario.

The tutorial will present an overview of the evolution and state-
of-the-art of mobile graphics platforms, discuss current graphics
APIs and development tools for developing mobile applications,
and illustrate current trends in exploiting capture, networking, and
display hardware. Detailed examples will be provided in two visual

computing domains: exploiting data fusion techniques for metric
capture and reconstruction, and exploiting networking and display
hardware to visualize and interact with massive models. The tuto-
rial concludes with a view of future challenges.

The outline of the individual sessions is detailed in the following
sections.

SESSION 1: Evolution of the mobile graphics world

In the last +15 years, mobiles have changed to being just an useful
tool for emergencies, to be with us through most of our daily tasks.
We use them for guiding us while driving, to account how many
steps or miles we have covered, to answer our mails, and, of course,
to spend some time by playing or watching TV shows.

Many companies rely on the ubiquity of mobile devices (and In-
ternet connections through them) to provide their services. We ask
for a taxi while listening to cloud-stored music, and get continuous
notifications on the transit, weather, shopping offers...

Ericsson Mobility Report [Eri16] predicts that global smart-
phone subscriptions will grow from 7.3B to 9B by 2021, with
a notable growth in smartphones, that will double. Moreover, it
also predicts the mobile traffic will grow from 1.4GB/month to
8.9GB/month by 2021.

Early on, with the advent of mobile devices, games arrived with
them. In 1997, the Nokia 6610 sported the Snake game. It become
so popular that this year, a new version of the Nokia 3310 was an-
nounced with all bells and whistles, with the game Snake as one of

c© 2017 The Author(s)
Eurographics Proceedings c© 2017 The Eurographics Association.



M. Agus & E. Gobbetti & F. Marton & G. Pintore & P.-P. Váquez / Mobile Graphics

its selling points. So throughout the history of smartphones, gam-
ing [FGBAR12] (especially casual gaming [Kul09]) has become
one of its desired features, and with gaming, the needs of increas-
ing the graphics power come all along.

In this session, we will analyze the evolution of the mobile world
from the point of view of the graphics, but also with all the elements
that make it possible, such as the GPU, the operative system, and
so on...

The main areas that will be covered are:

• Overview of mobile world, and its capillary diffusion;
• Description of the main characteristics of mobile graphics termi-

nals, with respect to network; capabilities, graphics and displays,
sensors and CPUs;

• Discussion of current issues and future opportunities.

This section ends with a discussion that will lead to a further
analysis of the mobile application trends.

SESSION 2: Mobile graphics application trends

Since the release of the iPhone, smartphones have become main-
stream. Most of us own at least one of those, and it is not uncom-
mon to see people sporting two of those. However, despite that, ac-
cording to the GSM organization, two-thirds of the population own
a device ( [A∗17]) there is a lack of variety in vendors, and opera-
tive systems. Most of the devices sold either have iOS or Android,
accounting for a 95% of the market. Thus, the evolution of appli-
cations and graphics in general is tightly linked to the evolution of
those two operative systems ( [GR11, Tra12]).

The session will cover different aspects of mobile graphics, such
as:

• General overview of rendering pipeline for interactive 3D mobile
applications.

• Evolution of 3D graphics applications, from remote rendering
solutions to hybrid mobile/remote solutions, exploiting image-
based or model-based methods.

• Overview of current trends in hardware acceleration employ-
ing parallel pipelines, real-time ray tracing and multi-rate ap-
proaches;

• Overview of other visual mobile applications like 3D acquisi-
tion and processing, physical simulations, and visual aberration
correction.

After this session, the talk will concentrate on the actual devel-
opment of applications and the technical aspects involved.

SESSION 3: Graphics development for mobile systems

As commented above, only two operative systems dominate the
market, with above 95% of the market share: iOS and Android.

Apple was first in creating a closed way to install new apps on
a mobile, through the Apple Store. The device owners can only in-
stall applications from the official store. Moreover, Apple uses a
strict approval-first policy that is lengthy and sometimes arbitrary.
Although there are other means to install applications in an iPhone

or iPad, they are forbidden by Apple and are by no means acces-
sible to most of the population, due to its technical complications.
This has permitted Apple to have a fine grain control on which
applications appear in the store, and, though it has its own short-
comings, especially for developers, it has some advantages for the
users, such as the relative safety of the content.

Following the path marked by Apple, Google also provides a
store, although the users can easily install applications from other
sources, even from other vendors such as Amazon or Samsung, that
compete with Google both in selling devices, and in selling apps.

Both operative system owners (Apple and Google) have created
the tools that facilitate the development of aplications. In the case of
iOS, Apple provides an SDK for the development using Objective
C. More recently, Apple is shifting to a new language called Swift,
and moving the graphics development to a new language, called
Metal ( [CP15], both developed by Apple.

Google chosed Java instead, for its popularity. Android SDK also
provides a set of tools for application development, that is contin-
uously evolving. The graphics language implemented in Android
is OpenGL, although new versions of Android are now supporting
the evolution of OpenGL: Vulkan.

The outline of the discussed points will be the following one:

• Overview of main operating systems employed in mobile plat-
forms;

• Description of currently used programming languages and tools
and deployment environments;

• Introduction to currently available 3D APIs.
• Q&A

SESSION 4: Mobile metric capture and reconstruction

Mobile devices have become increasingly attractive for solving en-
vironment sensing problems given their multi-modal acquisition
capabilities and their growing processing power, enabling fast dig-
ital acquisition and effective information extraction [DL15]. In this
tutorial session, we will cover the following subjects:

• Overview of the mobile device sensor and sensor-fusion capa-
bilities available on mobile devices, ranging from commodity
smartphones and tablets to new generation spherical panoramic
cameras (SPC).

• Introduction to image-based 3D reconstruction methods running
on mobile devices;

• Mobile metric reconstruction methods using a combination of
images and inertial acceleration data with an example imple-
mentation of a full acquisition and SfM reconstruction pipeline
working in a limited bounding volume;

• Real-world cases: mobile mapping and reconstruction of indoor
scenes, from the limits of the perspective views to the advantages
of the wide-FOV panoramic images;

• Example of application: mobile reconstruction and exploration
of indoor structures exploiting omnidirectional images;

• Motion estimation and dense depth maps generation from small
motion with mobile SPC;

• Future trends: automatic mapping and reconstruction of indoor
structures from 360 video sequences.

• Q&A

c© 2017 The Author(s)
Eurographics Proceedings c© 2017 The Eurographics Association.



M. Agus & E. Gobbetti & F. Marton & G. Pintore & P.-P. Váquez / Mobile Graphics

SESSION 5: Scalable mobile visualization

Since the first version on Snakes back in 1997, the GPUs have
evolved, but also gaming and gamers. Nowadays, many hardcore
gamers demand for incredibly large, realistic environments, to-
gether with multi-user collaboration and interaction. Mobile gam-
ing has also evolved similarly. Nowadays, many applications try to
mimic the console quality.

In this session we will analyze some of the developments in mo-
bile graphics that make this possible. From the rendering of massive
models, to the implementation of realistic rendering techniques or
the use of volume data.

Despite being claimed the contrary, mobile GPUs are still not
on par with consoles and/or desktop GPUs. This makes the use
of large scenes or datasets, quite difficult. As a result there is a
need in the implementation of algorithms that are able to deal with
large models. Despite mobile GPUs are equipped with powerful
hardware, that implements a large portion of the OpenGL pipeline
(e.g. tessellation, 3D textures...), the horsepower is not enough in
many cases, to deal with (what in desktop would be considered)
medium to large scenes in realtime.

There are several main challenges when developing graphics ap-
plications for mobile devices:

• Memory limitations: The model might not fit inside the mobile
device.

• GPU capabilities: The algorithm we intend to use either requires
non available GPU features (e.g. not all GPUs support tessella-
tion).

• GPU horsepower: Even if the GPU has the capabilities, and the
memory to store the data, the algorithm required (e.g. a GPU-
based raycasting) is unable to render, because it is so costly that
the operative system kills the application because it has become
non responsive.

• Performance: We can avoid the previous limitations but still have
not enough performance for the implementation run smoothly.

Throughout the last years, there have been many developments
tailored to improve the quality of renderings for large datasets, both
in terms of quality and in performance.

The initial trend was the creation of client-server architec-
tures, where the mobile simply renders an image generated by a
high end device [PGGB12]. This architecture has been used both
for meshes [BAMG14a], point clouds [BGM∗12], and volume
datasets [LS07].

The arrival of more powerful GPUs, just recently, has allowed
the possibility of rendering large models with them, although al-
ways performing some sort of simplification. This is due to the fact
that, even if claimed the contrary, mobile GPUs still are 10 to 40
times slower than a desktop GPU, as can be seen in benchmarks
that compare both GPUs (such as GFXBench).

For high quality illumination, we only find papers that address
some parts of the rendering equation, being it shadows [BLM16], or
some physically-based rendering effects [LKC14]. In many cases,
when implemented in mobile, global illumination approximations
rely on a high number of precalculations [KUK15], usually in the
form of light maps [SE16]. There are just a few techniques that

calculate a certain approximation to the rendering equation on re-
altime, e.g. ambient occlusion [SV16a].

In the case of volumetric models, it was not until 2011-2012 that
rendering them directly on the smartphone was possible, using a
standard GPU-based raycasting [BV12]. But even the framerates
that one can achieve with the latest device are still low for volumet-
ric datasets [SAK15].

• Characteristics of mobile devices with respect to massive models
and need for scalable technique with low CPU overhead;

• Converting complex environments to image-based solutions;
• Scaling in terms of geometry: comparison of general chunked

triangulation/point-cloud methods with constrained techniques
exploiting pre-defined compressed image formats and graphics
primitives;

• Improving visual quality with real-time screen-space based
global illumination methods for mobile applications.

• Approaches to support interactive volumetric exploration.
• Q&A

SESSION 6: Wrap-up and Conclusions

• Summary and view of future challenges
• Final Q&A session

2. Relevant references

The tutorial will provide a general introduction and summary to
the domain of mobile graphics. Some particular works will be pre-
sented in more details to illustrate case studies of significant meth-
ods and applications. Relevant references are the following:

• capture and reconstruction [PGGS16b, GPG∗16, PGG∗16,
PAG14, PG14]; metric reconstruction with mobile de-
vices [GPG∗16];

• presentation of enhanced image representations [AJPG16],
image-based exploration of environments [PGGS16a,DGB∗14],
and real-time interactive exploration of massive sur-
faces [BAMG14b, BGMT13, BGMT13, GMB∗12] and vol-
umes [VB12, DGBN∗16]

• real-time global illumination [SV16b]

3. Presenters

Marco Agus is currently research engineer in the Visual Com-
puting Center (VCC) at King Abdullah University of Science and
Technology. He holds a Laurea (M.Sc.) degree in Electronics En-
gineering (1999) and a Ph.D. degree in Mechanical Engineering
(2004) from the University of Cagliari, Italy. His research interests
span a variety of visual computing topics, including massive model
rendering and 3D spatial interaction on various displays, ranging
from mobile platforms to light field displays, volume visualization,
haptics and surgical simulations, and 3D digital heritage applica-
tions. His research is published in book chapters, journal and con-
ference papers in the area of computer graphics. He served as pro-
gram committee member and reviewer and presented tutorials at
international conferences.

c© 2017 The Author(s)
Eurographics Proceedings c© 2017 The Eurographics Association.



M. Agus & E. Gobbetti & F. Marton & G. Pintore & P.-P. Váquez / Mobile Graphics

Enrico Gobbetti is the director of Visual Computing (ViC) at the
Center for Advanced Studies, Research, and Development in Sar-
dinia (CRS4), Italy. He holds an Engineering degree (1989) and
a Ph.D. degree (1993) in Computer Science from the Swiss Fed-
eral Institute of Technology in Lausanne (EPFL), as well as Full
Professor Habilitations in Computer Science and Information Pro-
cessing from the Italian Ministry of University and Research. Prior
to joining CRS4, he held research and teaching positions at EPFL,
UMBC, and NASA. Enrico’s research spans many areas of visual
computing and is widely published in major journals and confer-
ences. Many of the technologies developed by his group have been
used in as diverse real-world applications as internet geoviewing,
scientific data analysis, surgical training, and cultural heritage study
and valorization. Enrico regularly contributes to the community as
reviewer, commitee member, and tutorial speaker. He participated
to the Editorial Board of Computer Graphics Forum (2008-2011),
and is currently Associate Editor of The Visual Computer (2010-
now), Frontiers in Virtual Environments (2014-now), and IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics (2015-now).
He is key member of IEEE Technical Committes on Multimedia
Communication (2010-now) and Human Perception and Multime-
dia Computing (2012-now). He also served as Program Chair of
ACM Web3D 2013 and EGPGV 2016, as well as general co-chair
e Eurographics 2012 and EuroVis 2015.

Fabio Marton is a researcher in the Visual Computing (ViC)
group at the Center for Advanced Studies, Research, and Devel-
opment in Sardinia (CRS4). He holds a Laurea (M. Sc.) degree
(1999) in Computer Engineering from the University of Padova, as
well as an Associate Professor Habilitation in Computer Science
from the Italian Ministry of University and Research. His current
research interests include out-of-core data processing, compression
multiresolution modeling and time-critical rendering. He has par-
ticipated as a key developer in industrial and research projects that
have led to the development of state-of-the-art tools for large scale
model rendering. He has co-authored papers in major international
refereed journals and conferences, co-chaired EGPGV 2012 (gen-
eral) and 2013 (papers), and given tutorials at IEEE Visualization,
SIGGRAPH, and Eurographics. Before joining CRS4, he worked
on 3D scanning at LMTT Padova and Optonet Brescia.

Giovanni Pintore is a researcher in the Visual Computing (ViC)
group at the Center for Advanced Studies, Research, and Devel-
opment in Sardinia (CRS4). He holds a Laurea (M. Sc.) degree
(2002) in Electronics Engineering from the University of Cagliari.
His research interests include multiresolution representations of
large and complex 3D models, lightfield displays, reconstruction
and rendering of architectural scenes exploting mobile devices and
the new generation mobile spherical cameras. His research is pub-
lished in major journals and conferences of computer graphics and
computer vision. He served as program committee member and re-
viewer at international conferences and recently as Program Chair
of the last Eurographics Italian Chapter conference. He is currently
EU project manager in the field of security, where he is developing
and applying novel mobile graphics techniques for indoor capture,
mapping, and exploration.

Pere Pau Vázquez. is an associate professor at the MOVING
Group in Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya. He holds a Degree
in Computer Engineering, and a PhD in Computer Science by the
Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya. His research interests include
the visualization of molecular models, GPU-accelerated rendering,
and mobile-based graphics. He has published a number of papers
in major journals and conferences of computer graphics and vi-
sualization. He has served numerous times as program committee
member at different international conferences and he is currently
the co-chair of EuroVis 2017.

Acknowledgments

This tutorial was partially supported by the Scan4Reco project
funded by European Union’s Horizon 2020 Framework Programme
for Research and Innovation under grant agreement no 665091. We
also acknowledge the contribution of Sardinian Regional Authori-
ties under projects VIGEC and VIDEOLAB and of King Abdullah
University of Science and Technology.

References

[A∗17] ASSOCIATION G., ET AL.: The mobile economy 2017. URL:
http://www.gsma.com/mobileeconomy/[accessed March 17]. 2

[AJPG16] AGUS M., JASPE VILLANUEVA A., PINTORE G., GOBBETTI
E.: PEEP: Perceptually enhanced exploration of pictures. In Proc. VMV
(Oct. 2016). 3

[BAMG14a] BALSA M., AGUS M., MARTON F., GOBBETTI E.: Hu-
mors: Huge models mobile rendering system. In Proceedings of the 19th
International ACM Conference on 3D Web Technologies (2014), ACM,
pp. 7–15. 3

[BAMG14b] BALSA RODRIGUEZ M., AGUS M., MARTON F., GOB-
BETTI E.: HuMoRS: Huge models mobile rendering system. In Proc.
Web3D (Aug. 2014), pp. 7–16. 3

[BGM∗12] BALSA M., GOBBETTI E., MARTON F., PINTUS R., PIN-
TORE G., TINTI A.: Interactive exploration of gigantic point clouds on
mobile devices. In VAST (2012), pp. 57–64. 3

[BGMT13] BALSA RODRÍGUEZ M., GOBBETTI E., MARTON F., TINTI
A.: Coarse-grained multiresolution structures for mobile exploration of
gigantic surface models. In Proc. SIGGRAPH Asia Symposium on Mo-
bile Graphics and Interactive Applications (November 2013), pp. 4:1–
4:6. 3

[BLM16] BALA S., LOPEZ MENDEZ R.: Efficient soft shadows based
on static local cubemap. GPU Pro 7 (2016), 175. 3

[BV12] BALSA M., VÁZQUEZ P. P.: Practical volume rendering in mo-
bile devices. In International Symposium on Visual Computing (2012),
Springer, pp. 708–718. 3

[CP15] CAIRA T., PRIETO J.: Learn metal for ios 3d game development.
2

[DGB∗14] DI BENEDETTO M., GANOVELLI F., BALSA RODRIGUEZ
M., JASPE VILLANUEVA A., SCOPIGNO R., GOBBETTI E.: Ex-
ploreMaps: Efficient construction and ubiquitous exploration of
panoramic view graphs of complex 3D environments. Computer Graph-
ics Forum 33, 2 (2014), 459–468. 3

[DGBN∗16] DÍAZ-GARCÍA J., BRUNET P., NAVAZO I., PEREZ F.,
VÁZQUEZ P.-P.: Adaptive transfer functions. The Visual Computer
(2016), 1–11. 3

[DL15] DEV K., LAU M.: Democratizing digital content creation using
mobile devices with inbuilt sensors. Computer Graphics and Applica-
tions 35, 1 (Jan 2015), 84–94. 2

c© 2017 The Author(s)
Eurographics Proceedings c© 2017 The Eurographics Association.



M. Agus & E. Gobbetti & F. Marton & G. Pintore & P.-P. Váquez / Mobile Graphics

[Eri16] ERICSSON: Ericsson mobile report, 2016, 2016.
https://www.ericsson.com/res/docs/2016/ericsson-mobility-report-
2016.pdf, [accessed March 17]. 1

[FGBAR12] FEIJOO C., GÓMEZ-BARROSO J.-L., AGUADO J.-M.,
RAMOS S.: Mobile gaming: Industry challenges and policy implica-
tions. Telecommunications Policy 36, 3 (2012), 212–221. 2

[GMB∗12] GOBBETTI E., MARTON F., BALSA RODRIGUEZ M.,
GANOVELLI F., DI BENEDETTO M.: Adaptive quad patches: an adap-
tive regular structure for web distribution and adaptive rendering of 3d
models. In Proc. Web3D (Aug. 2012), pp. 9–16. 3

[GPG∗16] GARRO V., PINTORE G., GANOVELLI F., GOBBETTI E.,
SCOPIGNO R.: Fast metric acquisition with mobile devices. In Proc.
VMV (Oct. 2016). 3

[GR11] GOADRICH M. H., ROGERS M. P.: Smart smartphone devel-
opment: ios versus android. In Proceedings of the 42nd ACM technical
symposium on Computer science education (2011), ACM, pp. 607–612.
2

[KUK15] KÁN P., UNTERGUGGENBERGER J., KAUFMANN H.: High-
quality consistent illumination in mobile augmented reality by radiance
convolution on the gpu. In International Symposium on Visual Comput-
ing (2015), Springer, pp. 574–585. 3

[Kul09] KULTIMA A.: Casual game design values. In Proceedings of the
13th international MindTrek conference: Everyday life in the ubiquitous
era (2009), ACM, pp. 58–65. 2

[LKC14] LEE W.-S., KIM S.-D., CHIN S.: Subsurface scattering-based
object rendering techniques for real-time smartphone games. Mathemat-
ical Problems in Engineering 2014 (2014). 3

[LS07] LAMBERTI F., SANNA A.: A streaming-based solution for re-
mote visualization of 3d graphics on mobile devices. IEEE transactions
on visualization and computer graphics 13, 2 (2007). 3

[PAG14] PINTORE G., AGUS M., GOBBETTI E.: Interactive mapping of
indoor building structures through mobile devices. In Proc. 3DV Work-
shop on 3D Computer Vision in the Built Environment (Dec. 2014). 3

[PG14] PINTORE G., GOBBETTI E.: Effective mobile mapping of multi-
room indoor structures. The Visual Computer 30, 6–8 (2014), 707–716.
3

[PGG∗16] PINTORE G., GARRO V., GANOVELLI F., GOBBETTI E.,
AGUS M.: Omnidirectional image capture on mobile devices for fast
automatic generation of 2.5D indoor maps. In Proc. WACV (Feb. 2016),
pp. 1–9. 3

[PGGB12] PINTORE G., GOBBETTI E., GANOVELLI F., BRIVIO P.:
3dnsite: A networked interactive 3d visualization system to simplify lo-
cation awareness in crisis management. In Proceedings of the 17th In-
ternational Conference on 3D Web Technology (2012), ACM, pp. 59–67.
3

[PGGS16a] PINTORE G., GANOVELLI F., GOBBETTI E., SCOPIGNO
R.: Mobile mapping and visualization of indoor structures to simplify
scene understanding and location awareness. In Proc. ACVR (Oct. 2016).
3

[PGGS16b] PINTORE G., GANOVELLI F., GOBBETTI E., SCOPIGNO
R.: Mobile reconstruction and exploration of indoor structures exploit-
ing omnidirectional images. In Proc. SIGGRAPH Asia Symposium on
Mobile Graphics and Interactive Applications (Dec. 2016), pp. 1:1–1:4.
3

[SAK15] SCHIEWE A., ANSTOOTS M., KRÜGER J.: State of the art in
mobile volume rendering on ios devices. In Eurographics Conference
on Visualization (EuroVis)-Short Papers. The Eurographics Association
(2015). 3

[SE16] SMITH A. V., EINIG M.: Physically based deferred shading on
mobile. GPU Pro 7: Advanced Rendering Techniques (2016), 187. 3

[SV16a] SUNET M., VAZQUEZ P.-P.: Optimized screen-space ambient
occlusion in mobile devices. In Proceedings of the 21st International
Conference on Web3D Technology (2016), ACM, pp. 127–135. 3

[SV16b] SUNET M., VAZQUEZ P.-P.: Optimized screen-space ambient
occlusion in mobile devices. In Proc. Web3D (2016), ACM, pp. 127–
135. 3

[Tra12] TRACY K. W.: Mobile application development experiences on
appleâĂŹs ios and android os. Ieee Potentials 31, 4 (2012), 30–34. 2

[VB12] VÁZQUEZ P.-P., BALSA M.: Practical volume rendering in mo-
bile devices. In Proc. International Symposium on Visual Computing,
vol. 7431 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science (LNCS). Springer Ver-
lag, 2012, pp. 708–718. 3

c© 2017 The Author(s)
Eurographics Proceedings c© 2017 The Eurographics Association.


