




































CSD-19 Background Paper - P.Midgley - Bicycle Sharing Systems-28Feb2011.doc


CSD19/2011/BP8 

 
UNITED NATIONS 
DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL AFFAIRS 
 

Commission on Sustainable Development 
Nine teenth Session 
New York, 2-13 May 2011 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
BICYCLE-SHARING SCHEMES: 

ENHANCING SUSTAINABLE MOBILITY  
IN URBAN AREAS 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

Prepared by  
 

Peter Midgley  
 

Global Transport Knowledge Partnership 
International Road Federation  

 
 
 

 
 

Background Paper No. 8 
CSD19/2011/BP8 

 



  CSD19/2011/BP8 
 

 1 
 

 

CONTENTS 
 
 

I.     Overview of bicycle -sharing  schemes 1 

A. Rationale for bicycle -sharing  4 
B. Manual and automated systems  5 
C. City size and service densities 7 
D. Topography and climate  7 
E. Bicycle priority and safety 8 

II.    Components 9 

A. Bicycles 9 
B. Docking stations  9 
C. System access and user registration 10 
D. System status information systems  11 
E. Maintenance programmes 11 
F. Bicycle redistribution mechanisms  12 

III.  Investment, manageme nt and sources of finance 12 

A. Capital and operating costs 12 
B. User Fees 13 
C. Business models  14 

IV.  Benefits and impacts 16 

V.      Challenges and opportunities 17 

A. Challenges 17 
B. Opportunities  18 

VI.  Policy recommendations 19 

A. Intensified information sharing 21 
B. Guidelines and manuals  21 
C. City networks  22 
D. Sources of development aid 22 
E. Demand projections 22 
F. Pilot projects 22 
G. Urban mobility plans  22 

 

References 23 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



  CSD19/2011/BP8 
 

 1 
 

 

Bicycle-sharing Schemes: 
Enhancing Sustainable Mobility in Urban Areas 

 
Peter Midgley 

Global Transport Knowledge Partnership 
International Road Federation 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

I. OVERVIEW OF BICYCLE-SHARING SCHEMES 

 
1.  Also called “Public-Use Bicycles” (PUBs), “Bicycle Transit” , “Bikesharing” or 
“Smart Bikes”, bicycle-sharing schemes comprise short-term urban bicycle rental schemes 
that enable bicycles to be picked up at any self-serve bicycle station and returned to any other 
bicycle station, which makes bicycle-sharing ideal for point-to-point trips (New York City 
Department of City Planning, 2009) .  The principle of bicycle-sharing is simple : individuals 
use bicycles on an “as-needed” basis without the costs and responsibilities of bicycle 
ownership (Shaheen, 2010) 
 
2.  Over the past ten years, bicycle-sharing schemes have developed from being 
interesting experiments in urban mobility to mainstream public transport options in cities as 
large and complex as Paris and London.  Ten years ago, there were five schemes operating in 
five countries (Denmark, France, Germany, Italy and Portugal) with a total fleet of 4,000 
bicycles (the largest was Copenhagen with 2,000 bicycles).  Today there are an estimated 375 
bicycle -sharing schemes operating in 33 countries in almost every region of the world using 
around 236,000 bicycles1 (the largest is Hangzhou with an estimated 40,000 bicycles).  As 
can be seen from Figure 1, the rate of growth in bicycle-sharing schemes and fleets has been 
very rapid since 2008 and has probably outstripped growth in every other form of urban 
transport. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Disclaimer: The views expressed in the background paper are those of the authors and do 
not necessarily reflect those of the United Nations.   

 
 
 

                                                 
1 Author’s estimates based on detailed research as of October 12, 2010 



  CSD19/2011/BP8 
 

 2 
 

 

Figure 1  
Growth in bicycle -sharing schemes and fleet 2000-2010 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
                   Source: Author’s estimates based on detai led research as of October 12, 2010 
 
3.  Undoubtedly , the widely publicised success of the Vélib’ system in Paris has 
generated considerable interest in this innovative approach to urban mobility.  However, as 
can be seen in Figure 2, bicycle -sharing schemes were expanding in Italy and Spain (more 
rapidly than in France) before the inauguration of the Paris system in 2007, and this growth 
has been principally in medium- to small-sized towns with systems of 50 bicycles or so.     
Therefore, not only are bicycle-sharing schemes attractive, it would appear that they are also 
highly adaptable to different types of cities and city sizes.     

 
Figure 2 
Growth in bicycle -sharing schemes in selected countries 2005 -2010  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
                        Source: Author’s estimates based on detailed research as of October 12, 2010.   
 

0

20

40

60

80

100

120

2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010

C
iti

es
 w

ith
 S

ha
re

d 
B

ik
e 

S
ys

te
m

s

China France Germany Italy Spain

0

50

100

150

200

250

300

350

400

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010

C
it

ie
s 

w
it

h 
S

ha
re

d 
B

ik
e 

S
ys

te
m

s

0

50,000

100,000

150,000

200,000

250,000

T
ot

al
 S

ha
re

d 
B

ik
e 

S
ys

te
m

 F
le

et

Systems Bike Fleet



  CSD19/2011/BP8 
 

 3 
 

 

4.  Bicycle-sharing schemes have evolved dramatically since their introduction in the 
1960s.  The first generation schemes that were introduced in Amsterdam (1965), La Rochelle 
(1976) and Cambridge (1993) provided free bicycles to borrow and return from any location.      
There were no incentives to care for the bicycles and return them in good condition.  With the 
exception of the system in La Rochelle, this resulted in the schemes being closed due to 
vandalism and theft of bicycles.  To address these issues, a new “second generation” set of 
systems began in 1991, in Farsø and Grenå, Denmark (DeMaio, 2009).  By 1995, the first 
large scale scheme (called Bycyklen or City Bikes) was introduced in Copenhagen.  These 
third generation systems took the form of a “bicycle lending library” (Metrolinx, 2009) with a 
membership or annual fee.  They used custom-built “heavy duty” bicycles with non-standard 
components to reduce theft.  They were relatively simple systems and cost little to install.      
Some used manual tracking of bicycle rentals, and most included multiple rental and return 
locations with coin operated locks to secure the bicycles.  Although these schemes were more 
dependable , with less vandalism and fewer thefts , the introduction of smartcard technology in 
the late 1990s would usher in the third generation schemes that have enabled bicycle-sharing 
to become what it is today.    
 
5.  The first bicycle -sharing scheme to use smartcard technology was the “Vélo à la 
Carte” system introduced in 1998 in Rennes, France.  Other systems soon began to develop in 
France (Lyon, 2005), culminating in the opening of the famous Vélib’ system in Paris in 
2007.  These third generation systems used improved bicycle designs, sophisticated docking 
stations and automated smartcard (or magnetic stripe card) electronic bicycle locking and 
payment systems. Some initiated the use of GPS (Global Positioning System) to track 
bicycles to prevent theft. Operators used networked self-service bicycle stations which 
communicate with a central computer system and Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) 
technology to monitor the location of bicycles in the system (New York City Department of 
City Planning, 2009). Many introduced the use of web sites to provide users with real time 
information on bicycle availability at docking stations (both features are now an integral part 
of modern bicycle-sharing schemes). Most were public-private partnerships and were mainly 
developed and operated by major advertising companies.  In nearly every case, the companies 
provided and operated the systems in exchange for free billboard advertising.     
 
6.  Potential “fourth generation” design innovations are already under development 
including movable docking stations, solar -powered docking stations, electric bicycles and 
mobile phone and iPhone real time availability applications. Of these innovations, the 
introduction of electric bicycles is likely to be the most significant in terms of attractiveness.   
The evolution of bicycle -sharing and the different generations of bicycle-sharing programmes 
are summarized in Figure 3.   
 
7.  In 2008 there were 213 bicycle-sharing schemes operating in 14 countries using 
73,500 bicycles. With the exception of the system in Washington D.C., all systems were 
operating in Europe.  Within two years there has been a 76 per cent increase in the number of 
systems and the bicycle fleet has more than doubled. There are currently 375 bicycle-sharing 
schemes operating in 33 countries using 236,000 bicycles. Although just over 90 per cent of 
the systems are located in Europe, nearly 50 per cent of the global bicycle-sharing fleet is 
now located the Asia and Pacific region.  
 
8.  Since 2008 and within Europe, bicycle-sharing has expanded to the Czech Republic, 
Ireland, Latvia, Monaco, Poland, Romania and Switzerland (with a new system about to open 
in Hungary). There has been a remarkable growth in Spain where the number of systems has 



  CSD19/2011/BP8 
 

 4 
 

 

almost doubled from 58 to 97 between 2008 and 2009, enabling Spain to claim to be the 
country with the most systems in the world (with currently 105 systems or 28 per cent of 
global systems).   
 
9.  Outside Europe, systems are now operating in Australia, Canada, Japan, New 
Zealand and Republic of Korea , and for the first time in developing countries - Brazil, Chile, 
China, India, Islamic Republic of Iran and Mexico.    
 
Figure 3 
The evolution of bicycle -sharing programmes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Source: Adapted from Dhingra, Chhavi and S.  Kodukula, 2010. 
 
10. It is estimated that 32 systems are currently being planned in 16 countries , the 
majority (23) of which would be outside Europe. New countries include: Colombia, Cyprus, 
Israel, and Turkey.  

A. Rationale for bicycle -sharing  
 
11. The ultimate goal of bicyc le-sharing is to expand and integrate cycling into 
transportation systems, so that it can more readily become a daily transportation mode  



  CSD19/2011/BP8 
 

 5 
 

 

(Shaheen, 2010) . In general, the rationale for introducing bicycle-sharing is to promote 
cycling, increase mobility choices, improve air quality and reduce congestion. It is also seen 
as a means to promote the viability of public transport by providing an “extension service” 
for the “first/ last mile” - the distance which many consider to be too far to walk between 
home and public transport and/or public transport and the workplace (Shaheen, 2010).   
 
12. Although travel distance by mode varies from country to country and city to city, 
most people are willing to walk up to 10 minutes. Cycling distances generally fall within the  
1km to 5km range. Bicycle -sharing can therefore fill an important niche in the urban 
transportation system in terms of trip length and costs (Quay Communications Inc. , 2008) as 
shown in Figure 4.   
 

Figure 4 
The role of bicycle -sharing systems in urban mobility 
 

 
 
Source: Quay Communications Inc. 2008.Trans Link Public Bike System Feasibility Study. Vancouver.   

 
 
13. Bicycle-sharing can also fill another niche in urban transportation: speed of 
implementation. Bicycle -sharing schemes can be installed relative ly quickly. In Paris, the 
initial 700 docking stations and 10,000 bicycles were installed in less than six months and the 
system doubled in size six months later. 
 
14. Table 1 summarizes the rationale for bicycle-sharing in terms of the objectives 
articulated by cities for their respective systems.   
 

B . Manual and automated systems  
 
15. There are basically two types of bicycle -sharing systems: those that are considered 
“manual” and those that are “automated”. The differences between these two types of 
systems, as documented in the “Guide on the implementation of public bicycle systems in 
Spain” (published by the Institute for Diversification and Saving of Energy in 2007) and the 
“Bike Sharing Guide” (published by Transport Canada in 2009), are presented below.   
 



  CSD19/2011/BP8 
 

 6 
 

 

16. A manual bicycle -sharing system is one where transactions related to taking out and 
returning a bicycle is supervised by staff.   Manual systems can, but do not necessarily, 
involve information technology for keeping track of the use of bicycles and monetary 
transactions. Generally speaking, a computerized tracking system is required when there are 
multiple pick up and drop off points for the bicycles. Examples include most of the “C’entro 
in Bici” systems in small to medium size towns in Italy.   
 
 
Table 1  
Objectives of selected bicycle -sharing schemes 
 

System Objectives 

Barcelona 
Spain 

• Improve interchange between different modes of transport, and promote 
sustainable travel.   

• Create a new individual public transport system for citizens’ habitual travel 
needs.   

• Implement a sustainable, health-inducing service fully integrated with the city’s 
public transport system.   

• Promote the bicycle as a common means of transport.   
• Improve quality of life, reduce air and noise pollution.   

Göteborg 
Sweden 

• Raise the status of cycling.   
• Promote using bicycles for short distance trips.   

Lyon 
France 

• Help create a more sustainable transportation system in the region by launching 
a public bicycle system that provides a new mobility option for short trips.   

• Help achieve transport and land use planning objectives including pollution 
emission reductions, reduced traffic congestion, road and parking cost savings, 
consumer cost savings, energy conservation, reduced crash risks, improved 
public health, and support for smart growth land use development.    

Montreal 
Canada 

• Encourage the use of public bicycles instead of cars for short, inner -city trips 

Paris 
France 

• Act on air quality and public health 
• Improve mobility for all 
• Render the city a more beautiful and agreeable place to live in 
• Encourage economic vitality 
• Reinforce regional solidarity 

Washington
DC 

• Provide as many transportation options as possible and reduce the level of 
congestion, especially downtown.   

 
Source: Curran, A .   2008.   TransLink Public Bike System Feasibility Study.  Vancouver: Quay Communications Inc.   
 
17. In an automated bicycle-sharing system, transactions related to taking out and 
returning bicycles are unsupervised – the systems rely on self-service. Bicycles are either 
locked to special electronically controlled racks or are equipped with an electronically 
controlled lock of their own. In the former case, the racks are either coin-, credit card-, or 
electronic key card-operated.   In the latter case, the locks on the bicycles have a combination 
pad; users must call or send a mobile phone text message to the bicycle -sharing operator to 
obtain a combination to unlock the bicycle. By definition, automated systems rely heavily on 
information technology for user interface, system control and monitoring. With credit card-, 
key card-, or mobile phone-operated systems the identity of bicycle users is known. In case of 
theft or damage to bicycles, the users can be held responsible . Coin-operated systems, such as 
the Bycyklen system in Copenhagen, do not keep track of user identities. Most systems are 



  CSD19/2011/BP8 
 

 7 
 

 

now automated and use smart card technology.   The “Call a Bike” system in Germany and 
the Domoblue/Onroll systems in Spain use mobile phone technology.   
 

C. City size and service densities 
 
18. In their policy recommendations for the development of bicycle -sharing systems in 
Europe, the New and Innovative Concepts for Helping European Transport Sustainability 
(NICHES) consortium suggested that a minimum population of 200,000 is required to 
support an automatic bicycle-sharing sys tem (Bührmann, 2007). The “Guide on the 
implementation of public bicycle systems in Spain” makes a similar recommendation, and 
adds that both automatic and manual systems would be appropriate for smaller towns (IDAE, 
2007) as illustrated in Table 2. This policy has in fact been implemented throughout Spain 
following the publication of this Guide .   
 
Table 2  
Type and scale of bicycle -sharing system relative to city size and density 
 

City population  Density  System type  Scale of bicycle-sharing network coverage  

High  Automatic  Throughout the city  > 200,000 
Low  Automatic  In the city centre or high density areas  
High  Automatic  Throughout the city  50,000 - 200,000 
Low  Manual  At public transport stations and public facilities 

(community centres, sports facilities, etc.  )  
High  Automatic  At main activity centres (main public transport 

stations, commercial centres, health centres, 
industrial estates, etc)  

< 50,000  

Low  Manual At public transport stations and public facilities 
(community centres, sports facilities, etc.  ) 

 
Source: IDAE (Instituto para la Diversificación y Ahorro de la Energía). 2007. Guía metodológica para la implantación de 
sistemas de bicicletas públicas en España.   Madrid.   
 
19. The scale of bicycle -sharing network coverage is relatively dense in French cities 
such as Paris (9.6 bicycles per 1,000 inhabitants), Lyon (6.4/1,000) and Rennes (4.8/1,000) 
compared with other European cities such as Copenhagen and Stockholm (both 4.0/1,000), 
Barcelona (3.7/1,000), Brussels or Frankfurt (both 1.1/1,000), Oslo (0.5/1,000) and Vienna 
(0.4/1,000).    

D. Topography and climate  
 
20. Cyclists generally dislike going up inclines of more than 4 per cent and avoid 
inclines greater than 8 per cent. In cities with slopes under 4 per cent, topography is not a 
limiting factor. However, with slopes between 4 per cent and 8 per cent, topography does 
become a significant constraint. Cyclists will go down the slope but will refuse to go up.   
Bicycle-sharing stations at higher elevations will tend to empty, while those at lower 
elevations will tend to fill up. This problem occurs in Barcelona, whose centre lies at the 
bottom of a bowl-shaped valley. Users happily take bicycles downhill into town but take 
other modes of transportation to go back uphill, leaving the bicycles behind. In Barcelona’s 
case, the problem is overcome through redistribution: a larger-than-usual fleet of 
redistribution vehicles continuously takes bicycles from low-lying stations to uphill stations.   



  CSD19/2011/BP8 
 

 8 
 

 

21. In Europe, public bicycle systems have been successfully implemented in cities with 
very different climates – from Nordic climates in the Scandinavian countries to warm, dry 
climates in France and Spain. Systems in Northern Europe tend to shut down during the 
colder months while others remain open year-round. In Copenhagen, for example, the 
Bycyklen system shuts down between early December and early April.   

E. Bicycle priority and safety 
 
22. For bicycle-sharing to function effectively , cyclists must be able to move around the 
city easily and safely . A network of bicycle lanes and dedicated bicycle paths, although not 
absolutely essential, is clearly an asset. Most cities with bicycle -sharing systems have such 
networks or have developed them in parallel with the installation of the system. As can be 
seen from Table 3, the network length has no relationship with the scale of the system. It is 
not the network length that matters, it is the fact that such a network exists and is in good 
repair.   
 
Table 3  
Length of bicycle lane network in selected cities 
 

Country City System Fleet Size  Stations Bicycle 
Lanes (kms) 

Brazil Rio de Janeiro PedalaRio 250 19 140 
Canada Montreal BIXI 5,000 400 600 
Italy Milan BikeMi 1,400 104 123 
France Lyon Vélo'v 4,000 343 265 
Republic 
of Korea 

Daejon Ta-shu 224 18 192 

Norway Oslo Bysykkel 1,200 120 250 
Poland Krakow BikeOne 155 13 99 
Spain Barcelona Bicing 6,000 400 177 
Sweden Stockholm City Bikes 2,000 180 760 
UK Reading OYBike 21 3 60 
USA Denver Denver B-cycle 500 50 160 

 
Source: Author’s estimates based on detailed research as of October 12, 2010 
 
23. Cities that have adopted urban mobility plans that promote public transport and 
restrict car use with demand management and traffic calming measures , undoubtedly provide 
a bicycle friendly environment for the introduction of bicycle-sharing systems. Most bicycle-
sharing cities have adopted broader urban mobility policies that promote cycling and limit car  
use.   
 
24. The self-serve nature of bicycle -sharing programmes limits their ability to provide 
helmets. Most jurisdictions where bicycle -sharing systems operate do not require cyclists to 
wear helmets. While not having to wear a helmet simplifies the use of  bicycle-sharing 
systems for one way trips or trips combined with public transport, as the user does not have to 
carry a bulky helmet before and after using the system, for many people this poses a safety 
risk. There is a considerable body of research that appears to find both in favour of and 
against bicycle  helmets, with a reported 31 papers in favour of helmet wearing or legislation, 
compared with 32 against There is hardly any research on the issue with regard to bicycle-
sharing systems. 



  CSD19/2011/BP8 
 

 9 
 

 

II. COMPONENTS 
 
25. Automated bicycle -sharing systems typically comprise the following components: 

A. Bicycles 
 
26. Shared bicycles need to be easy to use, adaptable to users of different sizes, 
mechanically reliable, resistant to vandalism or theft and distinctive in appearance.   
 
27. Most bicycle -sharing systems are equipped with bicycles that weigh between 16kg to 
22kg and are heavier than typical personal bicycles. They are sturdy and designed to be used 
between 10 and 15 times a day in all weathers. They have the following features: internal hub 
gears with three speeds, internal hub brakes, an enclosed chain, an adjustable seat, mud-
guards, reflective strips on the wheels, front and rear lights, a bell, a kickstand, a portable 
lock, a handlebar mounted bag rack or a basket; and wide, air filled tires.    
 
28. Most bicycles come equipped with a Global Position System (GPS) unit, a Radio 
Frequency Identification (RFID) tag, or other type of tracking mechanism. This function is 
typically used in fleet management and retrieval of lost or stolen bicycles (Alta Planning + 
Design, 2009).    
 
29. To discourage theft, bicycles typically have a single standardised design, a consiste nt 
livery and a distinctive look (Quay Communications Inc., 2008) in order to distinguish them 
from all other bicycles. In addition, to make them unattractive to potential thieves, they are 
made in such a way that special tools are required to disassemble them and their components 
are incompatible with other bicycles.    

B . Docking stations  
30. The Transport Canada Bike Sharing Guide groups docking stations into the 
following three categories:  
 
31. Fixed-permanent: Figure 6(a): A fixed bicycle -sharing system is one in which 
bicycles are locked to designated racks when not in service. In most cases, bicycles are 
attached to the rack via a specialized coupling system. The racks therefore act in essence as 
“stations”. The vast majority of bicycle -sharing systems feature fixed stations.   
 
32. Fixed-portable: Figure 6(b): Montreal’s BIXI system has introduced a significant 
innovation to the fixed system concept: portable modular stations . Service terminals and the 
bicycle stands are mounted onto sets of rectangular platforms to form two types of modules: 
main modules having a service terminal and three bicycle docks and secondary modules 
having only bicycle docks . Each station requires one main module; the number of secondary 
modules can vary, depending on the required number of bicycle docks at the given location.   
As the stations are solar powered and wirelessly networked, they are completely self-
contained and no wiring is required for installation. As a result, station installation consists 
merely of placing the modules in the desired location; there is no need for anchoring them to 
the ground.   It is therefore time-, labour-, and cost-efficient. BIXI docking stations can be 
erected or disassembled in 20 minutes and they can be moved easily to respond to demand or 
to provide “mega” docking stations for special events (New York City Department of City 
Planning, 2009).   
 



  CSD19/2011/BP8 
 

 10 
 

 

33. Flexible: Figure 6(c): A flexible bicycle-sharing system is one in which bicycles do 
not need to be locked to designated racks or stations.  In this case, the bicycles have a general 
purpose locking device, such as a chain or a cable, which allows the bicycle to be locked to 
any stationary object when not in use (e.g., a standard bicycle rack, a traffic sign, a parking 
metre, etc.). In addition to the built-in chain or cable lock, there may also be locks that block 
the bicycle’s drive train and steering.   
 
Figure 6 
Examples of docking stations  
 
(a) Fixed-permanent (Paris) (b) Fixed-portable (Montreal) (c) Flexible (Copenhagen) 

 
Source: Luc Nadal 

 
Source: Yvonne Banbrick 

 
Source: hostelworld 

 
34. The distribution of docking stations is dependent on the size and configuration of the 
city.   In Paris and Barcelona  docking stations are spaced 300 meters apart.   

C. System access and user registration 
 
35. To access bicycles at docking stations, users need to unlock the bicycle from the 
stand.   There are mainly two locking technologies involved in bicycle-sharing systems.   In 
the first, bicycles are checked out from an automated bicycle rack with the use of a smartcard 
or magnetic stripe card. The second technology provides an automated lock on the bicycle 
itself and relies on the user to communicate via mobile or pay phone for the entry code .    
 
36. Most systems require users to register prior to accessing bicycles at the docking 
stations and offer multiple options to register and pay for using the bicycles (e.g., smart card 
or credit card). To encourage casual and tourist use, registration is usually quickly and easily 
handled at each docking station. Requiring pre -registration can create a barrier to use, but will 
likely increase rider accountability and reduce bicycle theft (Alta Planning + Design, 2009).   
 
37. The registration and access process is usually handled at specially designed kiosks 
located at each docking station. The Vélib’ station kiosk illustrated in Figure 8 is typical of 
most smart bicycle -sharing systems. As described in the Bike Sharing Guide by Transport 
Canada (Gris Orange Consultant, 2009), the kiosk has the following features:  
 
 
 
 
 
 



  CSD19/2011/BP8 
 

 11 
 

 

Figure 7  
A Vélib’ station kiosk 

 

 
Source: Gris Orange Consultant.   2009.   
Bike Sharing Guide.   Transport Canada: 
Ottawa 

 
A. Advertising space.   For supplemental revenue 

generation.    
B. Touch-sensitive screen.   For user interface.    

• Purchase of day, week, or annual passes, using the 
credit/debit card terminal (D).    

• Information on how to use the system  
• Information on bicycle and parking space 

availability at other stations in the network  
• Available in eight languages:  French, English, 

Spanish, German, Italian, Arabic, Chinese and 
Japanese  

C. Key card reader.   For registered users with annual 
memberships or NaviGO public transit cards users.   
Allows users to check account information, such as 
usage charges.    

D. Credit/Debit card terminal.   Accepts credit and debit 
cards.   Used in conjunction with touch sensitive screen 
to purchase day, week, or annual passes.    

E. Card dispenser.   D ispenses temporary (one-day and 
one-week) passes purchased at the terminal.   

 
38. Once the card has been issued by the kiosk, the user simply brushes the card against 
the bicycle attachment point.  The user is identified and the bicycle is released by the docking 
station.   

D. System status information systems  
39. All of the major systems and many smaller systems provide real time information on 
websites about bicycle availability for each docking station in the system. Most also include 
maps with bicycle lanes marked, and some provide weather updates.    
 
40. One company has launched an application called “AllBikesNow” that uses the 
functions of mapping and geolocation of the iPhone to simplify access to their bicycle-
sharing service in 23 cities by providing information in real time about bicycle availability at 
docking stations and the status of the user’s account. The AllBikesNow application provides 
real time information on where to find a bicycle, where to return it, where to find a station 
near a given address, the status of the user’s account and how much they spent on their last 
journey.   

E. Maintenance program mes 
 
41. Maintenance and logistics are large operational issues, especially in the largest of 
bicycle -sharing programmes with the average bicycle operating up to 180,000 km per year.   
Users in Barcelona report that the largest problem with the bicycles is the tires, and that there 
are typically 2 or 3 bicycles with flat tires in every station. In Copenhagen ten to fifteen 
percent of bicycles must be replaced each year.   Four mobile units check the fleet daily there.   
In Paris the Vélib’ system has a support centre on a barge that moves between 12 landing 
points on the river. It features a shop with 10 mechanics for smaller repairs. The more 



  CSD19/2011/BP8 
 

 12 
 

 

seriously damaged bicycles are transferred daily to a facility outside the city (Quay 
Communications Inc., 2008).   

F. Bicycle redistribution mechanisms 
 
42. An optimized network needs more than large numbers of conveniently located 
stations; it must also anticipate the asymmetric travel demands of most large cities.   Not 
surprisingly stations located at the top of hills are chronically empty of bicycles –  as the 
customers ride down the hill but do not wish to make the return trip uphill. B icycles also tend 
to collect in stations in the city centres and stay there. Ideas for re-balancing the system, other 
than a dedicated team with a vehicle, can include a premium to return bicycles at a lower 
elevation or conversely a credit for each bicycle returned to a higher elevation. Vélib’ 
introduced such a programme in early 2008 (Quay Communications Inc ., 2008).  
 

III. INVESTMENT, MANAGEMENT AND SOURCES OF FINANCE 

A. Capital and operating costs  
 
43. Capital costs include bicycle purchase, docking station equipment and construction, 
license or purchase of the back-end system used to operate the equipment, member access 
cards, purchase or rental of maintenance and distribution vehicles, and installation.   From the 
analysis of several systems shown in Table 4, capital costs can range between $3,000 and 
$4,500 per bicycle.   (New York City Department of City Planning, 2009) .  
  
Table 4  
Capital costs of bicycle -sharing systems  
 

 
 
Source: New York City Department of City Planning. 2009. Bike-Share Opportunities in New York  
City. New York.   
 
 
44. Operating costs include maintenance, distribution, staff, insurance, office space, 
storage facilities, website hosting and maintenance, electricity charges for the docking 
stations, membership cards and warehouse/storage fees. From analysis of several systems 
shown in Table 5, operating costs range between $1,200 and $1,700 per bicycle, excluding 
the estimates made for New York.   (New York City Department of City Planning, 2009) .   
 
 



  CSD19/2011/BP8 
 

 13 
 

 

Table 5  
Operating costs of bicycle -sharing systems 
 

 
Source: New York City Department of City Planning. 2009. Bike-Share Opportunities in New York  
City. New York.   
 

B. User Fees 
45. Subscription and rental fees are collected by all the major bicycle -sharing systems.   
In order to make bicycle-sharing attractive and encourage use, membership and use fees are 
kept low. Most systems offer the first 30 minutes free of charge with increasing prices for 
each additional 30 minutes to ensure that bicycles are available for users throughout the 
system.    
 
46. In Paris , the Vélib’ system earned over €30 million in its first year in membership 
and user fees. Since the costs of the programme are covered by a billboard contract, this 
money goes entirely to the city of Paris as revenue . In Barcelona 100,000 subscriber 
registration fees alone will generate $3.5 million in revenues while in Lyon 15,000 
subscribers will provide $100,000 in registration revenue (New York City Department of 
City Planning, 2009). Table 6 presents a comparison of user fees in Lyon, Paris, Barcelona  
and Frankfurt undertaken by TransLink Vancouver in 2008.   
 
Table 6  
A comparison of user fees in Lyon, Paris, Barcelona and Frankfurt  
 

User Costs Lyon  Paris  Barcelona  Frankfurt  

Registration  $7.30  $47.00  $35.00  $7.30  
1st 30 minutes  Free  Free  Free  $3.50 
2nd 30 minutes  .73  1.60  .44  $3.50  
Next hour   9.64  .44  $7.00  
Full day  $34.38  $46.25  $96.58 $21.92  
Average 
Annual Income $32,000  $32,000  $31,800  $54,100  

 
Source: Curran, A .2008. TransLink Public Bike System Feasibility Study. Vancouver: Quay Communications Inc.   
 



  CSD19/2011/BP8 
 

 14 
 

 

47. Most systems are subsidised, with the shortfall between user fees and total costs 
made up through business models that use general revenues, advertising revenues, parking 
revenues, government grants or sponsorship.    

C. Bus iness models  
48. Over the years, several models have evolved for developing, operating and funding 
bicycle -sharing schemes. Operators include local governments, public transport agencies, 
advertising companies, for-profit companies, and non-profit groups (Shaheen, 2010 and 
DeMaio, 2009). Funding mechanisms include user fees, municipal budgets, and resources 
from public -private partnership agreements.  Table 7 provides an overview of bicycle-sharing 
business models by type of operator.  
 
49. Many bicycle-sharing systems are operated as public private partnerships (PPPs) 
with one of three large advertising companies (Cemusa, Clear Channel or JCDecaux).   
Typically, a city municipality provides the company with advertising space on street furniture 
(such as bus shelters) and billboards in exchange for the company providing and operating an 
off-the-shelf bicycle-sharing system. The advantage for the municipality of using this 
business model is that little or no direct public funding is required to set up and operate the 
bicycle -sharing system. Consequently, the system can appear to have little or no cost to the 
taxpayer.   However, although public money need not be spent on the system, there is still a 
cost to the municipality in the form of forgone advertising revenues (Gris Orange Consultant, 
2009).   
 
50. The major sources of funding for bicycle-sharing systems are public -private 
partnerships which account for 48 per cent of all systems. The three largest outdoor 
advertising companies (Cemusa, Clear Channel and JCDecaux) ac count for 20 per cent of all 
systems and three smaller non-advertising related suppliers (Centroinbici in Italy and ITCL 
and Onroll in Spain) account for 28 per cent.  The public sector (comprising municipalities, 
public transport agencies and municipal parking agencies) accounts for 30 per cent of all 
systems. NextBike, one of the few for-profit operators accounts for 7 per cent of all systems.   
New companies are setting up in China. The “Forever Bicycle Company” accounts for 4 of 
China’s 14 systems. The largest system in the world, in Hangzhou, is a municipal operation 
that is managed by the Hangzhou Public Bicycle Transport Service Development.    
 
51. Access to large  scale grant funding is rare. The European Commission, through its 
CIVITAS programme, has pr ovided support for the development of bicycle -sharing schemes 
in selected cities. The most significant programme was in Spain, where the Institute for 
Diversification and Saving of Energy (IDAE)2 provided €2.5 million in 2008 to support the 
development of 56 bicycle -sharing schemes with a total of 8,463 bicycles (IDAE, 2008).   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
2 The Instituto para la Diversificación y Ahorro de la Energía (Institute for Diversification and Saving of Energy, or IDAE) is a 

State-owned business entity that reports to the Ministry of Industry, Tourism and Trade through the State Secretary for 
Energy.   



  CSD19/2011/BP8 
 

 15 
 

 

Table 7  
Overview of bicycle -sharing business models 
 

Provider Business Model Examples Operator 

Advertising 
Company 

Provide and 
operates system in 
exchange for 
advertising rights 
 

Roma'n'Bike (Rome, Italy) 
Vélib’ (Paris, France)  
Bizi (Zaragoza, Spain) 

“Bicincittà” (Italy) by Cemusa 
(Spain) 
“Cyclocity” by JCDecaux 
(France)  
“SmartBike” by Clear Channel 
(USA) 
 

Contracts with 
provider to install 
and operate the 
system for a fee 

AranBike (Aranjuez, 
Spain) 
Bicing (Barcelona, Spain) 
Bicibur (Burgos, Spain) 
 

Onroll (Spain) 
Clear Channel (USA) 
ITCL (Spain) 

Local 
Authorities  

Designs, owns and 
operates the system 
 

Aarhus Bycykel 
(Denmark) 
Bike House (Teheran, 
Iran) 
 

Municipality of Århus 
(Denmark) 
Tehran Municipal Government 
(Iran) 

Public 
Transport 
Operators  

Provides and 
operates system to 
enhance public 
transport services 

BIXI (Montreal, Canada)  
Call a Bike (Germany) 
OV-Fiets (Netherlands) 
Vélos jaunes (La Rochelle, 
France) 

Stationnement de Montréal 
(Canada)  
Deutsche Bahn (Germany) 
Netherlands Spoorwegen 
(Netherlands) 
Régie des transports 
communautaires Rochelais 
(France)  

For-Profit Provides and 
operates system for 
a profit with 
minimal 
government 
involvement 
 

StadtRAD (Hamburg, 
Germany) 
 

Nextbike (Germany) 

Non-Profit Provides and 
operates system 
with the support of 
local authorities  

Bycyklen (Denmark) CityBike Foundation of 
Copenhagen (Denmark) 

 
Source: Adapted from Shaheen, Susan., S.   Guzman and H.   Zhang.   2010.   Bikesharing in Europe, the Americas, and 
Asia: Past, Present, and Future .   Washington D .  C.  : Transportation Research Board Annual Meeting.   Table 15.  2 
 
 
52. National railway companies in Germany and the Netherlands have provided 
extensive bicycle-sharing systems linked to their stations, initially for the benefit of their 
passengers but subsequently for any user. These systems are funded through a combination of 
general revenues and user fees. Municipal public transport agencies and parking agencies are 
important sources of operating funds . In Barcelona, part of system financing comes from on-
street parking revenues and the remainder comes from subscriptions. This is the only system 
where there is a clear cross-subsidy from motorists to cyclists.   
 



  CSD19/2011/BP8 
 

 16 
 

 

Table 8  
A comparison of operating and financing structures 
 

 Advantages  Disadvantages  Example  

Public Private 
Partnership 
Design, Build, 
Operate, Maintain, 
Finance  

• All logistics handled by the 
private sector partner  

• Partial control by public 
owner during some phases 
of project 

• Relieved of operating detail 
and performance risk  

• Loss of revenues from 
advertising 

• Risk of public backlash to 
increased levels of outdoor 
advertising  

• Difficult to enforce 
performance standards  

Paris  

Design, Build, 
Operate, Maintain  

• Partial control by public 
owner during some phases 
of project 

• Retain control of public 
spaces Relieved of operating 
detail  

• Competition for public 
funds  

• Difficult to assure 
performance standards  

Barcelona  

Design  Build  • Complete control through 
all phases of the project .    

• Retain control of public 
spaces Complete control 
over network configuration, 
performance, pricing and 
marketing details  

• Competition for public 
funds 

• Assume all Operating Risk  

Munich, 
Berlin, 
Frankfurt  

 
Source: Curran, A . 2008. TransLink Public Bike System Feasibility Study. Vancouver: Quay Communications Inc.   

IV. BENEFITS AND IMPACTS 
 
53. There is very little meaningful data on benefits or impacts of bicycle-sharing 
schemes. The most noticeable be nefit is increased bicycle use. In Lyon, the use of bicycles 
increased by 44 per cent w ithin the first year of the Velo’v operations (Bührmann, 2007) and 
in Paris there was a 70 per cent increase after the launch of Vélib’ (Shaheen, 2010).    
 
54. There is limited data available on changes in mode of travel before and after the 
introduction of bicycle -sharing. Data from Barcelona, Lyon, Montreal and Paris suggests that 
there is little impact on reducing car use.   The percentage of car or motorcycle trips replaced 
by bicycle-sharing in these cities ranges from 2 per cent to 10 per cent.   In fact, the shift is 
mainly from public transport to bicycle -sharing (see Table 9). A user survey of the Vélib’ 
system undertaken in 2008 found that 19 per cent of users state d that Vélib’ allowed them to 
make trips that would have otherwise been impossible and that 20 per cent of users stated 
they used cars less.    
 
Table 9  
Trip type replaced by bicycle -sharing in selected cities 
 

Type of Trip Replaced Bicing Barcelona  BIXI Montreal Vélib’ Paris  Vélo’v Lyon 

Bus or Metro  51%  33% 65 %  50% 
Car or motorcycle  10%  2% 8 %  7% 
Taxi   8% 5 %   
Walk  26%  25% 20 %  37% 
Bicycle 6% 28%  4% 
New Trip  4%  2% 

Sources: Buis, J.  , 2008; Curran, A, 2008; Bachand-Marleau, J.  , 2010.   



  CSD19/2011/BP8 
 

 17 
 

 

V. CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES 

A. Challenges 
 
55. The challenges faced by bicycle -sharing systems concern theft and vandalism, 
helmet use, topography and climate, and a tendency to exaggerate benefits that may end in 
discrediting bicycle-sharing as a sustainable approach to reducing car use and dependence.  
 
56.  Theft and vandalism: Despite the use of custom components and user 
identification technologies, theft and vandalism of bicycles is a major challenge in many 
systems. Paris has the highest rate of theft and vanda lism of any bicycle -sharing system.   
Within the first two years of operation, nearly the whole system fleet of 20,600 bicycles had 
to be replaced at a cost of 400 Euros per bicycle. Some 7,800 bicycles were stolen and 11,600 
bicycles were vandalized beyond repair. The Hangzhou’s system and the system in Montreal 
have so far experienced relatively low theft and vandalism rates (Shaheen, 2010).   
 
57. Helmets: The main hindrance in some regions to implementation of bicycle-sharing 
programmes is helmet laws or he lmet culture. For many years, it had been assumed that no 
Australian city would install a bicycle-sharing system because of national mandatory helmet 
laws. Melbourne launched its system in June 2010 and in October 2010 opened a pilot 
programme whereby users can purchase helmets for A$5 from vending machines and either 
keep them, or return them to a convenience store for recycling and receive A$3 cash back 
(VicRoads, 2010). A different approach has been taken in Mexico where Mexico City 
repealed its helmet law in February 2010 to make way for a bicycle-sharing system 
(MetroBike, LLC.  , 2010).   
 
58. Topography and Climate: Cycling in hilly conditions may be appropriate for the 
Tour de France but it can be very dissuasive for city commutes. Slopes between 4 per cent  
and 8 per cent are a significant constraint and slopes above 8 per cent are impractical. Year 
round hot and humid climates are clearly not conducive to cycling either. Many systems close 
in the winter (e.  g.   Montreal) due to ice and snow. Pedelecs (bicycles that provide electric 
power while pedalling) and E-Bikes (bicycles that provide electric power without pedalling) 
are clearly attractive options to overcome these challenges (but not ice and snow). While 
some systems are introducing electric bicycles on a pilot basis, the cost and weight (as well as 
the range) of current models are not conducive to mainstreaming this form of technology. 
Undoubtedly this will change as models become cheaper and lighter in weight. Until then, 
topographic and climatic conditions will tend to limit the application of bicycle-sharing 
schemes to cities that are relatively flat and temperate.   
 
59. Exaggerated Benefits: According to an online survey of 1,432 people in Montreal 
conducted in the summer of 2010 by researchers at McGill’s School of Urban Planning, the 
vast majority of trips (86 per cent) replaced sustainable modes such as walking, or rides on 
personal bicycles or public transport. While eight percent of BIXI users replaced taxi trips, 
only two percent of the respondents used a BIXI instead of driving, revealing that official 
estimates of CO2 reduction due to the implementation of the programme were exaggerated 
(Bachand-Marleau, 2010). This shows that proponents of bicycle-sharing systems need to be 
more cautious in their estimates of potential benefits and that more research is needed on the 
impacts of bicycle -sharing systems on reducing car use.    
 



  CSD19/2011/BP8 
 

 18 
 

 

60. Inexperienced Cyclists: In some cities there have been complaints from motorists 
that cyclists who use bicycle-sharing schemes tend to be inexperienced riders who do not 
follow the traffic rules.   This can be overcome by training programmes.    

B. Opportunities 
 
61. The rapid growth in bicycle-sharing schemes over the past two years outside of 
Europe, and especially in South East Asia and Latin America, is an indicator of the 
attractiveness of such systems and their adaptability to different situations.  Opportunities for 
success are clearly evident but from experience with past and current bicycle-sharing 
schemes, these opportunities will depend on several key factors that are summarized in Table 
10, below .   
 
Table 10  
Success factors in Bicycle -sharing schemes 
 

Factor  Description  Importance  

Bicycle Re-distribution  Mechanism to address asymmetrical demand for 
bicycles by location  

? ? ?  

Cycling infrastructure  Quality and quantity of designated cycling space – 
dedicated bicycle lanes, intersection facilities, slow 
streets  

? ? ?  

Density and Trip Demand  Demand for one way trips in multiple directions ? ? ?  

Maintenance  Bicycles and access terminals in good operating 
condition  

? ? ?  

Network Configuration  Location specific network design based on system 
objectives and travel demand  

? ? ?  

System Accessibility  Cost of use including monetary and convenience 
costs  

? ? ?  

Bicycles Bicycle specifications respond to user 
demographics and operating conditions 

? ?  

Docking Stations Terminals are visible and user interface is good ? ?  

Public Attitudes to 
Cycling 

Perception of mode, willingness to ‘share the 
road’, willingness to utilize mode 

? ?  

Quality of Public 
Transport  

Capacity to motivate residents to forgo auto trips 
to CBD  

? ?  

Weather & Topography Amount of Precipitation, Hills  ? ?  

Safety & Security  Terminals and cycling facilities are well lit and 
patrolled as necessary 

? ?  

System Availabi lity  Hours of Service  ? ?  

Technology Platform  Speed of access, real time information, privacy and 
security of data  

? ?  

 
Source: Curran, A . 2008. TransLink Public Bike System Feasibility Study. Vancouver: Quay Communications Inc.   
 
62. In addition, there are several external factors that will have a bearing on success.   
These include bicycle priority measurers and bicycle lanes, effective and efficient public 
transport systems and the perception of safety by users.    



  CSD19/2011/BP8 
 

 19 
 

 

VI.  POLICY RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
63. The rapid deve lopment and expansion of bicycle-sharing in recent years shows that 
it is an attractive and adaptable urban mobility concept.Drawing on successful European 
experiences, bicycle -sharing systems are now beginning to be implemented in Asia, Latin 
America, the Middle East and North America, and for the first time in developing countries.   
There are very few guidelines or manuals on how to develop such systems and there is an 
almost complete absence of policy recommendations.    
 
64. The only up-to-date and comprehensive set of generic guidelines that exists is the 
“Bike Sharing Guide” published by Transport Canada in March 2009. This draws heavily on 
the “Guía metodológica para la implantación de sistemas de bicicletas públicas en España” 
published by the Instituto para la Diversificación y Ahorro de la Energía (IDAE) in Spain in 
2007.  The “Guia” was the first attempt to develop guidelines for the development of bicycle-
sharing systems and was published to help Spanish cities apply for funds from IDAE.   
Elsewhere, systems are being developed and adapted in an almost “ad hoc” manner, partly by 
system promoters and partly by word of mouth.   
 
65. In some cases, individual cities are undertaking and publishing comprehensive 
bicycle -sharing feasibility studies that adapt European “best practice” to local conditions 
(London, New York City and Vancouver). These provide useful insights into what are the 
potential costs and benefits of bicycle -sharing and what it would take to make it happen in a 
specific city context. In 2008, Transport for London undertook a detailed feasibility study for 
introducing a bicycle -sharing scheme in central London (Transport for London, 2008). The 
key findings from this study provide the following comprehensive set of policy 
recommendations that are sufficiently generic to be applicable to developing a bicycle-
sharing scheme almost anywhere:  
  

• Annual subscription or registration promotes ownership of the scheme for the general 
public. Registration also enables the deposit system to work and eases the charging 
mechanism allowing accounts to be billed directly.   

• A strategic pricing structure is required which may differ depending on the business 
model. The length of the free period of use, the scale of price increases and the type of 
charge can all be used to manage demand and promote usage in accordance with the 
type of scheme, as defined in the business model.   

• Smart card usage makes it particularly easy to access bicycles.   
• Station location choice is imperative to create an effective, safe, usable network and 

to minimise the requirement for bicycle redistribution. Where redistribution is 
required, this should be done in an environmentally friendly and efficient way.   

• Innovative methods to identify land to locate stations will be needed, such as making 
use of existing on-street car parking spaces in Paris .   

• The bicycles need to be robust and must dock easily into a secure docking station.   
They could potentially be used up to 10 times a day.   They will be outside at all times 
and open to vandalism and damage. They must be sturdy, strong and secure, while at 
the same time easy to manoeuvre. They also need to be as difficult to steal and 
vandalise as practicably possible.   

• Maintenance must also be easy, with as much work completed on-site as possible.   
Standardised parts, on site storage facilities and versatile trained staff will help this 
process run smoothly.   



  CSD19/2011/BP8 
 

 20 
 

 

• The scheme needs to be visible and easily identifiable to its customers. Any potential 
scheme would be self-promoting, with more and more people using the scheme, 
increasing its visibility, promoting further growth in usage.   

• ‘Teething’ problems should be ironed out as soon as possible after the introduction of 
a scheme as users will switch away quickly if the scheme is problematic. This can be 
achieved with the targeting of demand through a phased introduction of the system.   

• Finally, project governance should be made clear from the start. The implementation 
of schemes in cities which have established strong, effective working relations hips 
has been far quicker and smoother.   

 
66. In addition, it is evident from the schemes that have been successfully implemented 
in Europe and elsewhere that bicycle-sharing schemes are successful within cities that are 
committed or at least interested in sustainable development. Without an effective public 
transport system and some form of demand management policy, bicycle -sharing will not be 
effective. Bicycle priority measures (such as cycle lanes) are essential ingredients for bicycle-
sharing users to fee l safe about cycling in any city.   
 
67. Experience to date with bicycle-sharing in developing countries is limited to Brazil, 
Chile, China, India, Islamic Republic of Iran and Mexico. There is hardly any information on 
system costs, operations or performance. In the case of China, the systems are very similar to 
those in Europe . In Guangzhou, the first phase of the bicycle -sharing system has been 
developed along the city’s Bus Rapid Transit (BRT) corridor to serve demand from the 
upcoming Asian Games.   
 
68. For bicycle-sharing to be an attractive option in any city, the following urban 
mobility elements are essential: (i) An effective public transport system which can be 
integrated physically and operationally with bicycle -sharing; and (ii) A bicycle lane network 
and associated bicycle priority measures at intersections that enable users to cycle safely and 
continuously throughout the area covered by the bicycle-sharing scheme.   
 
69. Although there are cities with bicycle-sharing systems without these facilities, the 
larger systems have extensive cycle lane networks and good public transport systems (both 
bus and rail-based) . Table 11 shows the extent of bicycle lane networks in selected cities with 
bicycle -sharing systems.   
 

Table 11  
       Bicycle lane networks in selected bicycle-sharing cities 

 

City System Fleet Bicycle Lanes (kms) 
Barcelona 6,000 177 
Copenhagen 2,000 1,000 
London 6,000 800 
Lyon 4,000 265 
Montreal 5,000 600 
Paris 20,000 370 

                                
                               Source: Author’s research 
 
70. Bicycle lanes alone will not guarantee safety. There must be an effective 
enforcement system in place to ensure that cyclists are in fact protected. According to a 
recent article in the Chinese media, dedicated bicycle lanes have only just started to appear in 



  CSD19/2011/BP8 
 

 21 
 

 

Guangzhou but are frequently disregarded by car drivers or pedestrians, rendering cycling 
through Guangzhou a perilous task (Guangzhou Interactive Information Network Company: 
Life in Guangzhou, 2010). 
 
71. In most developing country cities, the lack of bicycle infrastructure in the form of 
cycle lanes or cycle paths combined with the lack of enforcement of traffic laws presents a 
major challenge for the introduction of any form of bicycle-sharing system. In addition, and 
in most cases, the public transport systems are inadequate . Hence the integration of bicycle-
sharing with public transport at bus stops and/or stations is usually not possible.  The rapidly 
expanding introduction of BRT systems in developing country cities may present an 
opportunity to incorporate bicycle-sharing systems and the required bicycle lanes as an 
integral part of the BRT design and operational plan.   
 
72. In order to function effectively, bicycle -sharing systems rely on smart card 
technology, GPS tracking and real-time bicycle availability information on the internet.   In 
most cases, users need to register with a credit card to discourage theft. Hence, bicycle-
sharing’s dependence on credit cards is critical and as most people in developing countries in 
Africa, Asia and Latin America may not have credit cards this will severely limit usage. In 
the case of New Delhi (India) a valid Indian ID-Card, Voter Card or Driving License is kept 
as a deposit until the return of the bicycle at the station.  This approach excludes the one way 
point-to-point trip that is one of the key advantages of the bicycle -sharing concept. As a 
result, system usage is very low with an average of 11 customers per station in a city of 14 
million.   

A. Intensified information sharing  
 
73. There is no centra l repository of information on bicycle -sharing. The most up-to-date 
guidelines are over one year old and are designed specifically for conditions in Canada .  As 
more and more cities develop bicycle -sharing systems there is going to be a growing need 
for re liable and comprehensive information on costs, benefits and what it takes to design, 
implement and operate such systems. Cities such as New York and Vancouver that are 
considering bicycle -sharing have almost had to start from scratch in researching case studies, 
developing approaches and estimating costs and benefits.   

 
74.  There is a need to establish a “focal point” on bicycle-sharing or “Bicycle-sharing 
Centre”. This could take many forms and be supported in a number of ways. At this stage it is 
important to explore how it could assist cities interested in embarking on bicycle-sharing, 
especially in the developing world. There is also a need for a database of bicycle-sharing 
systems.   

B. Guidelines and manuals     
 
75. There is an urgent need for guidelines and manuals. They could be generic in nature 
but also geared to the specific needs of cities in different regions. They should be updated 
frequently and should be available in at least the major languages. 
 
 
 



  CSD19/2011/BP8 
 

 22 
 

 

C. City networks    
 
76. Although some cities are clearly learning from each other in an informal and ad hoc 
way, the benefits of establishing a global bicycle-sharing city network would be enormous. 
The purpose would be to share information, knowledge and expertise and contribute to the 
global database. In addition, cities would be able to collaborate on applied research and on 
developing innovative solutions. The network would be a prime source of assistance and 
advice for cities planning new systems as well as cities considering expansion, upgrades or 
changes to existing systems.   

D. Sources of development aid    
77. Cities in developing countries would benefit from bi-lateral aid and funding from the 
World Bank and the regional development banks. As the development of bicycle-sharing in 
developing countries is a very recent activity, it is not surprising that these institutions have 
little to no experience in the role of bicycle-sharing systems in developing country situations. 
This needs to change as there certainly will be requests for funding as more and more cities 
become aware of the potential for bicycle-sharing and see the developments in China and 
Latin America.    

E. Demand projections 
78. There is hardly any information available on how the demand for bicycle-sharing has 
been estimated. Undoubtedly the operators of the existing schemes JCDecaux have 
undertaken some form of market research to estimate the take up of their respective systems.   
Without this information it is somewhat difficult to judge the success of a system. The 
Bicycle-sharing Guide states simply that if a mobility study has not been carried out, the 
general rule is to deploy a public bicycle system in the metropolitan core, where the 
population and employment densities are the highest. As systems become more and more 
sophisticated and embedded in the urban transport system as a whole, the need for more solid 
demand projections will be become apparent.  It is not too early to begin to develop robust 
and simple methodologies to achieve this. 

F. Pilot projects 
79. Given the different characteristics of developing country cities, there will be a need 
to develop new and innovative approaches to bicycle -sharing that will draw on current 
experiences in Europe and elsewhere.  The best way to move forward on this would be to 
undertake a series of pilot projects, ideally supported by the development banks and/or 
bilateral aid.  Ideally these should be regional programmes that recognise local conditions.    

G. Urban mobility p lans 
80. Most bicycle-sharing schemes have been introduced in cities that have established 
sustainable ur ban transport policies and plans. In these cities, bicycle -sharing is seen as an 
element of sustainable urban mobility and in most cases the requisite cycling infrastructure 
has therefore been put in place before the schemes commence. Equally important to the 
success of bicycle-sharing is the role of public transport.  From the limited data available, it is 
evident that most bicycle -sharing trips are made as part of a public transport trip. The 
integration of bicycle -sharing and public transport within the framework of a sustainable 
urban mobility policy is therefore highly desirable . Cities that are considering the 
introduction of bicycle-sharing will need to be aware of the need to develop sustainable urban 
mobility policies and will probably need help and guidance.  Specific guidelines and manuals 
should therefore be produced on the role of bicycle-sharing in urban mobility, especially for 
cities in developing countries. 



  CSD19/2011/BP8 
 

 23 
 

 

REFERENCES 
 
Alta Planning + Design (2009). Bike Sharing/Public Bikes: An Overview of Programmes,
 Vendors and Technologies. Portland 
Bachand-Marleau, J., J. Larsen and A. M. El-Gene (2010). The much anticipated 

marriage of cycling and transit: But how will it work? Montreal: McGill University 
Bertuccio, Lorenzo (2008). Primo Convegno Naziona le del Club delle Città del Bike Sharing. 

Rome: Club delle Città per il Bike Sharing.   
Bicincittà: Solutions for Sustainable Mobility. 2008, 

 http://bicincitta.com/Files/Docs /brochure_bicincitt__eng_web.pdf   
Bührmann, Sebastian (2007). New Seamless Mobility Services: Public Bicycles (NICHES  

 Policy Note 4). Cologne: Rupprecht Consult Forschung & Beratung GmbH.   
Bührmann, Sebastian (2008). Bicycles as public-individual transport – European 

 developments. Cologne: Rupprecht Consult Forschung & Beratung GmbH .   
Buis, Jeroen (2008). The success story of public bicycle schemes. Interface for Cycling 

Expertise.   
Büttner, Janett (2009). Success Factors for Bike Sharing in Europe. Berlin: Choice GmbH.   
Curran, A . 2008. TransLink Public Bike System Feasibility Study. Vancouver: Quay 

Communications Inc.   
DeMaio, Paul (2003). Smart bikes: Public transportation for the 21st century.   

Transportation Quarterly 57(1): 9–11.   
DeMaio, Paul (2004). Will Smart Bikes Succeed as Public Transportation in the Unite  

 States? Journal of Public Transportation, Vol. 7, No. 2.   
DeMaio, Paul. 2009. Bike-sharing: Its History, Models of Provision, and Future (2009), 

Velo-city 2009 Conference.   
Dhingra, Chhavi and S.   Kodukula (2010). Public Bicycle Schemes: Applying the Concept
  inDeveloping Cities: Examples from India . Sustainable Urban Transport Technical 

Document # 3 . New Delhi: GTZ Sustainable Urban Transport Project.   
Faye, Vincent (2008). French network of bike-cities and Bike Sharing Systems in France.   

Paris: le Club des Villes Cyclables.   
Guangzhou Interactive Information Network Company: Life in Guangzhou (2010). Bike 

 Rental Service Snubbed by Citizens. Accessed October 30, 2010 
IDAE (Instituto para la Diversificación y Ahorro de la Energía) (2007). Guía metodológica  

 para la implantación de sistemas de bicicletas públicas en España . Madrid.   
IDAE (Instituto para la Diversificación y Ahorro de la Energía) (2008). Informe Anual 2008 .   

 Madrid.   
López Rodríguez, Angel (2009). Bicing: el transporte público individual de Barcelona .   
  Barcelona: Ajuntament de Barcelona.   
Mairie de Paris (2007). Vélib' Press Release. Paris 
MetroBike, LLC (2010). Mexico City Repeals Bike Helmet Law (June 15, 2010). 

Washington DC: The Bike -sharing Blog.bike-sharing.blogspot.com. Accessed 
October 19, 2010 

METROLINX (2009). Bike Share Program Investigation – Best Practices Investigation.   
Toronto.   

Nelson, Alyse (2006). Livable Copenhagen: The Design of a Bicycle City. Copenhagen: 
Center for Public Space Research.   

New York City Department of City Planning (2009). Bike-Share Opportunities in New York  
City . New York.   

Quay Communications Inc . (2008). TransLink Public Bike System Feasibility Study.   
 Vancouver.   



  CSD19/2011/BP8 
 

 24 
 

 

Shaheen, Susan., S. Guzman and H. Zhang (2010). Bikesharing in Europe, the 
Americas, an Asia: Past, Present, and Future. Washington D.C.: Transportation 
Research Board Annual Meeting.   

Gris Orange  Consultant (2009). Bike Sharing Guide. Transport Canada: Ottawa 
Transport for London (2008). Feasibility study for a central London cycle hire 

scheme.London.Vélib', From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia. Availaber from 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/V%C3%A9lib' 

Vélib', Official Site (with sections in English). Available from http://www.en.velib.paris.fr/ 
VicRoads (2010). New helmet trial for Melbourne Bike Share (October 13, 2010).   

Available from www. vicroads.vic.gov.au Accessed October 19, 2010 
 


