











































Microsoft Word - IJT_P57_Revised-Oppermann.docx


International Journal of Transportation 

Vol. x, No. x, (20xx), pp. xx-xx 

 

 

ISSN: XXXX-XXXX IJXX  

Copyright ⓒ XXXX SERSC 

Bike Sharing Atlas: Visual Analysis of Bike-Sharing Networks 
 

Michael Oppermann1, Torsten Möller2, Michael Sedlmair3 

University of Vienna 
1michael@oppermann.at, 2torsten.moeller@univie.ac.at, 

3michael.sedlmair@univie.ac.at 

Abstract 
In this paper, we introduce an interactive visualization system, bikesharingatlas.org, that 

supports the explorative data analysis of more than 468 bike-sharing networks worldwide. 
The system leverages a multi-coordinated view approach and innovative interaction 
techniques can help, for instance, to expose capacity bottlenecks, commuting patterns, and 
other network characteristics. Our broader goal is to illustrate how visual analysis can be 
used for exploring distributed, heterogeneous data from smart cities. Based on our 
collaboration with different target users, we present usage scenarios that show the potential 
of our approach to understanding bike-sharing and urban commuting behaviors. 
 

Keywords: smart city, bike-sharing, visualization, interactive visual analysis 
 
1. Motivation 

The majority of the world's population is living in urban areas, and this proportion 
continues to grow. An increase in efficiency is needed for cities to function, and sustainable 
infrastructures will be essential to accommodate larger numbers of people. As digitization 
has become an integral part of our life, massive amounts of data from a variety of sources 
are generated continuously in cities worldwide. Leveraging this data intelligently offers 
great potential towards smarter and more efficient cities. 

Although having these immense datasets at our fingertips, we often lag behind in 
supporting people to intelligently leverage the huge amount of data that is produced daily. 
A city planner might want to identify and better understand commuting patterns in order to 
develop more robust and cohesive transportation infrastructures. A sociologist wants to 
study local effects of job density and residential segregation on society, or wants to perform 
other data-intensive tasks like cross-country comparisons of urbanization. However, 
currently most of the data comes in machine-readable form only and hence is hard to access 
for people without sophisticated computational and statistical skills. 

In this paper, our goal is to illustrate how interactive visualization can help to open the 
data that is produced in smart cities to a wider audience. We believe that interactive 
visualization can help us to engage users, and to interactively explore and understand 
collected data from smart city sensors, in order to make life more comfortable, safer and 
sustainable. 

Towards this goal, we take public bike-sharing systems as an example and show how 
visualization can help to better leverage the data produced by these systems. Bike-sharing 
systems have been established as permanent components in urban passenger transport since 
1996 [1]. Being increasingly digitized, these systems nowadays produce data that can reveal 
interesting insights, not only into patterns of bicycle usage, but also underlying spatio-
temporal dynamics of a city, as Froehlich et al. [2] and Wood et al. [3] pointed out. 

As a first step, we recorded continually, over a period of 17 months, distributed data 
from several hundred bike-sharing networks worldwide. We aggregated the data, combined 
it with other data sources and derived characteristic network metrics. 



International Journal of Transportation 

Vol. x, No. x, (20xx) 

 

 

2 

In the course of an iterative design process we built a visualization tool with a variety of 
viewing options to offer multiple different perspectives on the data. Various design 
considerations were inspired and strongly shaped by our interactions with different target 
user groups: operators of a bike-sharing network, urban sociology researchers, public 
authorities, city planners, and the general public. To illustrate the value of this visualization 
approach, we provide four different usage scenarios: (1) how visualizing long-term 
recorded data can help to better understand commuting patterns in a city, (2) how the 
combination with other data sources can reveal interesting insights, (3) how our approach 
allows to compare systems world-wide through a shared global perspective (4) and how the 
general public can benefit from recording and visualizing this data. While our focus is on 
bike-sharing networks, we believe that—with the proliferation of globalization and mega 
cities—such data-driven and visual approaches will become increasingly important for 
other aspects of open urban data as well. 

In summary, our main contributions are: 

• We recorded and made openly available a repository of open bike-sharing data 
from 380 different cities over a period of 17 months and additionally data from 88 
cities over a period of 4 months. 

• We designed an online interactive visualization that makes the data accessible to 
users with a wide range of expertise. 

• We describe a set of four usage scenarios to illustrate the benefits of our approach 
for different target users. 

 
2. Related work 

Bike-sharing data has been used in different contexts before. Here, we review this 
previous work with the goal to contextualize our work and provide the interested reader 
with further pointers into the visualization and data analysis literature. 

The most prominent analyses of bike-sharing data this far have been statistical analyses. 
The goals of these analyses were, for instance, to help system operators to improve the 
location of stations [19], or re-balance bikes between stations [20]. While these approaches 
look for an algorithmic solution for a clearly defined task, our goal is different in that we 
want to make the data accessible, visible, and explorable to a wide range of potential users. 

Towards this goal, we took the approach of interactive visualization, which is well-
known to support such exploratory endeavors [21, 22]. It provides an essential way to 
support the user in a hypothesis generation and decision-making process. 

There exist some efforts that focus on the visual analysis of individual bike-sharing 
networks. Studying the spatial distribution of journeys and peak-time behaviors in London 
[3, 23], analyzing the system dynamics over a 10-month long period in New York City [24] 
or providing a tool to interactively explore the impact of demographic and weather factors 
on bike-share ridership in Boston [25]. In a broader context, there are several approaches 
that use other data sources in conjunction with visualizations to solve problems that are 
abstractly similar to the one of bike-sharing networks. These works use other smart city 
sensors, such as mobile phone data [26], public transport data [27] or social media data [26] 
to explore opportunities that arise from this type of data-driven analysis for smart cities. 
Ferreira et al. [28] used taxi trip data and Miranda et al. [29] utilized meta-data of Flickr 
images to visually explore and understand behavioral patterns in New York City. With these 
tools we share the goal to make the data accessible and to provide different levels of 
analysis. However, all these approaches take a local perspective on one city and are often 
limited to a specific target group, while our goal is to investigate how to expand such 
approaches to a more global level and for a broad range of users. 



International Journal of xxxxxx 

Vol. x, No. x, (20xx) 

 

 

3 

 

Figure 1. Screenshots of the web interface when focused on a specific city: 
(a) The fill level analyzer view exposes bike-sharing commuting behaviors in 
London, U.K. Each line represents an individual bike-sharing station and 
shows the daily average utilization. Selected stations are highlighted in all 
coordinated views. (b) Current overview of station fill levels in Paris, France. 
Tooltips help to predict the availability of bikes and empty docks at certain 
times during the day. As shown in the legend on top of the map, blue dots 
indicate full stations, and red dots empty ones. Circle size encodes the 
overall capacity of a station. (c) The route planner shows the fastest bike-
sharing route between two endpoints in Mexico City. 
 

      In terms of analyzing multiple cities, Austwick et al. [30] used statistics and 
visualization techniques to compare five different cities. Bargar et al. [31] proposed an 
application for comparing usage patterns between different bike-sharing programs from up 
to three different cities and Nagel et al. [32] exhibited, in a public gallery space, several 
visualizations for casually analyzing three different bike-sharing networks. Most closely 
related to our approach are O'Brien [33], Meddin et al. [34] and the platform citybik.es [4], 
who all used map-based tools to show the locations of bike-sharing networks worldwide. 
Although these tools provide an overview of networks, they are based on very 



International Journal of Transportation 

Vol. x, No. x, (20xx) 

 

 

4 

homogeneous data sources and do not take a long-term and contextual perspective, as we 
do.  Meddin's Bike-sharing Map [34] is based on Google Maps and administered manually. 
  

(a) Interactive filterable map 
provides a geographical 
overview of all networks 

(b) Small multiples are good 
indicators of the size, 
structure and density of 
networks 

(c) Table view with detailed  
statistical data of all 
networks

Figure 2. Screenshots of different overview components of the tool 
 
      It provides a high-level overview of bike-sharing programs around the world and 
includes also networks that are currently built or networks, for example in Asia, that don't 
provide live station data. Nevertheless, the navigation and the visual encodings weaken the 
usability. Citybik.es [4] uses the same information base as we do but is limited to showing 
live station fill levels. O'Brien's Bike Share Map [33] goes one step further by showing data 
from the last 24 hours but also does not offer a long-term perspective and the possibility for 
in-depth analyses. O'Brien et al. [7] proposed a classification of 38 systems based on spatio-
temporal characteristics and demonstrated thereby the opportunities of a higher-level view. 
In contrast to this work, which is a static analysis and a discussion of various insights, our 
goal was an interactive visualization tool that allows for dynamic and interactive 
exploration of the underlying data. 
 
3. Data acquisition and preprocessing 

A bike-sharing network, by our definition, has a certain number of stations and often 
thousands of bikes circulating in the network. Every station is composed of docking spaces 
and has therefore a finite capacity. The number of bikes in each station, we call it fill level, 
is highly dynamic and also a significant factor for the functioning of a system. Many 
operators make their collected data available to the public and contribute to various open 
data initiatives. A few cities share detailed historical data about completed trips but the 
majority provide only information about current station fill levels. In our application we put 
the focus on this type of information, to cover as many cities as possible. 

We started collecting data from 380 networks at the beginning and added new networks 
continuously. Our database is now composed of data from 468 networks in 45 different 
countries, with more than 21,500 stations. We gathered the data through api.citybik.es [4] 
or directly from the websites of the bike-sharing operators. Over a period of 17 months and 
for 380 networks we have logged the number of available bikes and empty docks for each 
station in a 15 min interval. Additionally, we further recorded this information from 88 
other networks over a 4-month period. The current version supports only a few systems 
from Asia, due to access limitations [4] but our tool provides interfaces to easily connect 
additional networks in the future. 

For data quality assurance purposes, we automatically verify if the geo-coordinates are 
plausible and lie in a specific region. We have also checked if the data from api.citybik.es 
is consistent with the information that is published on the websites of the respective bike-
sharing operators. If we observe that the fill levels of a network are not updated anymore, 
we disable certain features or the whole network. Due to the large number of networks and 



International Journal of xxxxxx 

Vol. x, No. x, (20xx) 

 

 

5 

different data providers, outages and some uncertainties are inevitable. However, the 
aggregation of several months creates a balancing effect and counteracts these problems.  

For all 468 networks, we enhance the platform with hourly weather records (temperature) 
and elevation profiles (altitude of each station). We get access to current weather 
information via OpenWeatherMap1 and the elevation profiles were loaded by means of the 
Google Maps Elevation API2. Additionally, we use Google Maps API, Mapbox and Open 
Street Map for map-related services. 

In total we collected more than 830 million fill levels, that offer a large potential for 
various analysis and prediction tasks, while also confronting us with additional processing 
challenges. For this reason, we integrated multiple preprocessing steps to break down the 
database into smaller chunks that can be loaded during runtime. High-level network metrics 
are also generated in advance. In addition to the number of stations per network, their 
elevation profiles and the average number of docks per station, we calculated the following 
characteristics for filter, ranking and comparison purposes. 

• Average number of stations within a 2 km radius: Starting from each station we 
counted the number of reachable stations in a 2 km radius and averaged across it. 
This radius corresponds to the mean trip distance in Vienna. 

• Average nearest neighbor distance: For each station, we compute the distance to its 
nearest station. We then average these distances over all stations in this bike-sharing 
network. 

• Network activity: We defined this metric by counting the number of fill level 
changes for every station and normalized it to the network size, as illustrated by the 
pseudo code below (Algorithm 1). Due to the 15 min interval in our data retrieval, 
there is some natural uncertainty of this straight-forward measure for larger 
networks [5]. 

• Maximum elevation difference between the highest and lowest station without 
consideration of possible hills and altitude changes in between. 

 

Table 1. Calculating the Network Activity for Each Bike-Sharing Network 
% n = selected_network  
n.fill_level_changes ← 0 
FOR EACH timestamp tk IN n.timestamps DO 

IF tk != tk-1 THEN 
    n.fill_level_changes ← n.fill_level_changes + 1 

END IF 
END FOR 
n.network_activity ← n.fill_level_changes / n.number_of_stations 
 

 
4. Bike Sharing Atlas 

We have developed an interactive visualization system (bikesharingatlas.org) to help 
users with a wide range of expertise to understand and intelligently leverage data that is 
produced by public bike-sharing systems worldwide. Figure 1-a shows a screenshot of the 
web tool and a video in the supplemental material provides further details on user 
interactions. 

                                                
1 https://openweathermap.org 
2 https://developers.google.com/maps/documentation/elevation/ 



International Journal of Transportation 

Vol. x, No. x, (20xx) 

 

 

6 

In the following, we give an overview of the system and subsequently we present four 
selected usage scenarios. In this context, we also describe in detail primary visual and 
interaction design choices we made during the implementation process. 

 
 
4.1. System overview 

Global view: Initially, the homepage of the web-platform presents an interactive map 
showing the geographical locations of all bike-sharing networks. To ease getting started, 
we also display example cities including the city of the user's current location, and those 
that are particularly interesting because of the available data. Two separate pages provide 
further high-level overviews of all networks, as shown in Figure 2 and 6. A small multiples 
view (Figure 2-b), for instance, provides a first impression of the size and density of the 
networks by visualizing them as individual vector maps. Sort functions, range sliders, and 
histograms allow users to explore and compare hundreds of networks in an interactive way.  

Local view: The user can then select a network of a particular city and go one level deeper 
revealing detailed information about this network (and city). A tab navigation and multiple 
views provide different perspectives on the selected network and support the user in the 
exploration process. The currently available detail views include: (1) Interactive map with 
current fill levels of the network, as shown in Figure 1-b; (2) Route planner, Figure 1-c, and 
in Figure 1-a: (3) Fill level analyzer with historical data; (4) Time series chart with the 
network activity and the superimposed temperature profile; (5) Other information about the 
network and the city, such as bike-sharing pricing, detailed information on trips (if 
available), or additional weather and elevation data.  

Multiple entry points, a search function, and a clear navigation structure provide an easy 
way to get from a global to a local view and vice versa. Moreover, we followed the idea of 
suggested interactivity [6], in the form of little preview videos and tooltips, to guide first-
time users through the visualization system. 
 
4.2. Usage scenarios 

Over the course of the last two years, we evaluated and discussed our approach with the 
following target groups: Operators of a medium-sized bike-sharing network, city planners, 
public authorities, researchers in urban sociology, and the general public. Overall, we 
interviewed 15 participants in 13 single or group sessions. The insights we gained together 
with these people informed many design considerations and shaped the final 
implementation. The usage scenarios below are based on them and are meant to illustrate 
the potential of our interactive visualization tool. 
 
4.2.1. Usage scenario – commuting patterns: By recording and aggregating station fill 
levels over a period of 17 months we get an accurate picture of the daily average utilization 
of each station in a network. The fill level analyzer, shown in Figure 1-a, with its multiple 
coordinated views is based on this data and provides a new approach to identify capacity 
bottlenecks and commuting behaviors in bike-sharing systems. The multi-series line chart 
is the core element and shows, for a selected city, the average fill levels (y-axis) during the 
day (x-axis). Each line represents a station. Due to the different numbers of docking spaces 
per station, the fill levels are normalized. This contrasts from the work from O'Brien et al. 
[7] where all station fill levels are aggregated to get a single line. In that case, during the 
averaging process important information gets lost and it is impossible to expose critical 
stations that are mostly full or empty. In our proposed system, all stations are separated and 
the user can switch between different modes to explore, for example, fill levels only for 
weekends or weekdays. Additionally, there are two other perspectives: an elevation profile 
of all stations and an interactive map for providing the geographic context. 



International Journal of xxxxxx 

Vol. x, No. x, (20xx) 

 

 

7 

Dynamic linking and brushing [8], an interactive visualization technique that connects 
multiple views, leads to a holistic understanding of the city dynamics. As shown in Figure 
1, the user can draw a line—a hypothetical profile—on top of the multi-series line chart and 
our algorithm automatically selects similar stations. At the end of the drawn line a slider is 
displayed and allows the user to specify how many lines she wants to select (default is 20% 
of the lines). The selected stations are not only highlighted in the line chart (brushing), but 
also in all other views (linking). Linking and brushing is a well-studied technique in 
visualization research [37] and many systems have successfully employed it in the past. Its 
biggest benefit is that the users can interactively and easily cast complex queries to the data. 
The query is casted in a direct manipulation manner [38], that is, the user can stay in her 
mental model without the need to leave her current train of thought and interaction mode. 
The highlighting is propagated to various other views where aspects related to the user’s 
selection visually pop out without the necessity to actively process them [39]. This approach 
allows the user to quickly analyze complex patterns that are distributed over multiple views. 
The supplemental video illustrates our linking and brushing approach. 

Besides bike-sharing operators, that can use the tool to analyze capacity bottlenecks, 
such as frequent outages, city planners and public authorities can use the visualization 
system also to identify and communicate urban commuting behaviors. For example, 
stations in the city center of London get full during the day and empty through the night, as 
shown in Figure 1-a. This phenomenon is observable in many cities worldwide as illustrated 
in Figure 3. Milan and New York City show very similar behaviors. People from the 
outskirts are commuting to downtown areas, such as Fifth Avenue in New York or Piazza 
Duomo in Milan, in the morning and return in the evening. Mexico City's pattern is a bit 
more faceted and shows multiple geographical hotspots. Although our two city planner 
interviewees have hypothesized a considerable separation of residential and commercial 
spaces in certain cities, our tool exposed visible evidence for this behavior. 

Barcelona and other Spanish cities show this characteristic morning commute curve too 
but in the afternoon it becomes vague. We can imagine that this effect might stem from the 
different working patterns in Spain with a longer lunch break and longer working hours in 
the evening [9]. This assumption could be further investigated by sociology researchers 
with the aid of our visualization system. 

Other cities, such as Marseille or Vienna, are instead characterized by a mixed-use 
development, without such a clear commuting pattern in filling levels (i.e., mostly balanced 
fill levels). 
 
4.2.2. Usage scenario - combining with additional data: Multiple guided brainstorming 
sessions with a bike-sharing operator revealed that elevation differences between stations 
are essential factors for the cost-efficient functioning of a system. Stations at higher 
altitudes tend to be empty more frequently because users are usually more downhill-
oriented. The bikes must be re-balanced manually by the operator. By combining the 
historical bike-sharing records with elevation profiles, the implemented visualization 
system also supports a closer investigation of this question. As part of the fill level analyzer, 
described in the previous usage scenario, we have integrated an elevation profile of all 
stations, which is also connected via linking and brushing to all other views. Instead, of a 
u-shaped commuting pattern such as in Figure 1-a, average filling levels in Vienna, for 
example, remain mostly constant throughout the day but show clear evidence of fewer 
available bikes at higher altitudes (see Figure 4-a). The maximum elevation difference 
between the highest and lowest station serves as one of our network characteristics and can 
be also used to analyze elevation patterns on a global scale. While we were considering to 
show this information by color coding the stations (circles), visualization is always a careful 
tradeoff and showing too much quickly leads to cluttered interfaces. To keep the design 



International Journal of Transportation 

Vol. x, No. x, (20xx) 

 

 

8 

straightforward and to the point, we thus decided to show elevation information of stations 
in a separate view and connect it via linking and brushing. 

Besides the elevation profiles, we further enhanced our database with hourly weather 
records for all cities. Weather has been found a substantial factor in bike sharing demand 
[10]. In addition to cross-correlation between the temperature and the network activity, 
which we compute for easy global comparisons, we also added an additional time series 
view showing this data visually. Vienna, for example, has a distinctive pattern and a 
particularly strong relationship between the network activity and the temperature, as shown 
in Figure 5. The two white cuts in April and August were caused by server issues and do 
not represent the actual network activity. Visualization is also good in quickly revealing 
such anomalies [11]. Analyzing the impact of weather conditions on bike-sharing can help 
to improve rebalancing operations and the planning of new systems in the future [12]. 

Generally, we opted for a modular design that can be easily extended with data from 
other sources, as well as with different views onto this data. Especially future work in urban 
sociology would benefit from an integration of additional context information, such as 
demographic developments (workplace density, gross domestic product etc).  
 
4.2.3. Usage scenario - multi-city comparisons: Conceptually, our user interface follows 
Shneiderman`s venerable information-seeking mantra (“overview first, zoom and filter, 
details on demand”) [13]. In order to provide an overview, a shared global perspective on 
the collected data, we implemented multiple interactive visualizations of all networks, such 
as zoomable maps or a small multiples view (see Figure 2-a and 2-b). Due to the same 
scales and axes, small multiples are very efficient for giving a first quick overview and for 
comparison purposes [14]. The individual vector maps with bike-sharing stations as dots 
serve as indicators of the size, structure, and density of networks. 

To illustrate the global scale of our data, we implemented another multi-coordinated 
view dashboard that allows users to interactively explore bike-sharing systems globally 
(Figure 6). Several frequency charts (or strip plots), with thin, vertical lines representing 
individual networks, show the distribution of networks along a set of selected dimensions, 
such as, population, network activity, or the reachable stations (see Section 3 for more 
details). Similar to the fill level analyzer, users can draw lines on top of these charts to select 
certain ranges of interest. Again, leveraging the linking and brushing approach, the 
selection is highlighted on all other dimensions, as well as in the corresponding map. Vice 
versa, upon filtering a specific geographical region (lasso selection, see Figure 4-b), the 
received values are highlighted in the frequency chart. 

While operators of these systems have mostly a rather narrow and local view, our 
visualization enables them to explore, compare, and learn from other networks worldwide. 
Similarly, politicians and transportation authorities who are planning a new bike-sharing 
system can get interesting insights from equal-sized cities, such as the number of reachable 
stations in a 2 kilometer radius. 
 

4.2.4. Usage scenario - general public: By bringing together distributed, heterogeneous 
data on a single platform we also simplify the access for general public users. While this 
user group is often not interested in in-depth analysis, it can benefit from a lightweight 
interface that leverages this rich data source. Our implemented system includes various 
features that illustrate how typical tasks that appeal to the general public can be supported, 
for example, maps showing live station fill levels or a bike-sharing route planner for all our 
468 networks, shown in Figure 1-b and Figure 1-c respectively. 

 

 



International Journal of xxxxxx 

Vol. x, No. x, (20xx) 

 

 

9 

 
Figure 3. Station fill levels visualized as multi-series line charts serve as 
indicators of commuting behaviors worldwide. Small thumbnails in the 
middle column of each view show how patterns differ during the week from 
those on the weekend. Users can click on one of the thumbnails to show it in 
the main view enlarged. Stations can be selected either in the line chart or in 
the map view and are highlighted respectively. 



International Journal of Transportation 

Vol. x, No. x, (20xx) 

 

 

10 

 

 
(a) Fill level analyzer shows mostly balanced fill 
levels in Vienna but provides evidence of fewer 
available bikes at higher altitudes 

(b) Lasso selection tool can be 
used to filter stations based on a 
geographical region

Figure 4. Analyzing Station Fill Levels of Vienna’s Bike-Sharing Network 
 

 

 
Figure 5. Time Series Showing the Network Activity (Gray Area) and the 

Temperature (Line) in Vienna 
 

Within the route planner users can enter trip start- and endpoints and the system 
automatically finds the nearest stations and the fastest route. Additional tooltips in the 
interactive map show the current fill level and a historical profile for each station, which 
we computed by averaging across the 17 months of data that we recorded. This information 
can be used to roughly predict how the availability might look like at a certain point in time, 
similar to Google's `popular times' feature [15]. While similar planning tools exist for many 
systems [16,17], our data allows a unified approach across them.  

In order to make the tool usable for a broad audience, we cannot have a steep learning 
curve as is the case for many expert visualization and data analysis tools. Hence, it is 
important that users are immediately aware of the benefits to get interested. Different design 
considerations and a much stronger focus on usability has been taken into account. We 
sought to consistently use easy to understand visual encodings, specifically as the 
visualization literacy of the general public is known to be low [18]. The feedback received 
in interactions with six persons of this user group has shown the added value, especially for 
those traveling or moving to new cities.  
 

4.3. Implementation 

Our system is implemented as a web-based tool that runs in every modern web browser 
and that adapts flexible to different desktop monitors. While we have used Python 



International Journal of xxxxxx 

Vol. x, No. x, (20xx) 

 

 

11 

extensively for data-preprocessing, the actual web-interface is primarily based on 
JavaScript. We use the library d3.js 1  for visualizations, and leaflet.js 2  for integrating 
interactive maps. The fill level analyzer with its interactive selection tool is also purely 
based on JavaScript and d3.js. The collected and aggregated data is stored in a MySQL 
database and partly in small CSV files that can be loaded asynchronously as needed.  

  

 
Figure 6. Frequency charts linked with a map view allow users to 

interactively explore and compare network characteristics 
 

5. Conclusions and future work 
In this work we discuss a data-driven and visual approach to understanding and 

leveraging smart city data. Through our iterative design process, we found evidence that 
such an approach can benefit different target groups. The fill level analyzer with its multi-
coordinated views, for instance, provides a new way to explore and communicate 
commuting behaviors in 45 countries. The combination with other data sources can help, 
for instance, urban sociology researchers to analyze effects of residential segregation. 
Elevation profiles support bike-sharing operators in identifying bottlenecks with stations at 
higher altitudes. An integrated route planner and live station fill levels offer a benefit for 
general public users. 

While our system is primarily built around global bike-sharing data we believe that the 
proposed visual approach is relevant for other smart city sensors too. Observed more 
closely, we use the data not only to analyze cycling behavior or to build a route planner but 
also as a way to understand high-level city dynamics more generally. The concept of using 
sensors for monitoring tasks for which they were not initially designed is called 
opportunistic sensing (or citizen sensing) [35]. Massive amounts of data, produced by car 
sharing services, taxis, public transport systems, smart meters, or other sensors provide 
abstractly similar challenges and opportunities. By recording them over a long time period 
and by making them accessible and visually explorable it could open up new possibilities 
in understanding and improving urban environments. 

                                                
1 https://d3js.org 
2 http://leafletjs.com 



International Journal of Transportation 

Vol. x, No. x, (20xx) 

 

 

12 

We will continue to gather live station fill levels in a 15 min interval and to execute the 
preprocessing workflow regularly. Furthermore, it is our intention to continuously expand 
the platform and to integrate additional bike-sharing networks in the future.  

We recorded not only the temperature but also weather conditions, humidity and wind 
speed for all cities. Eventually, however we decided to include only the temperature for the 
beginning. Thus, several questions remain unanswered such as the influence of 
precipitation or extreme weather conditions on the network activity.  The weather records 
combined with bike-sharing data or other datasets open broad possibilities for detailed 
analyses that we plan to address in future work.  

So far, we have only scratched the surface and there are many more usage scenarios that 
could be explored in this context. But also the ones that we have identified would benefit 
from being complemented, for instance, by further design studies and in-depth 
collaboration with specific user groups [36]. Our work of gathering and making the data 
available now provide the first steps towards such future endeavors. Beyond that, we also 
hope that our work will inspire researchers and designers of other urban data solutions. 
 
References  
[1] P. DeMaio and J. Gifford, “Will smart bikes succeed as public transportation in the United States?” 

Journal of Public Transportation, vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 1–15, 2004. 

[2] J. Froehlich, J. Neumann, and N. Oliver, “Sensing and predicting the pulse of the city through shared 
bicycling” in IJCAI, vol. 9, 2009, pp. 1420–1426. 

[3] J. Wood, R. Beecham, and J. Dykes, “Moving beyond sequential design:  Reflections on a rich multi-
channel approach to data visualization”, IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, vol. 
20, no. 12, pp. 2171–2180, 2014. 

[4] CityBikes API, 2017, last accessed April 26,2017. [Online]. Available: https://citybik.es 

[5] C. M. de Chardon and G. Caruso, “Estimating bike-share trips using station level data,” Transportation 
Research Part B: Methodological, vol. 78, pp. 260–279, 2015. 

[6] J. Boy, L. Eveillard, F. Detienne, and J.-D. Fekete, “Suggested interactivity: Seeking perceived 
affordances for information visualization”, IEEE Transactions on Visualiza- tion and Computer Graphics, 
vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 639–648, 2016.   

[7] O. O’Brien, J. Cheshire, and M. Batty, “Mining bicycle sharing data for generating insights into 
sustainable transport systems”, Journal of Transport Geography, vol. 34, no. 262–273, 2014.   

[8] J. Heer and B. Shneiderman, “Interactive dynamics for visual analysis”, Queue, vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 1–26, 
2012.   

[9] S. Jones, “Working 9 to 8: Spain seeks to shorten 11-hour working day”, December 2016, last accessed 
April 26, 2017. [Online]. Available: https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/13/spain-leaves-
franco-in-past- as-it-seeks-to-move-clocks-back-an-hour   

[10] M. S. Smith and G. Kauermann, “Bicycle commuting in Melbourne during the 2000s energy crisis: A 
semiparametric analysis of intraday volumes”, Transportation Research Part B: Methodological, vol. 45, 
no. 10, pp. 1846 – 1862, 2011.   

[11] S. Kandel, A. Paepcke, J. Hellerstein, and J. Heer, “Wrangler: Interactive visual specification of data 
transformation scripts”, in Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems. ACM, 2011, pp. 3363–3372.   

[12] K. Gebhart and R. B. Noland, “The impact of weather conditions on bikeshare trips in Washington, DC”, 
Transportation, vol. 41, no. 6, pp. 1205–1225, 2014.   

[13] B. Shneiderman, “The eyes have it: A task by data type taxonomy for information visualizations”, in IEEE 
Symposium on Visual Languages, 1996, pp. 336–343.   

[14] E. Tufte, Envisioning Information. Cheshire, CT, USA: Graphics Press, 1990.   

[15] Google, “Popular times”, 2017, last accessed April 26, 2017. [Online]. Available: https://goo.gl/F7D0c9 



International Journal of xxxxxx 

Vol. x, No. x, (20xx) 

 

 

13 

[16] Citymapper, “The ultimate transport app”, 2017, last accessed April 26, 2017. [Online]. Available: 
https://content.citymapper.com   

[17] Mapbox, “Plan a ride with surface, directions, and turf.js”, 2017, last accessed April 26, 2017. [Online]. 
Available: https://www.mapbox.com/bites/00094/   

[18] J. Boy, R. A. Rensink, E. Bertini, and J.-D. Fekete, “A principled way of assessing visualization literacy”, 
IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, vol. 20, no. 12, pp. 1963–1972, 2014   

[19] J. C. García-Palomares, J. Gutiérrez, and M. Latorre, “Optimizing the location of stations in bike-sharing 
programs: a GIS approach”, Applied Geography, vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 235–246, 2012.   

[20] C. Kloimüllner, P. Papazek, B. Hu, and G. R. Raidl, “Balancing bicycle sharing systems: an approach for 
the dynamic case”, in European Conference on Evolutionary Computation in Combinatorial Optimization, 
2014, pp. 73–84   

[21] T. Munzner, Visualization Analysis and Design. CRC Press, 2014.   

[22] G. Andrienko, N. Andrienko, P. Bak, D. Keim, and S. Wrobel, Visual analytics of movement. Springer 
Science & Business Media, 2013.   

[23] R. Beecham, J. Wood, and A. Bowerman, “Studying commuting behaviours using collaborative visual 
analytics”, Computers, Environment and Urban Systems, vol. 47, pp. 5–15, September 2014.   

[24] G. N. Oliveira, J. L. Sotomayor, R. P. Torchelsen, C. T. Silva, and J. L. Comba, “Visual analysis of bike-
sharing systems”, Computers & Graphics, vol. 60, pp. 119–129, 2016.   

[25] Bostonography, “Hubway trip explorer”, 2017, last accessed April 26, 2017. [Online]. Available: 
http://bostonography.com/hubwaymap/   

[26] T. von Landesberger, F. Brodkorb, P. Roskosch, N. Andrienko, G. Andrienko, and A. Kerren, 
“Mobilitygraphs: Visual analysis of mass mobility dynamics via spatio-temporal graphs and clustering”, 
IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 11–20, 2016. 

[27] L. Yu, W. Wu, L. Xiaohui, L. Guangxia, W. Siong Ng, S.-K. Ng, Z. Huang, A. Arunan, and H. M. Watt, 
“iVizTRANS: Interactive visual learning for home and work place detection from massive public 
transportation data”, in IEEE Conference on Visual Analytics Science and Technology (VAST),  
2015, pp. 49–56. 

[28] N. Ferreira, J. Poco, H. T. Vo, J. Freire, and C. T. Silva, “Visual exploration of big spatio-temporal urban 
data: A study of New York City taxi trips”, IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 
vol. 19, no. 12, pp. 2149–2158, 2013. 

[29] F. Miranda, H. Doraiswamy, M. Lage, K. Zhao, B. Gonçalves, L. Wilson, M. Hsieh, and C. T. Silva, 
“Urban pulse: Capturing the rhythm of cities”, IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer 
Graphics, vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 791–800, 2017. 

[30] M. Z. Austwick, O. O’Brien, E. Strano, and M. Viana, “The structure of spatial networks and communities 
in bicycle sharing systems”, PLoS ONE, vol. 8, no. 9, p. e74685, 2013. 

[31] A. Bargar, A. Gupta, S. Gupta, and D. Ma, “Interactive visual analytics for multi-city bikeshare data 
analysis,” in 3rd International SIGKDD Workshop on Urban Computing (UrbComp), 2014. 

[32] T. Nagel, C. Pietsch, and M. Dörk, “Staged analysis: From evocative to comparative visualizations of 
urban mobility”, in Proceedings of the IEEE VIS Arts Program, VISAP, 2016, pp. 23–30.   

[33] O. O’Brien, “Bike share map”, September 2017, last accessed April 26, 2017. [Online]. Available: 
http://bikes.oobrien.com 

[34] R. Meddin and P. DeMaio, “The bike-sharing world map”, September 2017, last accessed April 26, 2017. 
[Online]. Available: http://bikesharingmap.com 

[35] D. Havlik, S. Schade, Z. A. Sabeur, P. Mazzetti, K. Watson, A. J. Berre, and J. L. Mon, “From sensor to 
observation web with environmental enablers in the future internet”, Sensors, vol. 11, no. 4,  
pp. 3874–3907, 2011. 

[36] M. Sedlmair, M. Meyer, and T. Munzner, “Design study methodology: Reflections from the trenches and 
the stacks”, IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, vol. 18, no. 12,  
pp. 2431–2440, 2012. 

[37] C. Weaver, “Building highly-coordinated visualizations in improvise.”, in IEEE Symposium on 
Information Visualization, pp. 159-166, 2004. 



International Journal of Transportation 

Vol. x, No. x, (20xx) 

 

 

14 

[38] B. Shneiderman, “Direct manipulation: A step beyond programming languages”, IEEE Computer, vol. 16, 
no. 8, pp. 57–69, 1983. 

[39] C. Ware, Information visualization: perception for design. Elsevier, 2012. 

 

 
Authors 

 
Michael Oppermann is currently in the PhD program of the 

Department of Computer Science at the University of British 
Columbia. He received his Dipl.-Ing. degree (MSc) in Business 
Informatics from the University of Vienna. His research interests 
include information visualization, human-computer interaction 
and data-driven journalism. 

 
  

 
Torsten Möller is a professor at the University of Vienna, 

Austria, since 2013. Between 1999 and 2012 he served as a 
Computing Science faculty member at Simon Fraser University, 
Canada. He received his PhD in Computer and Information 
Science from Ohio State University in 1999 and a Vordiplom (BSc) 
in mathematical computer science from Humboldt University of 
Berlin, Germany. He is a senior member of IEEE and ACM, and a 
member of Eurographics. His research interests include algorithms 
and tools for analyzing and displaying data with principles rooted 
in computer graphics, human-computer interaction, image 
processing, machine learning and visualization. 

 
  

Michael Sedlmair received his PhD degree in Computer 
Science from the Ludwig Maximilians University of Munich. 
After a postdoc at the University of British Columbia, he is now 
an assistant professor at the University of Vienna. His research 
interests include visualization design and evaluation, human 
factors in visualization and data analysis, and human-computer 
interaction. 

 
  

 

 

 

 

 

 


