

































































Moving beyond sequential design: Reflections on a rich multi-channel approach to data visualization


IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VISUALIZATION AND COMPUTER GRAPHICS,   VOL. 20,   NO. 12,   DECEMBER 2014 2171

1077-2626 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Moving beyond sequential design:
Reflections on a rich multi-channel approach to data visualization

Jo Wood, Member, IEEE, Roger Beecham and Jason Dykes

Fig. 1. Bicycle flow visualizations at the Museum of London.

Abstract—We reflect on a four-year engagement with transport authorities and others involving a large dataset describing the use
of a public bicycle-sharing scheme. We describe the role visualization of these data played in fostering engagement with policy
makers, transport operators, the transport research community, the museum and gallery sector and the general public. We identify
each of these as ‘channels’ – evolving relationships between producers and consumers of visualization – where traditional roles of
the visualization expert and domain expert are blurred. In each case, we identify the different design decisions that were required to
support each of these channels and the role played by the visualization process. Using chauffeured interaction with a flexible visual
analytics system we demonstrate how insight was gained by policy makers into gendered spatio-temporal cycle behaviors, how this
led to further insight into workplace commuting activity, group cycling behavior and explanations for street navigation choice. We
demonstrate how this supported, and was supported by, the seemingly unrelated development of narrative-driven visualization via
TEDx, of the creation and the setting of an art installation and the curating of digital and physical artefacts. We assert that existing
models of visualization design, of tool/technique development and of insight generation do not adequately capture the richness of
parallel engagement via these multiple channels of communication. We argue that developing multiple channels in parallel opens up
opportunities for visualization design and analysis by building trust and authority and supporting creativity. This rich, non-sequential
approach to visualization design is likely to foster serendipity, deepen insight and increase impact.

Index Terms—Movement visualization, visual analytics, bikeshare, impact, visualization models, design study

1 INTRODUCTION

As the discipline of information visualization matures, we can recog-
nise several attempts to reflect on successes and failures in order to
abstract and generalize good practice and guidance. Such reflections
have ranged in focus from visualization system design [37] to inter-
action design [45], from visualization task taxonomies [46] to visu-

• Jo Wood, Roger Beecham and Jason Dykes are at the giCentre, City
University London, E-mail: j.d.wood@city.ac.uk,
roger.beecham.1@city.ac.uk and j.dykes@city.ac.uk.

alization objectives [49] and from abstractions of visualization archi-
tectures [11] to abstractions of the process of reporting design studies
themselves [43]. For good reason, most academic accounts focus on
development of visualization design, construction and evaluation and
tend to characterize the process as a sequential one. While this ap-
proach provides a useful means to offer generalizable guidance, the fo-
cus on sequential, often linear, development of visualization processes
does perhaps provide only a partial view of what visualization has to
offer. To extend the reach of a design study, we identify the idea of
a visualization channel – the evolving and often complex relationship
between the producers and consumers of visualization. In this paper
we argue that a parallel multi-channel approach to visualization offers
a richer way of engaging with data, topics and organisations and that
this may have a positive influence on visualization design that results
in more persuasive or impactful means of effecting change. Through

For information on obtaining reprints of this article, please send
e-mail to: tvcg@computer.org.

Manuscript received 31 Mar. 2014; accepted 1 Aug. 2014 ate of
publication 2014; date of current version 2014.11 Aug. 9 Nov.

D.

Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TVCG.2014.2346323



2172 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VISUALIZATION AND COMPUTER GRAPHICS,   VOL. 20,   NO. 12,   DECEMBER 2014

an extended case study reflecting a four-year engagement with a par-
ticular data-rich application area, we argue that considering broader
issues of visualization design and use such as metaphor, trust, author-
ity, storytelling, insight and engagement and the interactions between
them, we can extend the notion of what constitutes a ‘design study’
and how we might best approach visualization design.

The main contributions of this work are twofold. Firstly, we offer
a detailed conventional sequential ‘design study’ demonstrating how
appropriate visualization design can lead to deep insight and impact
in a policy making context (Section 2 and Section 4.2). Secondly we
offer evidence that extending visualization design to use rich multi-
channel engagement leads, though processes of intentional design as
well as engineered serendipity, to more impactful and effective dis-
course between producers and consumers of visualization (Section 4
and Section 5).

2 DATA CONTEXT AND THE PROBLEM DOMAIN
Our focus is on a large dataset that contains personal information about
individuals and their spatio-temporal travel behaviors. Very large and
rapid increases in the availability, scope and precision of such data has
brought many new opportunities for researchers working within the
social and behavioral sciences [33]. In transport studies, a community
with which we wished to engage, the advent of smartcard technolo-
gies is the most obvious example. Although introduced as an effi-
cient fare payment method, the data generated by smartcard systems
offer a very complete historical record of demand on a public trans-
port network [3, 9]. However, linking anonymized customer travel
records, these data can be used to characterize and understand various
aspects of individual travel behavior [2, 32]. The emergence of recent,
information-technology based public bikeshare schemes is another ex-
ample. In a similar way that smartcards record ‘tap ins’ and ‘tap outs’
on major metro systems, third-generation bikeshare schemes contain
technologies that allow a bicycle’s movement to be tracked and, as
with smartcard data, this transactional information can be linked to
individual customers.

We explore the roles visualization can play in engaging with the re-
search and policy communities and the general public by considering
a public bikeshare scheme that was introduced in London, UK in July
2010. The initiative, here referred to as the London Cycle Hire Scheme
(LCHS), was modeled on the successful Vélib scheme introduced in
Paris in 2007 and constitutes a major public transport project in cen-
tral London. At the time of its launch, the LCHS comprised around
5,000 hire bicycles and a network of 315 self-service docking stations
each with a capacity to store between 10-40 bicycles. It has since
grown to over 700 docking stations and around 11,000 bicycles avail-
able for use at any given time. Two major organisations are involved
in managing and operating the scheme. Transport for London (TfL)
is the local government body with strategic and management respon-
sibility for public transport in London, including the LCHS. TfL have
responsibility for the medium and long term running of the scheme,
including its expansion, pricing and wider strategic perspective on en-
couraging cycling in the capital. The logistics company Serco Group
have responsibility for the day-to-day operation of the scheme includ-
ing managing the communications infrastructure between the docking
stations and the distribution and maintenance of the bicycles.

A key characteristic of the scheme that offers opportunities for
analysis and visual exploration is the detailed digital record of its
use. Three datasets in particular have been central to the visualiza-
tion and analysis opportunities offered by the scheme. Firstly, a real-
time record of every docking station’s status, including the number of
bicycles currently docked and number of free spaces available, is gen-
erated continually at 3-minute intervals, resulting in c.300m records
generated between the start of the scheme and March 2014. Secondly,
every journey made between an origin and destination docking station
is recorded and timestamped along with the id of the user making the
journey and the bicycle on which it was made. While the precise tra-
jectory between each origin and destination is not known (although it
can be modeled [59]), the accumulation of approximately 25m jour-
neys by January 2014 provides a potentially valuable spatio-temporal

picture of journey patterns. Thirdly, approximately 70% of journeys
are made by ‘members’ who have registered in advance to use the
scheme and so provide details about their home location and gender
(via title and name). The structure of the data sources providing detail
of where and when journeys are made and who makes them is sum-
marized in Tables 1-3.

Table 1. Journey table
UserID oTime dTime oStation dStation

7638 2013-09-16T08:55 2013-09-16T09:20 314 580

6331 2013-09-16T08:56 2013-09-16T09:10 111 247

5467 2013-09-16T08:55 2013-09-16T09:20 420 116

9823 2013-09-16T08:55 2013-09-16T09:20 129 256

.

.

.
.
.
.

.

.

.
.
.
.

.

.

.

Table 2. Member table
UserID Gender Postcode RegistrationDate

1000 M EC1V 0HB 2011-3-20

1001 M SW1A 1AA 2010-12-01

1002 F E17 4AD 2013-3-20

.

.

.
.
.
.

.

.

.
.
.
.

Table 3. Station table
StationID Name Easting Northing

1 River Street , Clerkenwell 531202 182838

2 Phillimore Gardens, Kensington 525207 179398

3 Christopher Street, Liverpool Street 532984 182007

4 St. Chad’s Street, King’s Cross 530436 182918

.

.

.
.
.
.

.

.

.
.
.
.

These member records not only give population-level information
about who is using the scheme, but can be linked to journey details
to provide a very large, complete spatio-temporal profile of individual
cyclists’ journeys. The detail and volume of these data is in contrast
to most data sources used in studies of cyclists’ behavior, especially in
studies that examine the factors that motivate and discourage cycling
within cities [38]. Much of this prior work has involved commission-
ing social surveys that ask respondents to recall their experiences and
attitudes towards cycling [13, 18], but is vulnerable to self-selection
and social-desirability bias [4, 5, 6].

While the LCHS data were not collected and distributed for any
single purpose, there are a number of general challenges around the
operation and management of the scheme for which they may be suit-
able. These vary in their task clarity [43] but help to set the context of
use and potential for visualization of these data to have impact:

• Day to day operation of the scheme should run smoothly ensur-
ing there are sufficient bicycles distributed around the network
and sufficient spaces to dock them.

• Intervention in the scheme, such as the redistribution of bicycles
to keep the system balanced, should be as efficient as possible.

• What does use of the scheme tell transport planners and re-
searchers about the influences on cyclists’ behavior in London
and more widely?

• How can patterns of use of the scheme be used to assist in plan-
ning for its expansion that meets demand and encourages ‘modal
shift’ towards cycling?

In the subsequent sections we consider how visualizing the data
through a number of different channels has helped in addressing these
and other challenges.



2173WOOD ET AL.: MOVING BEYOND SEQUENTIAL DESIGN: REFLECTIONS ON A RICH MULTI-CHANNEL APPROACH TO DATA VISUALIZATION

LC
H

S launched

Jan
 2

0
1
1

Jan
 2

0
1
2

Jan
 2

0
1
3

Jan
 2

0
1
4

Transport operations

Transport policy

Transport studies

Academic visualization

Public engagement

Digital art

Museum

London Cycles exhibition

M
useum

 of London

‘W
e are the City’ exhibit

Digital Shoreditch

Stonecutter St  

im
pact assessm

ent

Fleet m
anagem

ent 

dashboard project

First transport visualization

journal publication

First m
eeting w

ith 

Transport for London

New
 Scientist publish

bicycle anim
ation video

Journal publication of

gendered cycling 

and w
orkplace studies

TEDx talk

G
endered cycling

analysis starts

Fig. 2. Timeline of the seven channels of discourse. Ellipses represent events such as public release of visualizations, talks, workshops, stakeholder
meetings and exhibitions. Key events annotated.

3 RETHINKING VISUALIZATION DESIGN MODELS

We can identify approaches to sequential and parallel modeling of vi-
sualization design at two distinct scales. Most commonly, modeling
has focussed on the transformation of data to visual encoding and its
mapping to cognition and task. This is most widely seen in the foun-
dational, and much refined, visualization reference model or “InfoVis
pipeline” [11], through which data are mapped to visual form to sup-
port interactive sense making. The application of the pipeline model
tends to emphasize the visualization design process as something that
occupies a single, sequential channel of activity – even when this pro-
cess is cyclical [26, 34], or involves loops [43]. There are some at-
tempts to consider non-sequential refinements to the pipeline model,
such as that of Jansen and Dragicevic [28], who account for visual-
ization beyond the desktop to include branching and merging. Parallel
development at this scale is more commonly discussed at the ideation
phase of visualization design [27] where the cost of prototyping mul-
tiple designs is comparatively small. Some work reports on successful
use of parallel prototyping [15] to inform visualization design [20],
however multiple designs tend to be merged or filtered ultimately to
inform a single ‘product’ or analytical objective.

In contrast, there is relatively little work that models design at the
scale of parallel projects with their own distinct objectives and audi-
ences. A rare example is that of Sedlmair et al. [42], who considered
a three-year study centered around a visual analytics system for the
automotive industry. Here, several related component products were
developed in parallel but lessons from one stream of activity were used
to inform others. In this paper, however, we extend this notion of par-
allel development to include a much more diverse set of tasks, contexts
and audiences while linking them all to the same underlying data and
problem domain.

Prior work (e.g., [35, 43]) tends to characterize visualization design
along a number of related continua – private (personal) vs public vi-
sualization; exploratory vs analytical visualization; vaguely expressed
vs precisely formed research hypotheses.

Although their useful examples describe single systems, we do not
find parallel efforts used to describe the wider processes of discourse
in the visualization literature despite a number of examples of long
term relationships between visualization producers and consumers.

The literature on visualization design that does describe discourse
frequently distinguishes ‘visualization experts’ from ‘domain experts’
(e.g., [34, 43, 48, 49]) and characterizes visualization design as a se-
ries of interactions between the two. This dichotomy is understandable
given that the impetus behind academic publishing in visualization is
for largely computer science based academics to demonstrate their vi-
sualization expertise. Design and domain expertise are both undoubt-
edly required in order to generate true insight as without both there
is a danger of simplistic or ineffective visualization (e.g., some of the

early work characterising computational social science [1]), or visu-
alization that is not used by those with domain expertise. However,
as techniques mature and tools to implement those techniques become
more readily accessible, that distinction is likely to become increas-
ingly blurred. Assigning an exclusive role of ‘visualization expert’ or
‘domain expert’ to an individual may fail to capture the more complex
multiplicity of roles taken by those engaging with visualization that
may change over time [34] or with context.

Understanding the discourse between producers and consumers of
visualization is informed by debate in the social research community
concerning the ambitions of computational social science and the way
in which research is organised. Many early contributions within the
computational social sciences have been criticised for simply confirm-
ing already existing social theory [19] and few have been published in
traditional social science journals or attempted to engage deeply with
social science literature [51]. One explanation is that to date, data-
driven social sciences studies have largely been defined by, and con-
ducted within, computer science departments [19]. Too often there is
an emphasis on either using existing methods, or developing new gen-
eralizable computational techniques, without adequate consideration
of the degree to which such solutions deliver meaningful or important
findings [52]. The tensions between computing and domain-specific
ambitions have been discussed at length within information visualiza-
tion [43] and appear prescient given these current critiques of compu-
tational social science [19].

We deliberately characterize the roles of the computing specialist
and domain expert less clearly than is typical in this literature through
our focus on channels rather than roles. We have expertise and interest
both in information visualization and transport studies research. The
‘domain specialists’ in this study (those responsible for the bikeshare
scheme’s design, operation and wider strategy) also have evolving and
variable expertise in visualization as well as transport theory.

Our experience suggests that models of the visualization process
that move away from the visualization expert / domain expert roles,
and are wider than the typical sequential pipelines, may help us cap-
ture and describe the rich design experience and evolving relationships
through which high levels of engagement are achieved. We also con-
sider it likely that engaging in visualization broadly, through multiple
interaction based upon a particular topic or theme, may result in more
meaningful, informed and persuasive visualization. The result is a rich
body of inter-related work upon which a broad engagement can draw.
We therefore choose to characterize the contexts where visualization
plays a role in discourse as channels, without necessarily imposing
fixed roles on the individuals involved in that discourse, in an effort to
explore these relationships.



2174 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VISUALIZATION AND COMPUTER GRAPHICS,   VOL. 20,   NO. 12,   DECEMBER 2014

4 VISUALIZATION DISCOURSE CHANNELS
By identifying channels of discourse, we recognise that several may
exist in parallel and that they have a capacity to interact with one an-
other, while each can be associated with different visualization design
approaches. Channels may be characterized by the context of engage-
ment rather than a fixed set of participants or precisely defined tasks.
In the context of our four-year engagement with the LCHS data, we
have recognised seven distinct but connected channels where visual-
ization of the data has been central to the discourse between those
involved (summarized in Figure 2).

4.1 Discourse with operational managers
One of the challenges in operating the LCHS is to ensure that the sys-
tem as a whole is balanced – that is, that there are sufficient bicycles
spread around all docking stations for people to collect and that there
are sufficient spaces at those stations for people to dock bicycles at the
end of their journeys. This challenge is a specific example of the ‘fleet
management problem’ [12] where an optimised relocation of vehicles
is required to maintain a balanced system while minimizing the inter-
ventions required to ensure that balance. This is particularly challeng-
ing in the context of the LCHS because of a strong commuter-driven
tidal flow of bicycles between the periphery and the core during peak-
hour periods in the morning and evening. We define the role of visual-
ization in the support of this task as being part of an operational chan-
nel, characterized by the need for real-time monitoring and response
to ensure continuous smooth running of the bicycle hire system.

In many ways, the task of designing and using visualization to sup-
port this operational channel is one for which visual analytics solutions
should be well suited. It is, in terms of the task-information space [43],
a crisply-defined task for which there is plenty of computer-based data
to support it. Similar well defined analytical tasks have led to new
visual analytic designs, such as trajectory lenses [31] that provide an-
alytic precision at the cost of having to learning new visual analytic
processes. We have previously documented how we designed a spatial
gridded dashboard to support realtime monitoring of the scheme [58]
that allows parallel visual processing of many hundreds of docking
stations in order to identify potential problem areas (local clusters of
full or empty docking stations). An example of part of the dashboard is
shown in Figure 3 where patterns of docking station use of the previous
24 hours, updated in realtime, can be used by operators to spot prob-
lems. Further insight into the causes of the problems can be gained
using an OD map representation [56, 58] that avoids the salience bias
of longer journeys that would arise with a more conventional flow map
of the system.

Fig. 3. A portion of the spatial gridded view of docking station status.
Each cell, positioned approximately at its geographical location, shows
the number of bicycles currently docked (blue ‘water level’) and its 24
hour history (sparklines). Full stations are highlighted in a darker border,
inactive stations visible as horizontal sparklines.

Yet, despite the visual design of such a system being tailored to the
task at hand, after initial enthusiasm by the operators of the scheme,
the system was never used on a day-to-day basis. In examining the
reasons for this ‘failure’, we can identify a number of the pitfalls enu-
merated by Sedlmair et al. [43]. At the ‘winnowing’ and ‘discovery’

stages it could be argued that PF-9 – ‘no need for change: existing
tools are good enough’ was key here and to some extent so too was PF-
15 – ‘ignoring practices that currently work well’. At the early stages
of the scheme, in practice the operators could rely on personal knowl-
edge of London transport behavior (PF4 – ‘no real data available’) and
spreadsheet views of the realtime data to do the job adequately. As a
result, at the implementation stage the effort required by operators to
learn a new visual grammar and operate an unfamiliar system (PF23 -
‘usability: too little / too much’) was seen to cost more than the ben-
efits it might confer. This remains a challenge for implementing any
new system for day-to-day operational matters in that there is not the
luxury of being able to pause operation while a new system is learned
and evaluated. We also note that the activity surrounding our initial in-
volvement in this channel of discourse with the operators was carried
out without the context of other channels to provide evidence to build
trust, capability and efficacy.

4.2 Discourse with Policy Makers and Transport Studies
The experience of working via the operational channel in part fed into
developing academic work in the transport studies domain. It also
demonstrated to us that there may be a role for visualization in sup-
porting a more strategic level of engagement with the LCHS, and in
particular in supporting the needs of the local government transport
authority, TfL, in their various goals to understand and encourage cy-
cling in the capital. In this context, the primary goal of using visual-
ization was to facilitate deep insight, both with the TfL policy makers
and transport studies community. Longer term strategic and epistemo-
logical engagement also provided the opportunity to use visualization
of the LCHS in a number of parallel channels with cross-over between
them.

4.2.1 Exploratory analysis
To open a discourse with those in transport studies researching urban
bicycle behavior and its influences (Section 2), it was important to ex-
plore how individual cyclists might use the LCHS, and the extent to
which cycling within a bikeshare scheme might relate to other forms
of cycling. For example, as is the case in other studies of urban cy-
clists’ behavior [14, 22], do returning bikeshare customers cycle for
utilitarian or other purposes, and are particular types of customer pre-
disposed to either behavior? These research ambitions were shared
by policy makers at TfL, who wished to explore informal hypotheses
about their customers and understand how certain target groups use
the scheme.

We first created a set of demographic and behavioral variables
to discriminate different types of behavior and used TfL’s informal
knowledge of the scheme and current literature in transport studies
to guide this process. Using the home postal code recorded for each
member, we added two geodemographic classifiers and a ‘distance-to-
nearest-docking-station’ variable to each customer record. Recency-
Frequency (RF) segmentation [39], a technique that segments cus-
tomers according to how often and recently they buy or use a product
or service, was then used to separate more active scheme users from
those using the LCHS only occasionally. Borrowing from approaches
that use similar timed origin-destination travel datasets [2, 32], we
clustered members info five groups according to when they typically
travel: 9-to-5ers (26% of customers), postwork-ers (13%), anytime
users (27%), weekenders (15%) and lunchtime users (19%). Naming
these clusters in an identifiable way that resonated with those studying
them (in contrast, for example, to naming them C1, C2 etc.) was seen
as an important part of the engagement process with policy makers as
it provided them with a language with which to communicate findings
with others in the organisation. This enriched set of customer-related
variables provided the basis for deeper discourse with the transport
studies and transport planning communities.

In order to collaboratively explore this attribute information, par-
ticularly with transport planning colleagues at TfL, we designed and
built a flexible visual analysis application (Figure 4) for quickly re-
lating customer variables to their spatio-temporal structure via three
coordinated and linked views [40].



2175WOOD ET AL.: MOVING BEYOND SEQUENTIAL DESIGN: REFLECTIONS ON A RICH MULTI-CHANNEL APPROACH TO DATA VISUALIZATION

Fig. 4. Visual analysis application for querying customers’ travel behaviors. The main map view shows a filterable spatial distribution of journeys.
The bottom row shows a temporal view by day and hour. Customer characteristics such as geodemographic profile, journey frequency and relative
cycling speed are shown to the left. In all cases, comparisons may be made between the filtered selection (blue) and global patterns (grey).

4.2.2 Exploring gender and cycling behavior

Exploratory data analysis [47] within this application took place
alongside policy makers and operations staff at TfL; we acted as an
interface to the tool and guided TfL staff through the various inter-
actions by chauffeuring. Early customer satisfaction surveys from the
LCHS reveal that women are underrepresented amongst scheme mem-
bers, consistent with more general findings of gender and cycling be-
havior [17]. Discussing this with transport policy makers at TfL, we
agreed the first substantial theme for analysis should address men’s
and women’s use of the scheme. The findings from this analysis have
already been detailed in [5], but we provide a summary here in or-
der to demonstrate the depth of analysis insight achieved through this
channel of activity.

Selecting all male and then female customers in the application
revealed a dominant commuter function for male cyclists and dom-
inant leisure function for female cyclists. This is apparent in the
customer-related and temporal views: women are very underrepre-
sented amongst the most active users and the 9-to-5er, postwork-er
and lunchtime cluster groups. While there is further evidence of this
in the temporal view, the differences are perhaps best characterized
when studying the spatial view (Figure 5). For men, there is a famil-
iar pattern of journeys between London’s major rail hubs and CBD,
whereas a very different pattern is true of women: bicycle trips taken
within London’s parks are most obvious, with comparatively few taken
in central London.

Colleagues at TfL were already familiar with these high-level gen-
dered patterns as they had been articulated in a separate channel of
activity (Section 4.3). We found the confirmatory nature of these ini-
tial insights provided a way of introducing the richer attribute infor-
mation and visual discourse discussed in Section 4.2.1. Upon the trust
offered by the visual confirmatory analysis we started to uncover pat-
terns unanticipated by the transport planners. Highly visible amongst
the most active bicycle users were those living outside London who,
after commuting into the city on a train, regularly used the scheme

Fig. 5. All journeys made by male (top) and female (bottom) customers.

to travel between the major rail hubs (Figure 5). Importantly, women
were very underrepresented amongst this customer population living
outside London. In simply selecting either male or female customers,
we therefore compare two very different populations. This finding was
important to both the transport studies and transport planning commu-
nities, as it suggested that the large differences in gendered cycling
behavior may be particular to the LCHS rather than representative of
wider experiences and attitudes to cycling held by men and women.

Filtering the visualization by selecting only those members who live



2176 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VISUALIZATION AND COMPUTER GRAPHICS,   VOL. 20,   NO. 12,   DECEMBER 2014

within 5km of a docking station showed some convergence between
male and female customers, particularly in their temporal travel be-
haviors. However, we found that women were still underrepresented
amongst the more active, commuting scheme users. Further discussing
this with TfL, we finally compared male and female customers but
controlled both by how far members live from a docking station and
how heavily they use the scheme. While this brings even greater con-
vergence on some variables, important differences in spatial travel be-
haviors remain. Importantly, for this group of active and experienced
female scheme users, travel behaviors were spatially constrained: jour-
neys within west London and parks dominate, and elsewhere journeys
are taken in very particular parts of the city. The visualization appli-
cation became a central part of this process of sense making, building
on both the trust built by initial confirmatory analysis, but also the
trust and credibility developed in discourse within the public, trans-
port studies and academic visualization channels (see Figure 2). It
constituted a highly appropriate, and perhaps in fact the only credible,
means of finding these particular parts of the city and relating them to
each other, existing knowledge (or its absence) and explanations.

4.2.3 Labelling, confirming and explaining behaviors

In a second phase of analysis driven by TfL operations managers, we
identified with much greater certainty all commuting journeys, and by
extension all individuals we suspected were commuters. Our com-
muter modeling has already been documented [6], so we reflect here
on the role of visualization in fostering collaboration with colleagues
at TfL, as well as the deeper findings elicited by this analysis. By
maintaining design consistency with earlier visualizations used with
TfL we were able to better communicate our analysis visually and ex-
plore modeling assumptions with them. In describing our analytical
decisions with reference to real data, TfL were able to offer plausi-
ble suggestions for more obscure spatial patterns of workplaces based
on their operational knowledge of the scheme. Two important dis-
coveries resulted from this second phase of chauffeured interaction.
Firstly, that imbalances in numbers of morning and evening commutes
to workplaces towards the periphery of London suggest a previously
unforeseen operational challenge around managing the bikeshare fleet.
Secondly, that there are differences in the geography of men’s and
women’s daily workplace commutes which, when analysed alongside
data on London’s labour market, appear to partially reflect differences
in the actual geography of their respective workplaces. The observed
differences in spatial travel behaviors described in Section 4.2.2 might
not, then, relate to differing motivations and barriers to cycling as sug-
gested in the transport studies literature [18, 22], but to differences in
the geography of employment opportunities for men and women.

Given this alternative explanation, in a further analytical step we
studied spatial travel behaviors in more detail. A limitation of using
the bikeshare dataset to study spatial behavior is that with only the
origin and destination of cycle journeys, nothing is known about the
nature and context of likely cycled routes. We therefore derived rout-
ing information for every cycled OD pair in the dataset by linking to
a cycle road network routing engine. For each route, heuristics on the
nature of cycle journeys were collected including number of signalled
junctions, difficult right turns, elevation data, and traffic flow volumes.
Given the uncertainty of predicted road choice behaviour, we focussed
our analysis on the bridge crossings necessary to connect origin and
destination locations. Visual exploration of spatial and gendered jour-
ney patterns involving river crossings showed differences in male and
female cyclists’ use of bridges, which appear to be strongly related to
the geography of their workplaces. This suggested that spatial differ-
ences in travel behaviors between men and women are not a function
of differing attitudes to cycling, as suggested in transport literature
[14, 18, 22]. Women may be underrepresented amongst commuting
journeys that involve a river crossing because those very journeys in-
volve routes that are busier and more demanding than river crossing
journeys cycled by men. This in turn led to further analysis, not de-
scribed here, where we considered group cycling behaviors [4] as a
strategy for dealing with the demands of urban cycling.

4.2.4 Role of visualization
The analytical path outlined above captures a very deliberate and col-
laborative approach to data analysis. The themes we pursued were
informed by TfL’s priorities and those within transport studies and our
findings were validated against TfL’s knowledge and the literature of
the domain. In design study terms, our early engagement with rele-
vant literature and the LCHS’s operational priorities might reflect a
successful strategy of ‘winnowing’ – of selecting collaborators, find-
ing an appropriate dataset and establishing substantive research needs
[43]. The description of data processing and exploratory visual anal-
ysis, through to more involved visual analytic activity and detailed
explanatory analysis, maps closely onto the iterative process of prob-
lem characterisation and abstraction and of design and implementa-
tion [43]. As an example of problem-driven research, our approach
was validated by the depth of insights achieved: the fact that work has
been published in high profile academic journals within the transport
studies domain [4, 5, 6] and that we addressed operational priorities
to the satisfaction of the transport authority. Our analysis started with
a meaningful, but relatively open set of research questions – how are
individual cycle behaviors structured and how do they relate to more
general cycle behaviors? By creating a set of discriminating derived
variables, and designing tools to visualize and analyse those variables,
we developed more focussed analysis requirements and data-driven
hypotheses. Our decreasing dependence on exploratory analysis tech-
niques in later work reflects a progression towards ‘a final goal of a
fully automatic [data analysis] solution’ [43, pp. 2433].

While we subscribe to many of the strategies for effective problem-
driven research set out in [43], other apparently separate visualization
activities and events played an important role in the analysis and in
sidestepping many of the pitfalls common to design studies. These
activities and events are not captured by the more narrow discussion of
problem-area, datasets and analysis tasks. For example, the previous
work described in Section 4.1 enabled us to build trust and establish
some authority when approaching collaborators. The specific events
discussed in Section 4.3 and Section 4.4 helped generate excitement
and a deeper engagement in the more involved analysis activities. We
argue that these parallel influences from other channels of discourse
helped protect against PF-5, ‘insufficient time available from potential
collaborators’, and contributed to ‘rapport with collaborators’ (PF-11).

4.3 Discourse with the public
Bicycle travel within an urban setting has a resonance with the wider
public beyond those involved in the transport policy context. Equally,
the potential for novel ways of using new data sources, especially
through visual means has the potential to engage the wider community
beyond those involved in transport management, policy and academic
activity. We wished to capitalise on both of these opportunities by pro-
ducing a more accessible and engaging depiction of the data and the
findings derived from them.

Unlike the policy and transport studies channel, here the goal wasn’t
deep insight but rather engagement with the themes of both urban bicy-
cle travel and big data / data visualization. This required more familiar
graphical encodings of movement as well as the need to generate in-
sight rapidly before a non-committed audience lost interest [24]. Cen-
tral to the visualization design in this channel was the idea of metaphor
supporting that rapid engagement process. This led to the creation of
an animated view [53] of the first 5 million journeys incorporating a
number of supporting metaphors. The most obvious of which was to
encode movement of bicycles with animated movement in a geospa-
tial layout. In order to compress a year’s worth of journeys into an
accessible two-minute animation, symbols representing an individual
journey were generated stochastically but in proportion to the relative
frequency of actual journeys made between docking stations. This cre-
ated an apparent time-compressed bird’s eye view of flows of cyclists
around London.

To convey the value of big data and visualization as means to gen-
erate insight, the symbolisation of each journey was varied over the
course of the two minute animation whereby the initial view showed
all journeys as moving dots, but over time, only the more common



2177WOOD ET AL.: MOVING BEYOND SEQUENTIAL DESIGN: REFLECTIONS ON A RICH MULTI-CHANNEL APPROACH TO DATA VISUALIZATION

journeys were represented as the less frequent journeys were gradu-
ally filtered out and those that were more frequent became symbolised
as gradually elongated ‘trails’ along the most common paths. This
was supported by color encoding of journeys as points of light against
a dark background with no mapping contextualisation. The effect was
to convey a sense of structure emerging out of the chaos of the initial
view; a powerful metaphor in persuading a general audience that there
was some value in visualizing new data sources such as these. What
we did not anticipate was that this metaphor resonated strongly with
TfL policy makers too, and it became a useful means by which to in-
duct other members of the policy team who had not previously been
aware of our visual analytics work. The emerging structure had clear
geographic causes, making it easy to associate the patterns observed
with the major influences of commuter-dominated travel from main-
line railway stations and leisure-dominated travel around the major
parks of the city.

The accessibility of this form of representation, in contrast to visual
analytic design in the operator and policy channels resulted in this
work attracting the attention of the popular press in the UK, includ-
ing the New Scientist (see Figure 6), The Economist and a number
of national newspapers. The hypnotic effect of the slowly emerging
structure was enhanced by the New Scientist with the addition of an
ambient musical soundtrack. This embellishment added little in terms
of analytic insight, but it may have increased memorability of the in-
formation being conveyed [25]. It also suggests that visualization in
the public realm is subject to influences and modification beyond the
control of the visualization designer in a more familiar research or
professional setting.

Fig. 6. Still from bicycle movement animation presented by New Scien-
tist magazine [21].

While the design decisions taken to enhance accessibility and en-
gagement may attract wider audiences, there is a tension with the
design decisions required to facilitate analysis and deeper insight.
Adopting separate channels for these two levels of engagement may
be one approach to handling this tension, but there is the danger that
accessible design can compromise perceptions of academic capabil-
ity. This is indicated by one of the comments posted by a viewer of
the New Scientist animation: “That is indeed very pretty, but it rather
prioritises ‘visual’ over ‘analytics’. I hope they also did some less
expensive but more informative analysis.”

One approach to effect greater influence within the discourse with
the general public is to adopt a more explicit storytelling approach
to visual communication. This was used directly when reporting
the visualization work with the LCHS via a TEDx talk [55]. Here,
through strong author-driven narrative [44], the unexpected ‘discov-
ery’ of structure out of chaos and ultimately an explanation for that
structure was made explicit. This contrast between the initially un-
intelligible chaos of the visualization with the structure that emerges
follows the ‘contour of communication’ that seeks to juxtapose the
‘what is’ with the ‘what could be’ [16]. This was reinforced further
with additional storytelling devices such as placing the audience in
the picture (the location of the talk was within the mapped area of the
visualization) and relating the personal to the bigger picture.

One of the unexpected consequences of having a compact and ac-
cessible data visualization story in the form of a 15 minute recorded
TEDx talk was that without prompting, policy makers and operators
in TfL started to share the recording as a means of explaining how the
data from the LCHS could be exploited through visualization. We sus-
pect that this was helped by the power of the metaphor ‘structure out of
chaos’, as this was precisely the task facing many of those within the
organisation sitting on an unexploited source of ‘big data’. Like ear-
lier analytic work with TfL, it acted both in a confirmatory capacity,
showing features of cycle usage the policy makers were aware of (e.g.,
large tidal commuting flows), and revealing new insights they were
not (e.g., gender-specific behavior). The fact that some members of
the policy team were introducing others to data visualization through
the TEDx ‘artefact’ suggests a more complex and nuanced set of roles
as both consumers and producers of visualization as part of discourse.
Visualization systems designed primarily for analytics (such as the one
described in Section 4.2) would not have served this purpose.

4.4 Discourse via the Museum Sector
The unforeseen consequences of designing for parallel visualization
channels did not only benefit policy makers. By building trust and
authority through discourse with the transport studies community and
policy makers we were recommended by TfL to the Museum of Lon-
don to contribute to a three month exhibition ‘London Cycles’ (see
Figure 1) aimed at putting contemporary cycling patterns into a histor-
ical context of cycling in London, using bicycles from the museum’s
collection alongside new digital acquisitions.

TfL donated a single LCHS bicycle to the museum along with a
digital record of its travel history in spreadsheet form. The museum’s
task was to provide an exhibit that somehow related the physical and
digital artefacts in their collection, contextualizing both. By adapting
the animation approach discussed in Section 4.3 to include not just
general patterns of movement, but additionally highlighting the move-
ment history of the bicycle in the museum’s collection, that link could
be established through data visualization [54]. The use of a more con-
ventional animation-focussed design rather then the more analytically
oriented visualization used with TfL and the transport operators fol-
lows the recommendation by Hinrichs et al. to ‘reward short term
exploration’ in museum exhibits while the detail and depth of the data
being depicted supported longer term exploration [24]. This formed
the centerpiece of an exhibit where visitors were encouraged to find
the single highlighted bicycle trajectory among those left by the other
20 million journeys being represented. To support the connection be-
tween the digital and the physical this was accompanied by a set of
prints depicting the ‘urban signatures’ left by the single bicycle as
it was cycled around the city over its lifetime. The design of these
printed data visualizations employed the metaphor of the hand-drawn
‘signature’ by using fluid Bézier curves to link docking stations that
formed the bicycle’s travel history (see Figure 7). This was further

Fig. 7. A ’bicycle signature’ shown in the ‘London Cycles’ exhibit at the
Museum of London and Digital Shoreditch. Lines represent a single
month’s journeys of the bicycle acquired by the museum.



2178 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VISUALIZATION AND COMPUTER GRAPHICS,   VOL. 20,   NO. 12,   DECEMBER 2014

enhanced by relating the line thickness in part to the local curvature
of the trajectory as well as a small degree of spatially autocorrelated
random noise and superimposing the signatures on a simulated hand
drawn map of London [57]. These visual design decisions were not
driven by conventional good practice in data visualization (e.g., as doc-
umented by Block et al. for their DeepTree museum exhibit [8]), but
rather by reinforcing the metaphor of the human-driven expression of
the personal and unique.

Adapting the visualization design to suit discourse with this chan-
nel of communication offered the opportunity to provoke discussion
on the nature of the digital and visual in recording and explaining our
behaviors. This led to the Museum not only archiving the visualiza-
tion artefacts themselves, but also the code used to construct them.
The Digital Curator at the Museum of London commented “The code,
data visualisations and animation reflect the contemporary nature of
using open data to make sense of patterns in a useful way for future
planning in London. This collection of digital files also reminds us
that in contemporary London people are leaving digital traces of their
activity behind as they go about their everyday lives”.

4.5 Discourse Through Art
The use of data-driven visualization as a form of artistic expression
has led academics to consider what distinguishes analytic-driven and
artistically-driven visualization (e.g., [30, 49]). Until recently [10, 23]
much of that discussion has focussed on aesthetics in design or even
just the presence or absence of pre-defined functional purpose [49].
What appears to be neglected in this discussion of information visual-
ization is the role context plays in framing visual thinking [7].

The creation of an art installation ‘We are the City’ as part of the
Digital Shoreditch festival in London provided an opportunity to con-
sider this notion of context framing. An adapted version of the bicycle
movement animation was developed that allowed two parameters of
the visual encoding – the weighting given to more frequent journeys
in comparison to less frequent ones, and the length of the trails left by
each journey – to be controlled by body movement via a hidden XBox
Kinect device. The frequency weighting parameter was controlled by
the number of people detected in the vicinity of the installation and
the position of the arms of a viewer was used to control the length of
the animated trails. The goal of the interaction was to build on the
idea that patterns of bicycle movements were a reflection of how peo-
ple had chosen to move around the city. Additionally, the color of
the trails was controlled by a live feed to data on where bicycles were
currently located around the city. By combining depiction of an indi-
vidual’s personal body movement with the passage of a single bicycle
shared by many people with the aggregate behavior of many millions
of journeys, the intention was to provoke thoughts on the relationship
between the individual, shared space, ‘big data’ and visualization.

The setting of the installation, located in the basement of a large
town hall along with 20 other exhibits, was also important in its im-
pact. The environment was dark (see Figure 8) and the rooms in which
each of the installations were located were connected by a deliberately
disorienting maze of passageways. Teaser postcards showing sample
bicycle signatures (see Figure 7) were provided to all visitors to the
exhibition. Thus encountering the installation was itself one of ‘dis-
covery’. To support this, only oblique instructions were provided sug-
gesting that body movement might influence what was being shown,
so that the act of revealing structure in movement from the chaos be-
came part of the act of discovery.

5 DISCUSSION
5.1 The task-information space
The channels of discourse in which visualization plays a role can be
mapped onto the task-information space proposed by Sedlmair et al.
[43]. This consists of two orthogonal axes that describe task clarity,
ranging on a continuum from ‘fuzzy’ to ‘crisp’ and information loca-
tion, again on a continuum ranging from ‘in the domain expert’s head’
to ‘in the computer’. Sedlmair et al. [43] use this space to usefully
define a design study contribution as “moving forward along either of
these axes”.

Fig. 8. Full body interaction and discovery at Digital Shoreditch.

Mapping our channels of discourse to this space reveals a number of
contributions that may accordingly be deemed to be ‘design study’ in
nature but do not necessarily involve moving ‘forward’ along the axes
(Figure 9). We observe that some of the channels occupy quite signif-
icant portions of this space (e.g., public engagement) while others are
more crisply located (e.g., transport operations). As discourse evolves
over time, there may be movement within this space although not nec-
essarily towards the crisp task definition / computer-based data portion
of the space. The Transport Policy discourse channel, as one of the key
objectives of our work, has involved establishing knowledge, refining
questions and developing tools in at least three stages. The processes
and choices involved in the exploration described in Section 4.2 (trans-
port policy and studies channels) bear many of the hallmarks of an
information visualization design study and as such show trajectories
that move towards more computable solutions. However, we also con-
tend that some of the discourse channels deliberately follow different
trajectories. For example, engagement via artistic channels involves
a more fluid two-way movement between digitally captured data and
personal subjective knowledge and emotion. They use artefacts as dis-
ruptive interventions designed to present alternative perspectives on a
problem and to encourage those who engage with them in re-thinking
rather than to clarify tasks. The discourse with the museum sector
evolved from artistic expression of subjective experience towards a
digitally captured representation, not perhaps in the way foreseen by
the design studies methodology, but rather through the process of the
museum archiving the source code behind the visualization. Report-
ing of the work via the academic visualization channel, including this
very paper, has shown a trajectory that moves ‘backwards’ along both
axes, over time widening the visualization context to encompass less
crisply defined problems and more subjective information location.

5.2 Interaction between channels
We contend that interactions between channels are mutually beneficial
and indeed necessary to exploit the full potential of visualization. In
particular we find that trajectories that may involve transferring infor-
mation from the computer to ‘domain expert’ (i.e., moving left in the
task-information space), can result in rich and fruitful contributions
to other, more analytical discourse channels. This should not surprise
us too much – passive ‘visualization awareness’ activities are used to
stimulate ideas through analogy in human-centered visualization de-
sign [29, 50]. What we emphasize here is that a design team’s parallel
work on multiple forms of discourse relating to the same problem do-
main can result in unpredictable, but constructive, interventions that
influence design processes.

These broad approaches to a design problem may increase the like-
lihood of serendipity. Blanford and Makri [36] define this as “a mix of
unexpectedness and insight and has the potential to lead to a valuable
outcome”. In visualization design that takes the trajectory described
in [43], a collective aim is the outcome involving insight. In the ac-
tivities described here this has resulted in those involved in design and
analysis getting to know data and a domain better and those primarily



2179WOOD ET AL.: MOVING BEYOND SEQUENTIAL DESIGN: REFLECTIONS ON A RICH MULTI-CHANNEL APPROACH TO DATA VISUALIZATION

Fig. 9. Discourse channel trajectories mapped onto the Sedlmair et al.
task-information space. Arrows indicate evolution over time.

interested in data getting to know data and visualization techniques –
a useful convergence of knowledge.

In our case, TfL brought policy expertise, partial knowledge of
usage patterns and potentially conflicting problem definitions (e.g.,
revenue generation, changing transport culture, perceived personal
safety). While their focus may not have been on using novel visu-
alization techniques, they were equipped with a high degree of spa-
tial literacy and knowledge when interpreting map views of the trans-
port networks in London, allowing us to design map-based views with
minimal geographic annotation. As academic contributors we offered
some visualization expertise but also transport theory expertise and
overlapping imperfect knowledge of usage patterns. This overlapping
understanding between the groups was an important factor in building
trust, and participation in multiple discourse channels helped estab-
lish this. Individuals may have membership of more than one of those
roles or their position may change over time, as may the individuals
involved. As such, the widely used distinction reported in the visual-
ization literature between ‘visualization experts’ and ‘domain experts’
seems not to fit well with many of the interactions described here so
we challenge the value of this dichotomy in our context.

Additionally we argue that in establishing knowledge and devel-
oping approaches, the unexpected can contribute effectively to design
decisions and analytical pathways. In our experience parallel visual-
ization efforts made via additional discourse channels through which
rich interaction and broad channels of engagement are achieved can
contribute very effectively to these. For example, the effect of the
public engagement channel, with the New Scientist endorsed bicycle
movie becoming something of a visualization meme in TfL, helped
establish interest and confidence in our more standard visualization ef-
forts and may have resulted in greater buy-in from TfL colleagues and
management as analysis progressed. The authority established via the
Transport Policy channel unexpectedly gave rise to discourse with the
Museum of London which in turn was fed by artistic activity at Digital
Shoreditch. This presented new ways for the Museum to link themes
of the personal (both as cyclists in the city and as the artist/analyst’s
self-expression) with ‘big data’ and visualization. These may be re-
garded as externalities as defined by Robinson [41], but we argue that
many of these may be internalised by explicitly recognizing multiple
channels of engagement.

5.3 Channels as a contribution to project success

One of the scientific challenges faced in evaluating the impact of multi-
channel interactions is in isolating the factors influencing project out-
comes. We have argued that there have been clear examples of one
channel’s activities having beneficial impacts on another, but we must

also consider other possible drivers of project success. It may be
that the geospatial domain considered here lends itself particularly
well to engaging visual representation, especially through the familiar
paradigm of the map. Similarly, exploring temporal change through
animation is both visually engaging and a cognitively plausible design
choice. We also acknowledge that careful selection of appropriate vi-
sual metaphors and encodings to support them has played an impor-
tant part of several of our successful outcomes. Yet the framework of
discourse channels has allowed us to target design decisions for differ-
ent purposes and audiences while borrowing the gains made in other
channels. The approach also allows a degree of risk mitigation in that
a parallel approach accommodates ‘project failures’ in some channels.

6 CONCLUSIONS
We present a wider interpretation of the design study model that re-
flects our open and flexible approach to using visualization in a vari-
ety of contexts. It acknowledges the evolving and overlapping roles
played by those who both consume and produce visualization.

Reporting on this work within the confines of data and task ab-
stractions, visual encoding and insight development, misses the many
other influences from parallel activities. The long-term nature of our
engagement with the LCHS and the substantial packages of work we
developed outside of conventional data analysis has led us to define
and advocate parallel channels of discourse. Acknowledging that ex-
ternal influences apply to almost all visualization projects, we find that
characterizing these influences may help designing successful visual-
ization projects.

Our argument is that these channels are often complementary and
that synergies exist between the highly analytical and more personally
expressive work. We argue that many pipeline-focussed models of
design omit these important influences and opportunities and that may
be costly in terms of the way visualization practitioners operate.

Our approach considers design as part of a richer range of engage-
ments leading to deeper analytical insight, protecting against possible
design pitfalls that may occur [43] and even use them as an opportu-
nity to influence an existing design or stimulate an alternative role for
visualization. In short it seems that parallel channels of discourse pro-
vide excellent opportunity for sharing knowledge and perspectives –
a basis upon which to develop new design studies. They additionally
offer a rich and important source for serendipity that can beneficially
influence ways in which this is achieved at a number of levels.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors wish to thank the Cycle Hire Team and managers at Trans-
port for London, especially Audrey Bowerman and Sarah Burr. We
would also like to thank Hilary Young and the Museum of London for
supporting the work. The work was partially supported by a Research
Prize and Research Student scholarship provided by City University
London.

REFERENCES
[1] L. A. Adamic and N. Glance. The political blogosphere and the 2004

US election: divided they blog. In Proceedings of the 3rd international
workshop on Link discovery, pages 36–43. ACM, 2005.

[2] B. Agard, C. Morency, and Trepanier. Mining public transport user be-

haviour from smart card data. Science, 333(6039):156–157, 2011.
[3] W. Bagchi and P. White. The potential of public transport smart card data.

Transport Policy, 12(5):464–474, 2005.
[4] R. Beecham and J. Wood. Characterising group-cycling journeys using

interactive graphics. Transportation Research C: Emerging Technologies,
2014.

[5] R. Beecham and J. Wood. Exploring gendered cycling behaviours within

a large-scale behavioural data-set. Transportation Planning and Technol-
ogy, (1):83–97, 2014.

[6] R. Beecham, J. Wood, and A. Bowerman. Studying commuting be-

haviours using collaborative visual analytics. Computers, Environment
and Urban Systems, 2013.

[7] J. Berger. Ways of Seeing. Penguin, London, 1972.
[8] F. Block, M. S. Horn, B. C. Phillips, J. Diamond, M. Evans, and C. Shen.

The deeptree exhibit: Visualizing the tree of life to facilitate informal



2180 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VISUALIZATION AND COMPUTER GRAPHICS,   VOL. 20,   NO. 12,   DECEMBER 2014

learning. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics,
18(12):2789–2798, 2012.

[9] P. Blythe and H. Bryan. Understanding behaviour through smartcard data

analysis. Proceedings of the ICE - Transport, 41(4):173–177, 2007.
[10] A. Borsani, B. Merlo, and L. Wang. Dataremix: Designing the datamade

through artscience collaboration.

[11] S. K. Card, J. D. Mackinlay, and B. Shneiderman. Readings in informa-
tion visualization: using vision to think. Morgan Kaufmann, 1999.

[12] T. G. Crainic and G. Laporte. Fleet management and logistics. Springer,
1998.

[13] D. Davies, S. Gray, G. Gardner, and G. Harland. A quantitative study of

the attitudes of individuals to cycling. A quantitative study of the attitudes
of individuals to cycling, 1(1):1–20, Jan. 2001.

[14] J. Dill and J. Gliebe. Understanding and measuring bicycling behavior:

A focus on travel time and route choice. Bicycling, 29(December):1 – 70,
2008.

[15] S. P. Dow, A. Glassco, J. Kass, M. Schwarz, D. L. Schwartz, and S. R.

Klemmer. Parallel prototyping leads to better design results, more di-

vergence, and increased self-efficacy. ACM Transactions on Computer-
Human Interaction (TOCHI), 17(4):18, 2010.

[16] N. Duarte. Resonate: Present visual stories that transform audiences.
John Wiley & Sons, 2010.

[17] J. Garrard, S. Handy, and J. Dill. Women and cycling. In J. Pucher and

R. Buehler, editors, City Cycling, pages 211–235. MIT Press, 2012.
[18] B. Gatersleben and K. M. Appleton. Contemplating cycling to work:

Attitudes and perceptions in different stages of change. Transportation
Research Part A: Policy and Practice, 41(4):302–312, 2007.

[19] J. Giles. Computational social science: Making the links. Nature,
488(7412):448–450, 2012.

[20] S. Goodwin, J. Dykes, S. Jones, I. Dillingham, G. Dove, A. Duffy,

A. Kachkaev, A. Slingsby, and J. Wood. Creative user-centered visualiza-

tion design for energy analysts and modelers. Visualization and Computer
Graphics, IEEE Transactions on, 19(12):2516–2525, 2013.

[21] D. Heaven. Tron-like map of bike journeys reveals London’s hubs. New
Scientist, Sept. 2012.

[22] K. C. Heesch, S. Sahlqvist, and J. Garrard. Gender differences in recre-

ational and transport cycling: a cross-sectional mixed-methods compari-

son of cycling patterns, motivators, and constraints. International Journal
of Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity, 9(1):106, 2012.

[23] D. Hemment. Emoto-visualising the online response to London 2012.

2013.

[24] U. Hinrichs, H. Schmidt, and S. Carpendale. Emdialog: Bringing infor-

mation visualization into the museum. IEEE Transactions on Visualiza-
tion and Computer Graphics, 14(6):1181–1188, 2008.

[25] J. Hullman, E. Adar, and P. Shah. Benefitting infovis with visual dif-

ficulties. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics,
17(12):2213–2222, 2011.

[26] P. Isenberg, T. Zuk, C. Collins, and S. Carpendale. Grounded evalua-

tion of information visualizations. In Proceedings of the 2008 Workshop
on BEyond time and errors: novel evaLuation methods for Information
Visualization, page 6. ACM, 2008.

[27] B. Jackson, D. Coffey, L. Thorson, D. Schroeder, A. M. Ellingson, D. J.

Nuckley, and D. F. Keefe. Toward mixed method evaluations of scientific

visualizations and design process as an evaluation tool. In Proceedings
of the 2012 BELIV Workshop: Beyond Time and Errors-Novel Evaluation
Methods for Visualization, page 4. ACM, 2012.

[28] Y. Jansen and P. Dragicevic. An interaction model for visualizations be-

yond the desktop. Visualization and Computer Graphics, IEEE Transac-
tions on, 19(12):2396–2405, 2013.

[29] L. C. Koh, A. Slingsby, J. Dykes, and T. S. Kam. Developing and ap-

plying a User-Centered model for the design and implementation of in-

formation visualization tools. In 2011 15th International Conference on
Information Visualisation (IV), pages 90–95. IEEE, July 2011.

[30] R. Kosara. Visualization criticism-the missing link between information

visualization and art. In Information Visualization, 2007. IV’07. 11th
International Conference, pages 631–636. IEEE, 2007.

[31] R. Krüger, D. Thom, M. Wörner, H. Bosch, and T. Ertl. Trajectorylenses–

a set-based filtering and exploration technique for long-term trajectory

data. Computer Graphics Forum, 32(3.4):451–460, 2013.
[32] N. Lathia, C. Smith, J. Froehlich, and L. Capra. Individuals among

commuters: Building personalised transport information services from

fare collection systems. Pervasive and Mobile Computing, 9(5):643–664,
2013.

[33] D. Lazer, A. S. Pentland, L. Adamic, S. Aral, A. L. Barabasi, D. Brewer,

N. Christakis, N. Contractor, J. Fowler, M. Gutmann, et al. Life in the

network: the coming age of computational social science. Science (New
York, NY), 323(5915):721, 2009.

[34] D. Lloyd and J. Dykes. Human-centered approaches in geovisualiza-

tion design: Investigating multiple methods through a long-term case

study. Visualization and Computer Graphics, IEEE Transactions on,
17(12):2498–2507, 2011.

[35] A. M. MacEachren and D. R. F. Taylor. Visualization in modern cartog-
raphy, volume 2. Pergamon Press, 1994.

[36] S. Makri and A. Blandford. Coming across information serendipitously–

part 1: a process model. Journal of Documentation, 68(5):684–705, 2012.
[37] M. Meyer, M. Sedlmair, P. S. Quinan, and T. Munzner. The

nested blocks and guidelines model. Information Visualization, page
1473871613510429, 2013.

[38] J. Pucher and R. Buehler. City Cycling. MIT Press, London, 2012.
[39] R. Radburn, J. Dykes, and J. Wood. vizlib: Using the seven stages of

visualization to explore population trends and processes in local authority

research. Proc. GIS Research UK, pages 409–416, 2010.
[40] J. C. Roberts. Exploratory visualization with multiple linked views. In

J. Dykes, A. M. MacEachren, and M.-J. Kraak, editors, Exploring Geovi-
sualization, pages 159–180. Elsevier, Oxford, 2005.

[41] A. C. Robinson. A design framework for exploratory geovisualization in

epidemiology. Information visualization, 6(3):197–214, 2007.
[42] M. Sedlmair, P. Isenberg, D. Baur, M. Mauerer, C. Pigorsch, and A. Butz.

Cardiogram: visual analytics for automotive engineers. In Proceedings of
the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pages
1727–1736. ACM, 2011.

[43] M. Sedlmair, M. Meyer, and T. Munzner. Design study methodology:

Reflections from the trenches and the stacks. IEEE Transactions on Visu-
alization and Computer Graphics, 18(12):2431–2440, 2012.

[44] E. Segel and J. Heer. Narrative visualization: Telling stories with

data. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics,
16(6):1139–1148, 2010.

[45] B. Shneiderman. The eyes have it: A task by data type taxonomy for in-

formation visualizations. In Visual Languages, 1996. Proceedings., IEEE
Symposium on, pages 336–343. IEEE, 1996.

[46] M. Tory and T. Moller. Rethinking visualization: A high-level taxonomy.

In Information Visualization, 2004. INFOVIS 2004. IEEE Symposium on,
pages 151–158. IEEE, 2004.

[47] J. W. Tukey. Exploratory Data Analysis. Addison-Wesley, London, 1
edition, 1977.

[48] J. J. van Wijk. Bridging the gaps. IEEE Computer Graphics and Appli-
cations, 26(6):6–9, 2006.

[49] J. J. van Wijk. Views on visualization. IEEE Transactions on Visualiza-
tion and Computer Graphics, 12(4):1000–433, 2006.

[50] R. Walker, A. Slingsby, J. Dykes, K. Xu, J. Wood, P. Nguyen,

D. Stephens, W. Wong, and Y. Zheng. An extensible framework for

provenance in human terrain visual analytics. IEEE Transactions on Vi-
sualization and Computer Graphics, 19(12):2139–2148, 2013.

[51] D. Watts. Computational social science: Exciting progress and future

directions. The Bridge on Frontiers of Engineering, 43(4):5–10, 2013.
[52] S. Weinberger. Social science: web of war. Nature, 471(7340):566–568,

2011.

[53] J. Wood. Experiments in bicycle flow animation.

http://vimeo.com/33712288, 2011.

[54] J. Wood. We are the city. http://vimeo.com/66477874, 2011.

[55] J. Wood. London moves, visualising 16 million cycle journeys across the

UK capital. http://tedxtalks.ted.com/video/London-Moves-visualising-

16-mil, 2012.

[56] J. Wood, J. Dykes, and A. Slingsby. Visualisation of origins, destina-

tions and flows with od maps. The Cartographic Journal, 47(2):117–129,
2010.

[57] J. Wood, P. Isenberg, T. Isenberg, J. Dykes, N. Boukhelifa, and

A. Slingsby. Sketchy rendering for information visualization. IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 18(12):2749–
2758, 2012.

[58] J. Wood, A. Slingsby, and J. Dykes. Visualizing the dynamics of london’s

bicycle-hire scheme. Cartographica: The International Journal for Geo-
graphic Information and Geovisualization, 46(4):239–251, 2011.

[59] J. Woodcock, M. Tainio, J. Cheshire, O. O’Brien, and A. Goodman.

Health effects of the london bicycle sharing system: health impact mod-

elling study. BMJ: British Medical Journal, 348, 2014.


