












































Microsoft Word - IUPAC final text and figures.doc


1 
 

Microanalytical study of luster glazed gilding and silvering from 
Baroque altarpieces 

 
Nati Salvadó1*, Salvador Butí1, Carme Clemente2, Victòria Beltran1§, Gianfelice Cinque3, 
Jordi Juanhuix4, and Trinitat Pradell5. 
 
1. Dpt. d’Enginyeria Química. EPSEVG. Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya, Av. Víctor Balaguer s/n, 08800 
Vilanova i la Geltrú, Barcelona 
2. Escola d’Art i Disseny de la Diputació de Tarragona a Tortosa, Pl. Sant Joan, 5, 43500 Tortosa 
3. Diamond Light Source, Harwell Campus, Chilton-Didcot OX11 0DE Oxfordshire, UK 
4. CELLS-ALBA Synchrotron, Carrer de la Llum 2-26, 08290 Cerdanyola del Vallès, Barcelona 
5. Dpt. Física and BRCMSE, Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya, Campus del Baix Llobregat. c) Esteve 
Terradas 8, 08860 Castelldefels, Barcelona 
 
*Corresponding author: E-mail address: nativitat.salvado@upc.edu 
 
§Current adress: IPANEMA, CNRS MC UVSQ MNHN, Université Paris–Saclay, BP48 Saint-Aubin, 91192 Gif-
sur-Yvette cedex, France 
 
Keywords: microFTIR, microXRD, cultural heritage, gilding, silvering, bole, Pinus resin, 
sandarac, silver corrosion, verdigris, red lake 
 
ABSTRACT 
 
Lustering, a technique which involved the application of coloured translucent glazes over 
gilding and silvering was widely used to enrich and decorate altarpieces in the Baroque 
period. The decorations consist of a micrometric multilayered structure including several 
color glazes, metallic leaves and bole applied over a plaster ground. The collection of 
Baroque altarpieces, the oldest dating 1671 and the newest 1775 from the cathedral of Tortosa 
(Catalonia), is a perfect case of study of the materials used and the techniques employed 
throughout the period. Further information is obtained from the analysis of the reaction and 
aging compounds resulting from the interaction among the compounds present in the layers 
and between the different layers. 
A combination of sensitive analytical techniques, Synchrotron based μ-XRD and μ-IR and 
SEM-EDS which enabled the luster samples to undergo analysis without altering their 
original layered microstructure were selected. The nature of the compounds used to produce 
the yellow, green, red and blue glazes (pigments, pigment lakes and resins), metallic leaves 
and boles is presented. Relevant information from historical and conservation viewpoints 
about the origin and nature of the materials used, the making of the lusters and their reactivity 
and aging are also discussed. 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
Innovations in art works are very often related to the discovery of new materials or 
techniques. Therefore, the analysis of the materials gives direct information about the 
materials available in the period, the use of synthetic and natural products and in each case the 
procedures used to obtain or to purify them. However, the materials change over the years due 
to the reactivity and aging of the substances and what reaches us is the result of these changes. 
Therefore, the current appearance of the art work is often very different from the appearance 
it had at the time of its creation. The investigation of the nature and changes happening in an 
artwork is often a complex analytical problem, which requires different analytical methods 



2 
 

and specific sample preparation methods. 
 
Coloured translucent glazes over gilding and silvering, also known as lustering, were used in 
altarpieces as a low cost method for imitating gold, gemstones, glazes, vitreous enamels and 
luxurious cloths and for the addition of interesting shiny effects and different shades 
depending on the artist criteria. The technique consisted in the application of a thin (20-50 
microns) colour glaze over metal silver, gold, brass or occasionally, tin [1-6]. The colour is 
obtained adding dyes, pigments or lake pigments, in variable amounts, into an organic matrix. 
Consequently, organic and inorganic substances either crystalline or amorphous coexist in the 
glazes. Chemical interactions among the different substances present in a luster glazed over 
gold or silver, as well as, with the environment (atmospheric gases, dust, polluting gases, 
humidity, etc) resulted in the change of the chemistry and also of the physical properties of 
the layers. The consequent reduction of the brilliancy and transparency of the organic glaze 
gives gilded and silvered decorations a dull aspect. Furthermore, subsequent restorations often 
introduce other materials not always adequate to ensure their preservation. All this yields a 
complex material [5-7] that requires a specific set of complementary microanalytical 
techniques. 
 
While in the 17th Century the Gothic tradition was still present in terms of materials used and 
the method of application, the Baroque period comprised between the second half of the 17th 
century and the end of the18th century, is a time of important changes by the introduction of 
new materials and techniques. Lustering was, geographically and chronologically gradually 
introduced in Baroque altarpieces [8] and in particular widely used in the Mediterranean 
basin. The oldest coloured glazes were generally made of drying oil and applied to small 
motifs. At the end of the 17th Century resin based glazes started being used to cover more 
extensive areas. Resins from different natural sources as indicated by the treatises of the 
period were used. Different dyes, lake pigments and pigments to resin proportion were used to 
produce different chromatic effects.  
 
The coloured lustering of a set of seven Baroque altarpieces created between 1671 and 1776 
from the Cathedral of Tortosa in Catalonia are studied. The altarpieces have been kept in 
place for over 300 years and, consequently, submitted to the same environmental conditions. 
This circumstance also facilitates a comparative study of the reactivity of the materials from 
the period. Tortosa is a city located a short distance from the mouth of the River Ebre, which, 
in the studied period, connected the Iberian Peninsula with the Mediterranean trade and so, 
open to all the technical and artistic European influences. Consequently, the set of Baroque 
altarpieces from the Cathedral of Tortosa constitutes a perfect case to study the reactivity and 
aging, as well as, the evolution of the materials and techniques.  
 
Analytical techniques with adequate detection limits, limited invasiveness and, especially, 
without altering the original microstructure of the layers must be considered. The micro-
structure of the sample (thickness, number of layers, particles, etc.) are determined by Optical 
Microscopy (OM) and Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM). Elemental analysis may also be 
obtained either by Energy Dispersive X-ray Spectroscopy EDS attached to the SEM or, X-ray 
Fluorescence. With regard to the identification of the nature of the compounds present Micro 
Infrared Spectroscopy (μ-FTIR), Micro Raman Spectroscopy (μ-Raman) and Micro X-ray 
Diffraction (μ-XRD) are among the most commonly employed. The use of synchrotron 
radiation (SR) adds micro-focusing capability and high quality data due to the brightness and 
high signal to noise ratio and may be critical for the success of the analysis [9-12]. 
 



3 
 

 

EXPERIMENTAL 
 
Samples and sample preparation 
Artwork samples. 37 samples a few hundred micrometres in size were taken from the seven 
Baroque altarpieces, spanning a period of one hundred years, located at the cathedral of 
Tortosa. A selection of the samples belonging to four of these altarpieces dedicated to All 
Souls (2 samples), Saint Joachim (11 samples), Saint Rufus (10 samples) and Our Lady of the 
Rosary (6 samples) (in chronological order) are discussed here and summarised in Table 1. 
 
Cross sections. Polished cross sections and thin cross sections of the samples were obtained 
for analysis [10,11]. Small fragments of the samples (a few hundred micrometers in size) 
were first embedded in epoxy resin and subsequently microtomed. In some samples, a thin 
gold protection layer was applied on the surface before embedding the sample to avoid the 
contamination of the sample by the epoxy resin [11]. 2 µm and 20 µm thick cross sections 
were cut for the infrared and X-ray diffraction measurements respectively. The 2 µm thin 
cross sections were pressed between two KBr pellets transparent to the IR to assure their 
flatness and assist in handling. Also, a few 150 µm cross section cuts obtained with a precise 
diamond saw were also prepared for X-ray diffraction measurements. 

 
Moreover, selected sample fragments were squeezed between two diamond windows into a 
microcompression cell to obtain samples of adequate thickness for the IR analysis. The 
various materials present in the sample were spread facilitating the analysis of the different 
substances and, at the same time, maintaining the layered structure of the paint.  
 

Methods and instrumentation 
The combination of various micro sensitive analytical techniques including Synchrotron 
based μ-XRD, and μ-IR in combination with SEM has proved to be a powerful tool to obtain 
precise information on the composition and distribution of the reaction and aging substances 
in a sequence of micrometric layers, such as is the case with luster glazed gilding and 
silvering (glaze, metal leaf, bole and ground layers). 
 
Optical microscopy (OM) 
The samples were observed, handled and small fragments selected for further analysis by 
means of a Stereomicroscope, SMZ800 Nikon. The cross-sections of the samples were 
observed with an Optical microscope Eclipse LV100 Nikon under visible and UV light. 
 
Scanning Electron Microscopy with energy dispersive x-ray spectroscopy (SEM-EDS) 
SEM-EDS was used in order to obtain information of the elemental composition and 
thickness of the layers of the samples. Secondary electron (SE) and backscattered electron 
(BSE) images were acquired with a GEMINI SEM equipped with a Shottky-FE column (4pA-
20 nA, 0.1 to 30 kV and 1nm maximum resolution) at an accelerating voltage of 20kV. 
Elemental analysis was also obtained by Energy Dispersive X-ray Spectrometry (EDS) using 
an INCAR Penta FETX3 detector and a 30 mm2 ATW2 window attached to the Electron 
Microscope. The EDS spectrometer is calibrated using mineral standards which ensure 
quantitative analysis of polished surfaces. The samples, small fragments and cross-sections, 
were carbon coated to ensure the electrical conductivity. 
 
Synchrotron-based infrared microspectroscopy (µSR-FTIR)  



4 
 

IR analysis provides molecular specificity and structural information of the different 
compounds present in the paint layers. A high spectral quality (signal/noise ratio) at the 
highest spatial resolution (diffraction limited) can be achieved thanks to the high brilliance 
and collimation of synchrotron radiation. Synchrotron based FTIR allows work to be carried 
out in confocal mode conveniently between 5 to 15 microns; i.e. accessing the true micron 
scale which is important to reveal both the chemical species and spatial distribution, with no 
compromise on the low wavenumber spectral range (an effect typical when closing slits with 
benchtop). Thus, µSR-FTIR is particularly useful due to its capability of mapping on a 
micrometric scale. 
 
The set up used included a Hyperion 3000 IR microscope, a broad-band high sensitivity MCT 
detector and a 36x condenser coupled to the Vertex 80v interferometer available at the end 
station of beamline MIRIAM B22 at Diamond Light Source, UK [13]. The spectra were 
obtained in transmission mode using a small beam spot of 15×15 /12×12 square microns, 4 
cm-1 resolution, co-adding 256 scans at scanner velocity 80 kHz (35 sec), in the 4000 to 650 
cm-1 wavenumber range. Molecular composition IR maps were obtained by scanning the 
sample via a micrometric resolution motorized X-Y stage.  
 
Synchrotron-based X-ray diffraction (µSR-XRD)  
Taking into account that many substances are present, in each layer, often in very low 
amount, µSR-XRD was used to resolve the complex mixtures of crystalline compounds 
present in this micrometric layered samples. µSR-XRD data was obtained at XALOC 
beamline at ALBA Synchrotron, Cerdanyola del Vallès (Barcelona) [14]. A 50×6 µm2 (width 
× height FWHM) focused beam with an energy of 11.800 keV (1.0507 Å wavelength) was 
used to collect a series of diffraction patterns from either 20 or 150 µm thick cross-sections of 
the samples; the cross sections were scanned vertically at steps of 3 microns allowing some 
overlapping. Typical acquisition times varied between 0.2 to 1 s using a virtually noise free 
Pilatus 6M (Dectris) detector with a large active area (424×435 mm2, 6 Mpixels) protected by 
a small beam stop. The powder diffraction patterns of the layers were obtained by radial 
integration of the images obtained by this two-dimensional detector. This setup provides a 
high sensitivity to poor diffracting compounds present in very low amounts and a large 2theta 
range.  
 
Chemical and mineral compound identification was carried out by comparison with large 
databases from The International Centre for Diffraction Data, The RRUFF database and 
published data.  
 

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
 
The colour glazed over gold and silver leaves are constituted by a sequence of layers 
including a coloured coating, metal leaf, bole and a ground layer. The ground layers, applied 
on a wooden support, are basically made of gypsum and anhydrite (gesso grosso) mixed with 
a protein binder (animal glue). Above this ground, one or more layers of bole were applied. 
The bole is, essentially, a fine clay with protein binder which, thanks to the colloidal size of 
its constituents and high plasticity, facilitates the adherence and burnishing of the metal 
leaves. The Baroque period the main technique used is gilding and silvering on bole. 
 
Gold and silver leaves 
Gold or silver are the most common metal leaves employed in these altarpieces. Small 
amounts of silver (<1%-7%) and also, in some cases of copper (1%-2%) are found in the gold 



5 
 

leaves whereas the silver leaf used was of high purity (copper is not detected by SEM-EDS). 
The thickness of the metal leaves varies between 0.12 and 0.35 µm and between 0.15 and 0.50 
µm for the gold and silver leaves respectively. These very thin leaves were obtained by the 
conventional beating technique which profits from the high ductility of gold and silver. The 
metal leaves were applied over a bole layer and burnished with an agate stone. 
 
Coloured glazes were applied to confer to the gold and silver leaves a glowing effect and 
enhance their brightness (Figures 1a and 2a). Moreover, in the case of the silver leaves, the 
glaze also had a protective function; to prevent the formation of silver sulfide, Ag2S, [15] and 
silver chloride, AgCl [16-19] (Figure 1b). The glaze avoids the reaction of the metallic silver 
with the oxygen from the environment to produce silver oxides, Ag2O [19,20] which is 
required to finally form silver sulfide and chloride. Ag2S is obtained from the reaction with 
pollutant gases, such as, hydrogen sulphide (H2S) and carbonyl sulphide (OCS) [21,22], while 
AgCl with the chloride ions present in atmospheric sea spray, which together with the 
humidity penetrate through the porosity of the protected layer [21]. Nevertheless, chlorine can 
also be present in very small amounts in the binding media and adhesives; in fact, we have 
stated that the analysis of several rabbit glues showed the presence of Cl associated to 
impurities.  
 
The results obtained demonstrate that atmospheric corrosion is the prevailing alteration 
mechanism and, therefore, the alteration of the metal leaves is mainly related to the 
conservation state of the protective coatings. Figure 1a shows a detail of the elaborate 
silvering work with yellow glaze details from the altar frontal of the Saint Joachim’s 
altarpiece. All the silvered area was protected by a proteinaceous substance layer according to 
contemporary Treatises[1], over which, the yellow glazes details were applied. In fact, silver 
appears mainly unaltered and only small amounts of Cl are determined by SEM-EDS (Figure 
1b) in those yellow areas where two coating layers cover the silver foil (currently, three 
layers, the most external varnish layer was added in a modern restoration, 1997). On the 
contrary, those areas where the yellow glaze and proteinaceous layer are missing (Figure 1c), 
a continuous layer of acanthite (the monoclinic Ag2S) is formed, Figure 1e bottom, although 
a very small amount of Cl is also determined by SEM-EDS. These corrosion layers may be 
very thick, up to 1 µm, and even in the case shown, 2 µm. Acanthite gives a characteristic 
black-tarnish appearance at a macroscopic level. In fact, it is possible that some of the areas 
were kept uncoated on purpose to obtain it. If the coatings are partially lost, metallic silver 
and acanthite are mainly determined (Figure 1d, e top). 
  
On the other hand, AgCl chlorargyrite is always found in the inner areas of protected silver 
leaves. However, higher amounts of AgCl are determined in those leaves protected by a single 
coating than in those protected by several coating layers (Figure 1). Moreover, in the cases 
where the coating layer contains pigment particles or cracks, the amount of AgCl is even 
higher (Figure 2). In fact, this alteration process may end up with the complete 
transformation of silver into silver chloride [21]. Moreover, the penetration of the atmosphere 
through cracks and pores boost the growth of silver corrosion products which may cause 
tensions and flaking of the glazing. 
 
As a consequence of all this, there is a large variability in the state of conservation of the 
silver leaves even in the same altarpiece. 
 
Bole 
The bole is made of an iron oxide rich clay mixed with a proteinaceous substance which 



6 
 

assists the adherence of the metal leaf. Three different boles showing different colours, red, 
red-violet and ochre are identified in the set of altarpieces. The colour of bole also contributes 
to the final colour shown by the luster gilded and silvered areas. Red boles were widely used 
in the Gothic and Renaissance periods. In fact, in the set of altarpieces studied here the red 
bole is found only in one altarpiece dating from the beginning of the 18th century. The red-
violet bole was introduced approaching the 18th century and was gradually replaced in the 
last third of the 18th century by the ochre bole. Both, the red-violet and the ochre coloured 
boles may be related to local sources and historical documentation supports the exploitation 
of local boles in Tortosa. However, to ascertain this further study is needed. The thickness of 
the bole layer varies between 10 and 20 µm and, sometimes two or more layers are 
superimposed reaching a thickness between 40 and 80 µm. The complex mixture of minerals 
present in the boles is determined by μ-XRD [23, 24]. And due to the micrometric thickness 
of the internal layers, in many cases the use of this technique associated with synchrotron 
radiation is clearly advantageous. A cross section of the sample is mounted on a goniometer; 
although this setup accurately positions the selected area in the x-ray beam it forbids rotation. 
This method has some limitations: the microcrystallites are not necessarily isotropically 
oriented and consequently some texturing effects related to preferred crystalline orientations 
which may be favoured by the method of application of the paint layers may happen. 
Moreover, the small beam spot size limits the size of the crystallites that may be measured 
without giving individual crystal diffraction spots. Thus, the relative intensity of the diffracted 
peaks may not completely agree with the powder diffraction pattern. Figure 3 shows a 
representative image of the diffraction rings corresponding to the clay minerals present in a 
bole layer showing a layered orientation. 
 
The μSR-XRD patterns of the three boles, corresponding to red, red-violet and yellow, 
obtained from thin cross-sections of the samples are shown in Figure 3. The red bole (Figure 
3a) composition contains a dioctahedral mica of muscovite type, KAl2Si3AlO10(OH)2, 
hematite, Fe2O3, and quartz, SiO2. The red/violet bole (Figure 3b) contains a Mg-chlorite 
clinochlore (Mg5Al)(Si,Al)4O10(OH)8, a dioctahedral mica of muscovite type 
KAl2Si3AlO10(OH)2, hematite Fe2O3 and quartz SiO2. Finally, the yellow bole (Figure 3c) 
contains dioctahedral mica, muscovite type, KAl2Si3AlO10(OH)2, kaolinite, Al2Si2O5(OH)4, 
goethite, FeO(OH), a potassium feldspar, KAlSi3O8, quartz, SiO2, and calcite, CaCO3. The 
presence of a small amount of calcium carbonate, in the yellow bole can come from the 
natural source rock. Calcium oxalate dehydrate CaC2O4·2H2O, weddellite was also 
determined in the bole layers.  
 
Although the analysis of clays by infrared spectroscopy is difficult due to the strong overlap 
of bands from the different compounds, the micrometric resolution and high quality infrared 
spectra obtained by µSR-FTIR helps the discrimination of the phyllosilicates from other 
materials. Figure 4a shows a SR-FTIR spectrum of a red-violet bole. The infrared absorption 
bands present at the 4000-3000 cm-1 spectral region belong to the stretching vibration of 
structural hydroxyl groups and to the stretching vibration of water. The OH-stretching band 
near 3620 cm-1 can be assigned to muscovite or illite and those at about 3560 cm-1 to Mg-
chlorite [25, 26, RRUFF ID:R060725.1]. Besides the phyllosilicates the presence of protein 
related to animal glue is also determined (Figure 4). The broad stretching band at 3400 cm-1 
may be related to the H2O stretching vibration from the absorbed water of Mg-chlorite 
distorted by the overlapping of the 3300 cm-1 band of N-H stretching vibrations from the 
amide group of protein and of the O-H stretching vibrations of water molecules.  
 
Animal glue was extensively used in Europe in the period both as a binder and as adhesive for 



7 
 

the metal leaf. Baroque treatises recommend the use of rabbit glue because of its good 
adhesive properties in bole gilding and silvering [1, 27]. Animal glue is constituted mainly of 
collagen but the identification of the animal species to which the collagen belongs needs more 
specific proteomic studies [28]. One particularly interesting result obtained is the correlation 
observed between the protein the bole layer and calcium oxalates. The presence of protein 
decreases (black line in Figure 4b) while calcium oxalate increases (red line in Figure 4b) in 
those areas close to the ground layers which contain calcium. Figure 4b shows that the amide 
I band at 1650 cm-1 shifts towards lower wavenumbers approaching 1620 cm-1 where the C–O 
stretching vibration of coordinated oxalate groups appear. Moreover, the intensity of the 
amide II band around 1540 cm-1 decreases while other bands characteristic of calcium oxalate, 
1320 cm-1 and 780 cm-1, increase. Consequently, this data denotes that the presence of 
calcium oxalate in the inner layers is an indicator of the presence of altered organic matter 
[29]. This is indeed the case, as calcium oxalate is also found in the ground layers.  

 
Coloured glazes 
Drying oils are determined in the 17th century coloured glazes from the Cathedral of Tortosa 
whereas resins are identified in the 18th century lusters. Diterpenic resins, particularly, the 
abietane-type resin from the Pinus species is the main resin applied in the 18th century 
altarpieces. However, in some cases, mixtures of Pinus resin with drying oil or other resin 
types such as sandarac (diterpenic resin) or shellac (sesquiterpenic resin) are also used. For 
instance, a mixture of Pinus resin and sandarac is found in all the coloured glazes from both 
the altar frontal and the main body of Saint Joachim`s altarpiece. The use of glazes made of 
sandarac and Pinus resin are also described in historical sources.  
 
The yellow glazed silvering from Figure 1a was analysed by µSR-FTIR. The coating shows a 
sequence of three micrometric layers applied over the silver leaf. The composition and 
thickness of the layers is clearly shown in the IR maps corresponding to the integration of 
selected bands related to the protein (Figure 5a, layer I), the mixed resin (Figure 5b, layer 
II) and the acrylic resin (Figure 5c, layer III) are plotted. Above the silver leaf there is a first 
5 to 10 µm thick protein rich layer followed by a 20-30 µm resins mixture covered by a <5 
µm top layer of synthetic acrylic resin and which is related to an intervention performed 
twenty years ago.  
 
The second layer is a mixture of Pinus and sandarac resins (black line in Figure 5d). Pinus 
resins (colophony) are mainly made up of two types of diterpenoids, i.e., compounds with 
abietane or pimarane skeletons. During Pinus resin aging, oxidative processes and molecular 
changes happen. Resins of different Pinus species evolve into a similar molecular 
composition consisting in oxidized abietanes and high molecular weight compounds. In 
Figure 5d the infrared spectrum characteristic fingerprint from aged Pinus resin is shown 
(orange line) [30,31]. The IR spectrum presents a complex shape where the specific markers 
of aged Pinus resin can be identified. However, the bands at 1647, 1033 and 890 cm-1 in the 
1800-700 cm-1 region (Figure 5d) do not belong to the aged Pinus resin but are related to 
sandarac, a labdane-type resin obtained from Tetraclinis articulate Vahl. 
 
As mentioned, sandarac is also a diterpenic resin whose main compound is the polymerized 
communic acid. The structure of communic acid is very similar to those of abietic acid, the 
main compound of the fresh Pinus resin, sharing some IR bands (Figure 5d) such as those at 
around 1695 cm-1 corresponding to –COOH, which has almost the same chemical 
environment. However, some differences are still appreciated such as the presence of the 
conjugated C=C band at about 1645 cm-1 in the sandarac spectrum (Figure 5d, green line). 



8 
 

 
Although the composition of sandarac also changes upon aging due to oxidation processes, 
the characteristic bands at 1647, 1033 and 890 cm-1 of the fresh resin are still present in aged 
samples (Figure 5d). Confirmation of the presence of Pinus resin and sandarac in the second 
layer of the glaze is clearly seen comparing the spectrum with those resulting from the 
addition of a moderately oxidized resin, aged Pinus nigra Arnold resin from 1884 (Economic 
Botany Collection of Kew, ref. 28172), and an aged sandarac resin from 1953 (Economic 
Botany Collection of Kew, ref. 95431) (Figure 5d, red dashed line). The presence of Pinus 
resin and sandarac has also been confirmed by GC/MS.   
 
An analytical problem presents itself when substances related to the origin and/or synthesis of 
the pigments are present in the resin matrix. For instance, the lake pigments used in the red 
glazes also contain reaction compounds associated to the auxiliary substances used in its 
synthesis. The cross section of the red glaze from the Saint Rufus altarpiece shows a < 30 µm 
thick deep red colour layer containing a Pinus resin matrix and a red lake pigment, Figure 6a. 
Three different substances are determined by µSR-FTIR; the Pinus resin associated to the 
matrix (Figure 6b and 6c, orange line), starch grains which were typically added as a 
pigment extender [32] (Figure 6b and 6c, grey line) and protein related to a red lake pigment 
(Figure 6b and 6c, dark red line). The origin of protein it is not clear, but there are various 
reasonable hypotheses. One possibility is that the red lake might be recovered either from a 
wool textile or wool shearing waste [33]. Another possible origin is related to the probable 
source of the red dye; a product extracted from an insect of the superfamily Coccoidea (scale 
insects of the order Hemiptera) [34]. Finally, it may also be related to the proteinaceous 
binders (glue or egg white) added to aid the lake precipitation [32] or mixed and ground 
together with the lake pigments before included in the resin.  
 
Moreover, the infrared bands doublet at 1079 cm-1 and 1044 cm-1 (Figure 6c) may be 
indicative of the presence of carminic acid (a hydroxyanthraquinone compound) related to an 
insect red dye, cochineal carmine. Carminic acid is the main component of all cochineal dyes 
from various species. However, to confirm liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry based 
techniques [35] or surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy [36,37] are adequate to identify a 
specific red lake.  
 
Aluminium was the main element found by SEM-EDS in the red particles (Figure 6d). Other 
elements, such as calcium, potassium, sulphur, chlorine, phosphorus, and silicon are also 
detected in varying amounts (Figure 6d). Aluminium and calcium are associated to the metal-
dye complex as they form insoluble complexes with the dye molecules via coordinated bonds. 
The analysis of the particles suggests the presence of an Al-dye complex as main component 
and a Ca-Al-dye which cannot be completely ruled out in lesser amount. Moreover, particles 
containing aluminium, sulphur and potassium or sulphur and potassium only, are also 
determined. They might be related to the impurities resulting from the synthesis of the red 
dye; in fact, alum, a potassium aluminium sulphate hydroxide hydrate, KAl(SO4)2·12H2O was 
commonly used to precipitate the lakes [34] and, in the process by-products such as, 
potassium sulphate could be generated. 
 
Another source of difficulties in the characterisation of the coloured glazes is the possible 
interactions between the pigments, lake pigments and dyes with the resin matrix. An 
interesting example of this is found in the green glaze from the Saint Rufus altarpiece. Copper 
acetate monohydrate, Cu(CH3COO)2·H2O, basic copper acetate with the formula 
Cu(CH3COO)2[Cu(OH)2]3·2H2O and also copper hydrochloride, Cu2Cl(OH)3 are determined 



9 
 

by µSR-XRD Figure 7a. The use of copper acetate/basic copper acetate (verdigris) for green 
shades was common in the Baroque period [38,39], and so it is in the set of altarpieces we 
studied. Towards the end of the period the introduction of new pigments in the market 
resulted in the generation of a new green/blue colour obtained mixing Prussian blue with the 
yellowish resin. In fact, in some the altarpieces decorated after the first quarter of the 18th 
century (Saint Joachim, Saint Joseph and Our lady of the Rosary), the presence of Prussian 
blue is determined. 
 
The synthesis of the green copper pigment usually produces mixtures of various compounds 
of the type [Cu(CH3COO)2]x[Cu(OH)2]y·nH2O, those compounds can react with the 
atmosphere producing other compounds, in particular copper chloride salts of the type 
[CuCl2]x[Cu(OH)2]y·nH2O [9,39]. Although copper chloride salts may also be produced 
during the synthesis of the pigment itself as a result of the addition of sodium chloride, this 
was more common in medieval pigments according to the recipes described in the 
manuscripts than in the Baroque period. In fact, SEM observation of the green glaze from the 
Saint Rufus altarpiece shows that the copper chloride particles are concentrated near the 
surface suggesting that in this case their presence is related to weathering. Moreover, the 
µSR-XRD pattern (Figure 7a) of the green glaze also shows the presence of other crystalline 
phases which have not been identified, but which might be related to the reaction between the 
copper pigment and the Pinus resin. 
 
The abietic acid and abietane skeleton acids from the Pinus resin react with the copper 
compounds producing copper abietates (copper carboxylate) [7,38,39]. According to the 
treatises, the green glazes were a green translucent material which suggests that most of the 
pigment particles had already reacted before application and thus, abietic acid and abietane 
skeleton acids would have almost reacted completely.  In fact, by varying the copper pigment 
to resin ratio different optical effects were achieved. A non-embedded thin cross section of the 
green glaze layer, obtained cutting the sample with a microknife and squeezing it on a 
diamond cell, was measured by µSR-FTIR and spectra are shown in Figure 7b. The main 
characteristic infrared bands related to the green copper pigment and to copper abietates are 
observed. The intense band at 1608 cm-1 corresponds to the antisymmetric stretching of the 
COO- group of copper carboxylates formed from abietic acid and abietane skeleton acids. 
This band overlaps the 1606-1608 cm-1 C=C stretching band from the aged Pinus resin [30]. 
Moreover, the band at about 1400 cm-1 can be associated to the symmetric stretching of the 
COO- group of the copper abietate. The 885 cm-1 band is also related to this compound [7].  
 
The C=O stretching band of the –COOH from the resin is observed at a higher wavenumber, 
1708 cm-1 (Figure 7b), than in the fresh Pinus resin. This is due to the presence of ketones in 
the aged resin. Due to the fact that the resin has reacted almost completely with the copper 
pigment, this band appears with low intensity. This facilitate distinguish other bands, such as 
the band observed at about 1670 cm-1 in the green glaze (Figure 7b) which can be associated 
to C=C stretching of R2C=CH of pimarane diterpenoid compounds [31]. In addition, the band 
observed at 1301 cm-1 (Figure 7b) could be attributed to the =CH rocking of C=C terminal 
also present in pimarane diterpenoid compounds. In fact, fresh Mediterranean Pinus resin 
species contain pimaranes and non-oxidized abietanes in a ratio of 1:2 to 1:3 [40-46]. The 
interaction between the copper pigment and the pimaranes from the resin is also expected, 
although there are no references of this phenomenon.  
 
And finally, IR spectra of the green glaze (Figure 7b) also shows the 1542 cm-1 symmetric 
stretching of the COO- group band [47] associated with calcium abietates. With regard to the 



10 
 

origin of the calcium we have to mention that CaCO3 particles related to environmental 
deposition are occasionally found on the surface of the glaze. This, together with the reaction 
and aging compounds formed and the alteration of the metallic leaves has modified the 
appearance of the lusters to a darkened, matt aspect. 
 
 

CONCLUSIONS 
 
Luster glazed gilts and silvering from a set of Baroque altarpieces dating from the last quarter 
of the 17th century and 18th century from the Cathedral of Tortosa were studied. Limited 
invasiveness was considered and, for this a selection of representative submilimetric samples 
were obtained from the altarpieces. The strategy of combining a set of microanalytical 
techniques which enabled the analysis without altering the original layered microstructure of 
the samples was fundamental to gain information on the substances related to the original 
materials used and the reactions among them and between the different layers (glazes, 
metallic leaves, boles and ground). 
 
The resin matrix used in the coloured glazes, reaction and aging compounds, impurities 
related to the synthesis of pigments, pigment lakes and dyes, the metallic leaves (gold and 
silver), the silver corrosion products and the boles were identified. The glazes were made of a, 
probably local, diterpenic resin (Pinus resin, colophony) which was used alone or mixed with 
imported sandarac or drying oil. Three different color boles, probably of local origin, were 
chronologically used, red, red-violet and yellow. The phyllosilicates (muscovite, magnesium 
chlorite, kaolinite) and iron oxides (goethite and hematite) constituting each of the three 
different boles were determined. The colourants and pigment particles appear always 
associated with other substances used either in their synthesis or formed by the reaction with 
the resin. For instance, the carmine red lake pigment appears associated to auxiliary 
substances used in its synthesis (starch, aluminium potassium sulphates and related by-
products). Whereas the basic copper acetate green pigment appears together with the copper 
abietates resulting from its reaction with the Pinus resin matrix. Different silver corrosion 
products (silver chloride and silver sulphide) are formed depending on the presence or 
absence of a protective coating. Reactivity is not confined within the luster layers but on the 
contrary, the reaction between bole and ground layer (calcium oxalates). 
 
 
Acknowledgements:  
 
The project received financial support from MINECO (Spain), grant MAT2016-77753- R and 
Generalitat de Catalunya, grant 2014SGR-581. We acknowledge Diamond Light Source for 
time on Beamline MIRIAM B22 under Proposal (SM8153/ SM12570) and the collaboration 
of Diamond staff. The µSR-XRD experiments were performed at BL13 XALOC beamline at 
ALBA Synchrotron Facillity with the collaboration of ALBA staff. The authors thank the 
“Economic Botany Collection of the Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew”, in Richmond (Greater 
London, UK), for supplying dated ancient resins. 
We especially thank the chapter of the Saint Mary of Tortosa Cathedral to allow the access to 
the altarpieces. 
 
References 
 

1. F.V. Orellana. Tratado de Barnices y Charoles, (Joseph Garcia, ed.), València (1785).  



11 
 

2. S. K. Kroustallis. Diccionario de Materias y Técnicas. I. Materias, (Ministerio de 
Cultura, ed.), Madrid (2008). 

3. J. Tauber. Polychrome Sculpture, The Getty Conservation Institute, Los Angeles 
(2015). 

4. I.C.A. Sandu, L.U. Alfonso, E. Murta, M.H. de Sá. Int. J. Conserv. Sci. 1(1), 47 
(2010). 

5. I. C. A. Sandu, M. H. de Sá, M. C. Pereira. Surf.  Interface Anal. 43, 1134 (2011). 
6. E. Emmerling, M. Kühlenthal, M. Richter. Coloured Glazes on Metal Leaf from the 

Baroque and Rococo Period, (A. Siegl ed.), Munich (2013). 
7. V. Beltran, N. Salvadó, S. Butí, G. Cinque. Microchem. J. 118, 115 (2015). 
8. F. R. Bartolomé Garcia.  La policromía barroca en Álava, (Diputación Foral de Álava. 

Departamento de Cultura, ed.), Vitoria (2001). 
9. N. Salvadó, S. Butí, M.Cotte, G. Cinque, T. Pradell, App. Phys. A 111, 47(2013). 
10. E. Pouyet, B. Fayard, M. Salomé, Y. Taniguchi, F. Sette1, M. Cotte. Herit Sci 3(3), 1 

(2015).  
11. V. Beltran, N. Salvadó, S. Butí, G. Cinque, K. Webbe, T. Pradell. Anal. Chem. 87, 

6500 (2015).  
12. N. Salvadó, N, S. Butí, M.J. Tobin, E. Pantos, N.W.J. Prag, T. Pradell.  Anal. Chem. 

77(11), 3444 (2005).  
13. Cinque G, Frogley M, Wehbe K (2011) Multimode InfraRed Imaging and 

Microspectroscopy (MIRIAM) Beamline at Diamond. Synchrotron Radiation News 
24(5):24-33 

14. Juanhuix J, Gil-Ortiz F, Cuni G et al (2014) Developments in optics and performance 
at BL13-XALOC, the macromolecular crystallography beamline at the ALBA 
synchrotron. J. Synchrot. Radiat 21:679-689 

15. O. Schalm, A. Crabbé, P. Storme, R. Wiesinger, A. Gambirasi, E. Grieten, P. Tack, S. 
Bauters, C. Kleber, M. Favaro, D. Schryvers, L. Vincze, H. Terryn, A Patelli. Apply. 
Phys. A   122, 903 (2016). 

16. S. Gialanella, E. Possenti, D. Chateigner, L. Lutterotti, F. Marino. Apply. Phys. A 113, 
1001 (2013) 

17. G.P. Mastrotheodoros, K.G. Beltsios, Y. Bassiakos, V. Paapadopaulou.  Archaeometry 
DOI: 10.111/arcm.12287 (2017). 

18. N. Salvadó, S. Butí, A. Labrador, G. Cinque, H. Emerich, T. Pradell. Anal. Bional. 
Chem, 399(9), 3041 (2011). 

19.  H.A. Ankersmit, N.H. Tennent, S.F. Watts. Atmos. Environ. 39, 695 (2005) 
20.  J. Novakovic, P. Vassiliou. Conservation of Cultural Heritage, pp 58-63 V. 

Argyropoulus, Athens (2007).  
21. G. Marchard, E. Guilminot, S. Lemoine, L. Rosette, M. Vieau, N. Stephant. Heritage 

Science  2(5) 1 (2014). 
22. M. Watanabe, S. Shinozaki, E. Toyoda, K. Asakura, T. Ichino, N. Kuwaki, Y. Higashi, 

T. Tanaka. Corrosion 62(3) 243 (2006). 
23. D. Hraldil, P. Bezdička, J. Hradilová, V. Vašutová. Microchem. J. 125, 10 (2016). 
24. D. Hraldil, J. Hradilová, P. Bezdička, S. Švarcová. Appl. Clay Sci. 118, 8 (2015). 
25. L. Vaculíková, E. Plevová. Acta Geodyn. Geomater., 2, 2 (138), 167 (2005). 
26. M. Singha, L. Singh, Indian J Pure&Appl Phys, 54, 116 (2016). 
27. F. Pacheco, Arte de la Pintura. p.507. Cátedra Madrid (2009). 
28. S. Dallongeville, M. Koperska, N. Garnier, G. Reille-Taillefert, C. Rolando, C. 

Tokarski. Anal Chem 2011,83 (24), 9431(2011). 
29. N. Salvadó, S. Butí, T. Pradell, B. Beltran, G. Cinque, J. Juanhuix, L. Font, R. 

Senserrich. Anal. Methods. 8(7), 1637 (2016). 



12 
 

30. V Beltran, N Salvadó, S Butí, T Pradell, Anal Bional Chem 408, 4073 (2016). 
31. V. Beltran, N. Salvadó, S. Butí, G. Cinque, T. Pradell. J. Nat. Prod. 80, 854 (2017).  
32. J Kirby, M Spring, C Higgit, National Gallery Technical Bulletin, 28, 69(2007). 
33. J Kirby, M Spring, C Higgit, National Gallery Technical Bulletin, 26, 71(2005). 
34. D Cardon, Le monde des teintures naturelles. Chapter 2. Belin, Paris (2003). 
35. E. Rosenberg, Anal. Bional. Chem. 391, 33(2008). 
36. F Pozzi, M Leona. J. Raman Spectrosc. 47, 67(2015) 
37. F Pozzi, S Zaleski, F Casadio, R P Van Duyne, J. Phys. Chem. DOI: 

10.1021/acs.jpcc.6b03317 
38. R. Woudhuysen-Keller. Aspects of Painting Technique in the Use of Verdigris and 

Copper Resinate. In Historical Painting Techniques, Materials, and Studio Practice 
(Arie Wallert, Erma Hermens, Marja Pee, eds.), pp65-69 The Getty Conservation 
Institute (1995). 

39. H. Kühn. Verdigris and copper resinate. In Artists’ Pigments: A handbook of their 
history and characteristics, vol 2, (A. Roy ed.) pp.131-158. Archetype Publications, 
London (1993).  

40. C. Arrabal, M. Cortijo, B.F. De Simón, M.C. García Vallejo, E. Cadahía. Biochem. 
Syst. Ecol. 33(10), 1007(2005) 

41. C. Arrabal, M. Cortijo, B.F. De Simón, M.C. García Vallejo, E. Cadahía. 
Holzforschung. 56(3), 261(2002) 

42. S. Rezzi, A. Bighelli, V. Castola, J. Casanova. Ind Crops Prod. 21(1), 71(2005). 
43. V. Mosini, R.Samperi.  Phytochemistry. 24(4), 859(1985). 
44. N.M. Joye, R.V. Lawrence. J. Chem. Eng. Data. 12(2), 279(1967). 
45. R.Gref. For. Pathol. 17(4-5), 227 (1987). 
46. A.C. Gören, G. Bilsel, A.H. Oztürk, G.Topçu. Nat. Prod. Commun. 5(11), 1729(2010) 
47. S. Sundqvist, E. Paatero, H. Tenhola.  Can. J. Chem. Eng. 77(3), 465(1999). 

 



13 
 

                    
a            b 

   
c            d 

5 10 15 20 25 30
2 theta  

e 
 
Figure 1.  
a) Detail from the Altar frontal of Saint Joachim altarpiece.  
SEM-BSE images corresponding to b) layer structure of the yellow luster: acrylic resin, 
yellow glaze, protein coating, a silver leaf with Ag and low Cl content, bole; c) Originally 
unprotected silver leaf showing high S and very low Cl at present coated with an acrylic resin 
from the 1997 intervention; d) Badly protected silver leaf showing S and low Cl. 
e) µSR-XRD patterns from: top, partly lost silver leaf from Saint Rufus altarpiece and bottom, 
unprotected silver leaf shown in c)  



14 
 

 

        
    b          c 

           
    a      d          e 

 

 
f 
 
Figure 2.  
a) Picture from a column and magnification of a detail from Saint Rufus altarpiece. White 
circles mark the red and green lusters analysed.  
b) OM and c) SEM images of a cross section of the green luster. 
d) OM and e) SEM images of a cross section of the red luster.  
f) µSR-XRD pattern from the silver leaf protected by the red glazing. 



15 
 

   
 
Figure 3. µSR-XRD patterns of the three bole layers identified;  
a) red bole from All Souls altarpiece (silver and its alteration compounds and ground layer are 
also determined because the bole layer is only <10 μm thick)  
b) red-violet bole from Saint Rufus altarpiece; the inset shows the 2D diffraction pattern 
showing the clay mineral crystalline planes (00n) preferentially oriented parallel to the 
surface; green and dark red arrows indicate the (00n) crystalline planes for clinochlore and 
muscovite respectively. 
c) yellow bole from Our Lady of the Rosary altarpiece.  

c 

b 

a 



16 
 

 
a 

 
b 
 
Figure 4.  a) µSR-FTIR spectra from several areas of the red-violet bole layer from Saint 
Rufus altarpiece showing the heterogeneity of the layer (clay minerals, protein and 1410 cm-1 
and 875 cm-1 are related to calcium carbonate).  
b) Comparison between the spectra taken from the middle of the bole layer (black solid line) 
and near to the ground (brown dash line). The protein decreases and calcium oxalate increases 
in the region near the ground. 



17 
 

 

II

I
Ag
bole

III

25 µm

 

a    b    c  

 
d 

 
Figure 5. Thin cross section of the yellow luster from the Altar frontal of Sant Joachim showing a 
multi-layered structure constituted by bole, silver leaf and three coating layers. Transmission µSR-
FTIR intensity maps of the cross section obtained integrating the bands at: 
a) 1543 cm-1, b) 1700 cm-1 and c) 1729 cm-1 corresponding to protein (layer I), yellow glaze (layer II) 
and acrylic (layer III) respectively. 
d) Comparison between the spectrum corresponding to layer II (black line) and those (dashed 
red line) calculated adding the spectra from aged Pinus nigra Arnold resin dated 1884 
(Economic Botany Collection of Kew, ref. 28172, orange line) and sandarac dated 1953 
(Economic Botany Collection of Kew, ref. 95431, green line). 



18 
 

  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6. a) Fluorescence optical image of the 25 µm thick red glaze from Saint Rufus 
altarpiece showing the presence of different particles (resin matrix, red lake and starch). b) 
3900-2700 cm-1 and c)1800-650 cm-1 range from the µSR-FTIR spectra related to: Protein 
from the red particles (red line), Pinus resin matrix (orange line) and starch grain (grey line). 
d) SEM-EDS analysis of several red particles. 
 

d 

a 

b 

c 



19 
 

 
a 

3000 2000 1000
Absorbance / Wavenumber cm-1

Cu(CH3COO)2·H2O
Pinus resin /copper abietate

Cu(CH3COO)2Cu(OH)2·5H2O
(Pinus resin) 

[Cu(CH3COO)2]x[Cu(OH)2]y·nH2O
Pinus resin /copper abietate

Pinus resin /copper abietate

CaCO3
Pinus resin /copper abietate

carboxyl group
of copper abietate

carboxyl groups of Pinus resin and
R2C=O group oxidised compounds

3075

3274

2873

2935
2955

3375
3455

33593446

  
b 
 
Figure 7. Green glaze from Saint Rufus altarpiece.  
a) µSR-XRD pattern.  
b) µSR-FTIR spectra. The bands wavenumbers corresponding to the copper pigment, aged 
Pinus resin and calcium carbonate are marked in green, orange and grey respectively. Other 
bands related to copper and calcium abietates and pimaranes and discussed in the text are 
marked in black.  



20 
 

Table 1. Samples description 
 

altarpiece 
nº  

samples 
glaze metal bole 

All souls 
1 orange 

silver red 
1 amber 

Saint Joachim 

2 amber gold 

red-violet 
1 orange 

silver 3 blue 

1 red 

Saint Joachim. 
Altar Frontal 

2 - 
silver 

red-violet 1 yellow 

1 - gold 

Saint Rufus 

2 - 

gold 

red-violet 

1 amber 

1 red 

1 green 

silver 
3 red 

1 - 

1 amber 

Our lady of 
 the Rosary 

1 amber 

silver 

yellow 

1 red 

1 green 

1 blue 

1 green 
gold 

1 red 

 
 
 
 
 


