








































14 instrumentation viewpOint- 20 - MARTECH 18

ID3- DATAFLOW OF UNDERWATER NOISE MEASUREMENTS: FROM OBSEA TO EMODNET
Joaquín del Rio Fernandez129, Michel Andre103, Thomas Folegot125, Mike van der Schaar104, Patrick Gorringe54, Antonio Novellino55, Albert Garcia144, 
Enoc Martinez145

Abstract
Underwater noise has been significantly raising in the past decades due to an 
increment of human-related activities in the oceans such as shipping, industrial 
activities, seismic explorations, etc. These activities may have adverse effects on 
fish and mammals, such as communications masking and modifying predator–
prey interactions.

In order to assess and limit the impact of these, the European Commission ap-
proved the Marine Strategy Framework Directive (MSFD) which aims to achieve 
a good environmental status in European waters. Within this directive different 
environmental challenges are addressed, including the long-term monitoring of 
underwater noise throughout European waters.

EMODnet Physics, one of the European Marine Observation and Data network 
thematic portals, which is is currently providing easy access to data and prod-
ucts of: wave height and period; temperature and salinity of the water column; 
wind speed and direction; horizontal velocity of the water column; light attenu-
ation; sea ice coverage and sea level trends. EMODnet Physics is continuously 
increasing the number and type of platforms in the system by unlocking and 
providing high quality data from a growing network. EMODnet Physics has re-

cently started working on water noise with the aim of making available more 
operational data (in terms of parameters and format that are close to MSFD I.11 
requirements), offer a single European entry point to impulsive noise registries 
(MSFD I.11.1) and work on (regional) sound maps are three key identified activi-
ties for Physics. Furthermore the very first operational under water noise data 
(i.e. Sound Pressure Level – SPL), and HELCOM and OSPAR impulsive sounds reg-
istry were connected and are now available on the portal. Exploiting the LIDO 
(Listen to Deep Ocean) knowledge and the BIAS project (https://biasproject.
wordpress.com/) experience EMODnet Physics will develop and make available 
monthly sound maps.

In this presentation, we give an overview of how EMODnet Physics is organized, 
with a particular focus on this new data flow and its perspectives.

Keywords - Underwater Noise, Emodnet, Obsea, MSFD, LIDO

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by the project JERICO-NEXT from the European Com-
mission’s Horizon 2020 research and Innovation program under Grant Agree-
ment No. 654410

Figure 1: From sensor to user dataflow diagram and standards


