








































23rd Annual Conference of the European Cetacean Society                       Istanbul Turkey  2-4 March 2009 

46 

 

visually observing the study area. The received data of both PODs were analyzed 
and compared to each other as well as to the broad-band recording analyzed in 
AVISOFT (Saslab). This poster shows the results of the recordings from a visually 
confirmed harbour porpoise encounter. The porpoise’s echolocation sequences 
were recorded successfully on all three systems and could be assigned to each 
other.  In the T-POD.exe software, these sequences were identified by the 
algorithm as high and low probability cetacean click trains as well as very doubtful 
trains.  A comparable algorithm for C-PODs is not yet available, but the detected 
sequence was visually confirmed as being of porpoise origin. Parameters obtained 
by the different recording systems for each click such as the duration of clicks and 
their frequency characteristics were compared.  This study shows that both POD 
models are valuable tools for registering harbour porpoises. Furthermore, the C-
POD provides additional information to validate porpoise registrations. 
 
A09 A SECOND GENERATION OF AN AUTONOMOUS AND PORTABLE 

AUDITORY SCREENING SYSTEM FOR CETACEAN CLINICAL AND RESEARCH 
PURPOSES 

 
Mas, A., Castell, J., del Rio, J., van der Schaar, M., Delory, E., André, M. 
 
 Laboratori d'Aplicacions Bioacústiques, Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya, 

Centre Tecnologic de Vilanova i la Geltrú, Avda. Rambla Exposició, s/n 08800 
Vilanova i la Geltrú, Barcelona, Spain 

 alex.mas@lab.upc.edu 
 
While noise is now considered a marine hazard that can directly affect cetaceans 
and induce a stranding, no clinical approach has yet introduced the detection of a 
possible hearing loss at a stranding site as a necessary practice. Here we present 
the second generation of an autonomous and portable auditory screening system 
for cetacean clinical and research purposes. This system is composed by two 
independent and autonomous modules that build a more versatile, lighter and 
radio-magnetically isolated system. The improvement relies on the electromagnetic 
isolation between modules and the independency of the first one on many 
situations. The second module will activate only when needed for some 
frequencies and levels driving high voltage to the transducers thus avoiding 
interferences with the first module containing the low voltage amplifications 
system. The tool has been successfully tested for research purposes in captivity 
dolphins and calibrated for a stranding site diagnoses operation. 
 
A10 HEARING SENSITIVITIES IN THE ATLANTIC BOTTLENOSE DOLPHIN USING 

AUDITORY EVOKED POTENTIALS 
 
Pacini, A.(1), Nachtigall, P.(1) Breese, M. (1), Panheleux, Y. (2), Look, D.(1), Vlachos, 

S. (1)  
 


	111
	Abstract book.pdf
	22

