








































31instrumentation viewpOint- 20 - MARTECH 18 instrumentation viewpOint - 20 - MARTECH 18

ID15- PROOF OF CONCEPT FOR DISTRIBUTING UNDERWATER NOISE MAPPING THROUGH EMODNET  
    PHYSICS PORTAL
Thomas Folegot125, Arnaud Levaufre126, Michel André103, Mike van der Schaar104, Joaquin Del Rio Fernandez129, Patrick Gorringe54 and Antonio 
Novellino55

Abstract
Underwater noise has been significantly raising in the past decades due to an 
increment of human-related activities in the oceans such as shipping, industrial 
activities, seismic explorations, coastal developments, etc. As recognized by the 
Marine Strategy Framework Directive (MSFD), these activities may have adverse 
effects on fish and mammals, such as communications masking and modifying 
predator–prey interactions, or, for the most intense noise sources, direct tempo-
rary or permanent physiological damage.
In order to assess and limit the impact of these, the European Commission ap-
proved the Marine Strategy Framework Directive which aims to achieve a good 
environmental status in European waters. Within this directive different environ-
mental challenges are addressed, including the long-term monitoring of under-
water noise throughout European waters.
EMODnet Physics is one of the European Marine Observation and Data network 
thematic portals, which is currently providing access physical parameters of the 

oceans. Quonops Online Services is an online and on-demand underwater noise 
prediction system (qos.quiet-oceans.com) that provides with global statistical 
maps of both natural and anthropogenic components of the underwater noise. 
Quonops has been successfully experimented to fulfil the requirements of the 
MSFD during the BIAS Life+ funded project to provide regional underwater 
noise mapping of the Baltic Sea.
The feasibility of the connection between Quonops and EMODNet platforms 
together with the LIDO (Listen to Deep Ocean) network of underwater sound 
monitoring network has been demonstrated through periodic and automatic 
delivery of monthly noise maps. This multi-platform technological innovation 
forms a major step forward towards an operational service dedicated to the op-
erational survey of underwater noise at regional scales.

Keywords – Marine Strategy Framework Directive, Ocean Noise, Noise Map, Noise 
Modelling, Noise Monitoring

Fig. 1: Statistical noise map offshore Barcelona around the OBSEA monitoring station in July 2018. The 
map represent the 10th exceedance levels, indicating that the effective noise is equal or higher than the 
levels represented for 10% of the time, i.e. 3.1 days in July.


