























































Acoustics in water: synergies with marine biology


Acoustics in water: synergies with marine biology

Mike van der Schaar1,?, Robert Lahmann2, Kay Graf2, Ludwig Houégnigan1, Alba Solsona1,
Steffen De Vreese1, Antonio M. Sánchez1, and Michel André1

1Laboratory of Applied Bioacoustics, UPC, Barcelona, Spain.
2Erlangen Centre for Astroparticle Physics (ECAP), Friedrich-Alexander-Universität, Erlangen, Germany.

Abstract. This paper presents some of the bioacoustics related analysis that was per-
formed on the ANTARES data, focussing on the year 2014. The data was processed for
sperm whale, dolphin and shipping presence and grouped by hour of the day. It seemed
that dolphins were more socially active during the day and foraging during the night.
Sperm whales were mostly foraging during the day, but they may have been moving to
other areas during the night. The most intense shipping noise came from a ferry that
passed the platform twice a day. Although beaked whales were expected to be present in
the area, so far their biosonar signal has not been conclusively found.

1 Introduction

The principal aim of the ANTARES collaboration is the operation of a Cherenkov Neutrino telescope
[1]. In addition to the optical sensors required for this purpose, an array of 36 hydrophones was
installed with the aim of investigating acoustic neutrino detection techniques. This acoustic data
stream has been active since 2008 and is managed under AMADEUS [2]. Coincidentally, ANTARES
is installed in the Pelagos marine sanctuary, home to many marine mammals species, both whales
and dolphins, all of which are acoustically active. The fact that ANTARES is cabled (providing
real-time access to data) makes it a unique observation platform for the local marine fauna. The
Laboratory of Applied Bioacoustics (LAB) has been analysing the acoustic data, relayed through
AMADEUS, since 2010 with a focus especially on sperm whales and dolphins. The ability to study
trends in animal presence and a possible relationship with anthropogenic activities for such a long
and continuous time frame is unique and is impossible as a purely biological initiative; the costs
for installing such a platform just to measure sound levels and to monitor the environment are too
high. Opening up platforms such as ANTARES, and for example the NEPTUNE Ocean Observatory
(part of Ocean Networks Canada [3]) which offers open access to data from both acoustic and
environmental sensors, to marine researchers will not only help to improve marine research but may
also help to obtain funding by widening the scope of applications.

Presented here are some of the signal processing techniques that have been used for the acoustic
event detection and classification algorithms on data recorded during 2014 at ANTARES. A few ex-
amples of both biological and anthropogenic sonar are shown, and daily cetacean activity is evaluated.

?e-mail: mike.vanderschaar@upc.edu

    
 

 
DOI: 10.1051/,  (2017) 7135epjconf/201135EPJ Web of Conferences

ARENA 2016

0 06008 6008

 © The Authors,  published  by EDP Sciences.  This  is  an  open  access  article  distributed  under  the  terms  of the Creative
 Commons Attribution License 4.0 (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/). 



In the evaluation of cetacean presence or the measurement of shipping noise it has to be taken into
account that the hydrophones are installed deep under water. The sound speed profile of the Mediter-
ranean Sea does not have a common sound channel at depth and is mostly refracting upwards [4]. This
means that most surface sources, such as dolphins and ships, may have to be on top of the array for
the sound to be able to reach the hydrophones. Deep diving animals, such as beaked whales [5] and
especially sperm whales [6] who can regularly dive below 1 km depth, will have a better horizontal
detection range particularly when they vocalize downwards.

2 Bioacoustics at ANTARES

As part of the ESONET project [7] a server was installed at the ANTARES data centre to analyse the
incoming data. For detection a single channel was used, depending on which one was available. The
data was run through software developed by the LAB for bioacoustics data analysis called Listening
to the Deep Ocean Environment (LIDO [8]). LIDO takes acoustic data in segments (normally aournd
16 seconds in length) and processes these segments as a whole. It includes modules for sound
level measurements, acoustic event detection and classification, localization, spectrogram creation,
acoustic data compression and other functions.

The LIDO software uses two broad acoustic categories. First are impulsive signals which are
broadband in frequency and well defined in time [9]. Examples of impulsive sounds are biosonar,
noise from shipping, echo sounders, etc. The second type of signals are named short tonal [10]. These
signals are well defined in frequency and can have a duration from half a second to half a minute
or longer. They may be frequency modulated. A signal that remains constant over the duration of
an entire segment (e.g. power line interference) is removed by the detector (hence "short tonal").
Examples of these events are dolphin whistles, whale calls, fish, and e.g. some ships produce tonal
sounds. Many baleen whales produce low frequency sweeps that depending on the time-frequency
resolution used for the analysis can be detected by both impulsive and tonal detectors. However, at
ANTARES baleen whales cannot be detected due to the hardware configuration where low frequency
sound is filtered.

Normally, multiple versions of these detectors are used to operate in specific frequency bands. In
some cases, the detector can be specific enough to primarily pick up events from a particular source.
When a detector is not sufficient to identify a source, classifiers are used. The main classifier used in
LIDO is a Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM [11]). A separate GMM is fit on the feature space of each
competing class, with features composed from the time-frequency domains. When a new acoustic
event is detected it is passed through each GMM model, and the model with the highest likelihood
decides the class. Under this approach a single event can have a high likelihood for multiple models.
In that case the software might not take an immediate decision on the class, indicating that one of the
high scoring classes may be present. Over time it is likely that the real class will maintain high scores
while the other false classes will score lower. Alternatively, all models may have a low score on a
new event. When this happens frequently in a short time period these events are flagged and recorded
for manual analysis. They can be used to retrain a class or to introduce a new class. At ANTARES
classifiers are used for impulsive signals to distinguish between sperm whale and dolphin biosonar,
and shipping impulses.

After classification spectrograms and compressed audio streams are created for real-time play-
back in the software interface. Especially the spectrograms are useful for post-analysis and obtaining

    
 

 
DOI: 10.1051/,  (2017) 7135epjconf/201135EPJ Web of Conferences

ARENA 2016

0 06008 6008

2



(a)

(b)

Figure1: The top image (a) shows typical dolphin whistles and between 8 and 12 seconds a modulated
sound slightly above 20 kHz that is not from a dolphin. The bottom image (b) shows a sonar signal.

a quick overview of the quality of the automatic detection or classification. Sometime multiple spec-
trograms are created to focus on low and high frequencies separately.

2.1 Short tonal events

Short tonal events detected between 2.5 - 20 kHz at ANTARES were almost always produced by
dolphins. Occasionally other signals were encountered such as shown in Fig. (1). On the top image
Fig. (1a) there are common dolphin sounds mixed with a frequency modulated tone that continues
for a few seconds; the tone might be related to an acoustic release. On the bottom image Fig. (1b)
there is signal from what is believed to be a sonar exercise. Fig. (2) shows the short tonal detections
throughout the year and for each hour of the day. All histogram frequency axes in this report are
provided as percentages representing the percentage of the time that the activity was measured. The
monthly histogram Fig. (2a) indicates that dolphins were present all year round, with increased activity
at the end of the summer and in fall. The hourly image Fig. (2b) suggests that the dolphins were mostly
socially active during daylight hours. These findings are currently being studied in more detail.

2.2 Ultra sonic cetacean clicks

Ultra sonic cetacean clicks (UCC) are defined as impulses detected between 20 - 46 kHz and classified
as UCC. Signals at these frequencies are produced mostly by dolphins and beaked whales. Sperm
whale sonar and occasionally impulsive shipping sound is detected in this range as well. For this

    
 

 
DOI: 10.1051/,  (2017) 7135epjconf/201135EPJ Web of Conferences

ARENA 2016

0 06008 6008

3



(a) (b)

Figure 2: The histogram on the left (a) shows short tonal activity for each month during 2014 with
peak detections at the end of the summer. The histogram on the right (b) shows the short tonal activity
for each hour of the day with a higher intensity during daylight hours

reason separate classifiers for these classes were defined. Fig. (3a) shows an example of dolphin
biosonar, with impulses around 60 kHz while there is another anthropogenic sonar in the image just
below 20 kHz. The histogram Fig. (4a) shows the output of the dolphin classifier for each hour during
the day. In comparison with the short tonals in Fig. (2b) it is interesting that they peak at different
hours, which can be related to the function of the two different signals: biosonar for feeding and
whistles for social behaviour.

2.3 Sperm whale clicks

Sperm whale presence was evaluated using a classifier as their biosonar signal often overlaps in fre-
quency with shipping generated impulsive noise. An example of a click train from a single animal
is shown in the spectrogram in Fig. (3b). The impulses have energy up to 40 kHz, but this changes
depending on the orientation between the animal and the hydrophone. Surface recordings often record
off-axis clicks which have less energy at high frequencies [12]. The histogram Fig. (4b) shows the
hourly output of the classifier during 2014 indicating more activity during the day. It may be that the
whales forage elsewhere during the night. The presence of sperm whales at ANTARES is studied in
more detail in a forthcoming paper.

2.4 Shipping activity

The contribution of shipping noise at ANTARES was not found to be very high, except that twice
a day a ferry to north Africa would pass by completely saturating the hydrophone acquisition. Due
to overlap of other impulsive signals in the shipping band a shipping impulse classifier was trained.
Fig. (3c) shows an example of shipping noise. It is clear that low frequency biological sounds are
quickly lost in the broadband shipping noise. Higher frequency dolphin biosonar could still be de-
tected in this example. The histogram Fig. (4c) shows the output of the shipping classifier with two
peaks in the morning and evening when the ferry passes the platform. Otherwise, most shipping
occurred during the day, but for a small percentage of the time.

    
 

 
DOI: 10.1051/,  (2017) 7135epjconf/201135EPJ Web of Conferences

ARENA 2016

0 06008 6008

4



(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 3: The top spectrogram (a) is an example of typical high frequency dolphin sonar, visible as
the rapid impulses around 60 kHz. There is an unknown sonar signal visible around 20 kHz. The
middle spectrogram (b) shows an example of sperm whale biosonar clicks, with slow pulses up to 40
kHz. The bottom spectrogram (c) shows an example of a ship passing nearby, with both very strong
broadband noise and impulsive noise.

    
 

 
DOI: 10.1051/,  (2017) 7135epjconf/201135EPJ Web of Conferences

ARENA 2016

0 06008 6008

5



(a) (b) (c)

Figure 4: All histograms show classifier output for each hour of the day during 2014. From left to
right the classifiers are: high frequency biosonar (a), sperm whale (b), and shipping (c). Biosonar
was especially detected during night, while sperm whales appear to be predominately active during
the day. Shipping was mostly present during the day, with a ferry passing by each evening and early
morning.

3 Discussion

While this paper presented an overview of data analysis of only one year, the strength of platforms
such as ANTARES is that data is available during the entire year for many years. This allows
establishing baseline levels of cetacean and anthropogenic activities and estimating the common
background noise level. Over time, these baseline levels can be tracked and deviations noted. There is
especially interest in the increase of background noise levels due to shipping and establishing such a
relationship requires many years of data. Even though the position of the hydrophones at ANTARES
is not ideal for measuring surface based sources, these deep water platforms can still provide a
large amount of unique data. In that sense, it would be advantageous to take into account design
requirements of other fields when deploying new monitoring platforms (e.g. KM3). For example, for
acoustics it would be preferred not to use hardware high-pass filters and to store or transfer the raw
data. This would allow evaluation of the Marine Strategy Framework Directive [13] acoustic criteria.

The results shown here were based on a combination of detectors and classifiers and are considered
to be preliminary. In order to verify the monthly or daily patterns such as shown for dolphins between
foraging and social behaviour or for sperm whales in their foraging behaviour, a better evaluation
of the reliability of the classifiers has to be made. This to ensure that e.g. masking by shipping
traffic or anthropogenic impulses misclassified as biosonar are not the reason for reduced or increased
detections respectively during a certain time period. This requires manual analysis of the data and
analysis results which is currently being done. A more fine-tuned result is expected to be published in
2017.

Acknowledgement

The main author (MvdS) wishes to thank the organisers of the ARENA 2016 workshop for the in-
vitation to give this presentation. He also wishes to thank his ANTARES colleagues for the fruitful
interdisciplinary collaboration.

    
 

 
DOI: 10.1051/,  (2017) 7135epjconf/201135EPJ Web of Conferences

ARENA 2016

0 06008 6008

6



References

[1] J. Aguilar, ANTARES Collaboration, Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research A
570, 107 (2007)

[2] J. Aguilar, ANTARES Collaboration, Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research A
626, 128 (2011)

[3] M. Heesemann, T. Insua, M. Scherwath, S. Juniper, K. Moran, Oceanography 27, 151 (2014)
[4] S. Salon, A. Crise, P. Picco, E. de Marinis, O. Gasparini, Annales Geophysicae 21, 833 (2003)
[5] P. Tyack, M. Johnson, N. Aguilar Soto, A. Sturlese, P. Madsen, The Journal of Experimental

Biology 209, 4238 (2006)
[6] S. Watwood, P. Miller, M. Johnson, P. Madsen, P. Tyack, Journal of Animal Ecology 75, 814

(2006)
[7] R. Person, L. Beranzoli, C. Berndt, J. Danobitia, M. Diepenbroecke, P. Favali, M. Gillooly,

V. Lykousis, J. Miranda, J. Mienert et al., ESONET: An European Sea Observatory Initiative
(OCEANS 2008 - MTS/IEEE Kobe Techno-Ocean, 2008), pp. 1–6

[8] M. André, M. van der Schaar, S. Zaugg, L. Houégnigan, A. Sánchez, J. Castell, Journal of the
Marine Biological Association 87, 59 (2007)

[9] S. Zaugg, M. van der Schaar, L. Houégnigan, C. Gervaise, A. Sánchez, M. André, Applied
Acoustics 71, 1011 (2010)

[10] S. Zaugg, M. van der Schaar, L. Houégnigan, M. André, Applied Acoustics 73, 281 (2012)
[11] C. Bishop, Neural Networks for Pattern Recognition (Oxford university press, 1995)
[12] B. Møhl, M. Wahlberg, P. Madsen, A. Heerfordt, A. Lund, Journal of the Acoustical Society of

America 114, 1143 (2003)
[13] European parliament and the council of the European Union, Official Journal of the European

Union L164, 19 (2008)

    
 

 
DOI: 10.1051/,  (2017) 7135epjconf/201135EPJ Web of Conferences

ARENA 2016

0 06008 6008

7


	Introduction
	Bioacoustics at ANTARES
	Short tonal events
	Ultra sonic cetacean clicks
	Sperm whale clicks
	Shipping activity

	Discussion
	Acknowledgement



