







































S0025315414001118jrv 1..24


The nose of the sperm whale: overviews of
functional design, structural homologies and
evolution

stefan huggenberger
1,2

, michel andre’
3

and helmut h. a. oelschla¤ger
4

1Biocentre, University of Cologne, 50923 Cologne, Germany, 2Department of Anatomy II, University of Cologne, 50924 Cologne,
Germany, 3Laboratori d’Aplicacions Bioacústiques, Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya, Centre Tecnològic de Vilanova i la Geltrú,
Avenida.Rambla Exposició, s/n, 08800 Vilanova i la Geltrú, Barcelona, Spain, 4Department of Anatomy III (Dr Senckenbergische
Anatomie), Johann Wolfgang Goethe University of Frankfurt am Main, 60590 Frankfurt am Main, Germany

The hypertrophic and much elongated epicranial (nasal) complex of sperm whales (Physeter macrocephalus) is a unique
device to increase directionality and source levels of echolocation clicks in aquatic environments. The size and shape of
the nasal fat bodies as well as the peculiar organization of the air sac system in the nasal sound generator of sperm
whales are in favour of this proposed specialized acoustic function. The morphology of the sperm whale nose, including a
‘connecting acoustic window’ in the case and an anterior ‘terminal acoustic window’ at the rostroventral edge of the junk,
supports the ‘bent horn hypothesis’ of sound emission. In contrast to the laryngeal mechanism described for dolphins and
porpoises, sperm whales may drive the initial pulse generation process with air pressurized by nasal muscles associated
with the right nasal passage (right nasal passage muscle, maxillonasolabialis muscle). This can be interpreted as an adapta-
tion to deep-diving and high hydrostatic pressures constraining pneumatic phonation. Comparison of nasal structures in
sperm whales and other toothed whales reveals that the existing air sac system as well as the fat bodies and the musculature
have the same topographical relations and thus may be homologous in all toothed whales (Odontoceti). This implies that the
nasal sound generating system evolved only once during toothed whale evolution and, more specifically, that the unique
hypertrophied nasal complex was a main driving force in the evolution of the sperm whale taxon.

Keywords: Cetacea, epicranial complex, coda

Submitted 10 April 2014; accepted 6 July 2014

I N T R O D U C T I O N

Toothed whales (Odontoceti) are unique in the morphology of
their forehead (nasal complex), which houses a set of struc-
tures, mostly unknown in other mammals, building an epicra-
nial complex. These structures are usually centred around the
blowhole which moved from a subterminal position at the
tip of the nose in ancient whales (Archeoceti) to the vertex
of the head. After respiration, the second important function
of the nasal complex in toothed whales is the generation and
transmission of echolocation clicks and communication
sounds (Norris & Harvey, 1974; Cranford et al., 2000;
Cranford & Amundin, 2004; Au et al., 2006; Madsen et al.,
2010). For sound generation, toothed whales have specific
valves (monkey lips ¼ phonic lips) associated with small fat
bodies (dorsal bursae ¼ bursae cantantes), which can vibrate
in the air current and generate sound waves in adjacent
tissues (Cranford, 1988; Cranford et al., 1996; Dubrovsky
et al., 2004; Huggenberger et al., 2009). These sounds (i.e.
echolocation clicks and short tonal sounds) are transmitted
to another, much larger acoustic fat body (melon), which

focuses the sound beam prior to emission into the surround-
ing water (Norris & Harvey, 1974; Au et al., 2006). As there
are two respiratory nares (nasal passages) serving the blow-
hole area, each equipped with a set of air sacs and bursae can-
tantes, both sides, in principle, are independent from each
other and, in many toothed whales, have specialized in differ-
ent ways concerning functional properties and directional
asymmetry (Cranford et al., 1996, 2000; Madsen et al., 2010).

Some of the most asymmetric and specialized foreheads are
found in members of the superfamily Physeteroidea (Heyning
& Mead, 1990), which includes three extant species: the sperm
whale (Physeter macrocephalus, Linnaeus, 1758) as well as the
smaller dwarf sperm whale (Kogia sima, Blainville, 1838) and
pygmy sperm whale (Kogia breviceps, Owen, 1866) (Rice,
1998). Male sperm whales may attain a total body length of
nearly 20 m but females usually reach only half that size.
Thus, sexual dimorphism is more pronounced here than in
other toothed whales (Berzin, 1972; Cranford, 1999). The
sperm whale head, similar to the bow of a submarine in
shape, is extremely large in both absolute and relative terms.
In the adult male, it may reach nearly one third of the total
body length and its weight may equal more than one third
of the total body weight (Nishiwaki et al., 1963).
Hypertrophy of the nasal complex on the right side as well
as the concomitant secondary forward projection of the blow-
hole with the nasal tracts have led to this uniquely enlarged

Corresponding author:
S. Huggenberger
Email: st.huggenberger@uni-koeln.de

1

Journal of the Marine Biological Association of the United Kingdom, page 1 of 24. # Marine Biological Association of the United Kingdom, 2014
doi:10.1017/S0025315414001118

mailto:st.huggenberger@uni-<?h 0,14>koeln.de
mailto:st.huggenberger@uni-<?h 0,14>koeln.de


and asymmetric nose (Klima et al., 1986a, b; Cranford et al.,
1996; Cranford, 1999). Accordingly, the world’s largest nose
reduced the skull, and particularly the neurocranium, to an
insignificant small structure (Klima, 1990). This singularity
has led some authors to describe the sperm whale as ‘a nose
with an outboard motor’ (Møhl et al., 2003b).

Initial descriptions of the sperm whale nose can be found as
early as the end of the 19th century (Pouchet & Beauregard,
1885; Raven & Gregory, 1933; Schenkkan & Purves, 1973).
The most prominent structures in the nasal complex of
sperm whales are two hypertrophied fat bodies: the junk
seated on the bony rostrum of the skull and the spermaceti

organ lying on top of the junk (Figures 1 & 2). The junk con-
sists of connective tissue in which lens-like fat bodies are
embedded (Figure 1). The ‘lenses’, referred to as wafers
(Møhl, 2001), stand nearly perpendicular to the body axis of
the animal. The whole set of lenses tapers backward along
the dorsal surface of the rostrum of the skull in the direction
of the bony nostrils (Figure 1).

The spermaceti organ is fusiform in shape and enclosed in
a thick sheath of extremely tough connective tissue ‘case’
which only lacks caudally between the two fat bodies.
Between the spermaceti organ and the junk the soft and
smooth right nasal passage runs as a flattened sub-horizontal

Fig. 1. Three-dimensional reconstruction of the head of an adult sperm whale. The major components of the nasal complex are colour-coded: brown, dense
connective tissue (case, rein of case); purple, airways; beige, bony tissue (skull, lower jaw, hyoid bones); green, cartilage (rostral cartilage, septum nasi); red,
muscle tissue; yellow, fat tissue. Other tissues, i.e. loose connective tissue surrounding the fatty structures of the junk, are not shown; shade of body in grey.
(A) The right lateral view (dorsal pointing up) shows the extension of the superficial dense connective tissue (case, rein of case) and the maxillonasolabialis
muscle. (B), Same view as (A); dense connective tissue and maxillonasolabialis muscle omitted. (C), Dorsal view (rostral pointing right); maxillonasolabialis
muscle and dense connective tissue (case, rein of case) semi-transparent. The contour of the spermaceti organ demonstrates its close relationship with the
underlying right nasal passage. (D), Left lateral view (dorsal pointing up). (E), Same view as (D); maxillonasolabialis muscle omitted. (F), Same view as (D);
maxillonasolabialis muscle and dense connective tissue (case, rein of case) omitted. Note that it was not possible to include a scale into the figures because the
reconstruction was not based on measurements of a single specimen. However, it is possible to estimate the dimensions of the reconstruction because figures
A–F are in scale and measurements of nasal structures were provided by Clarke (1978b).

2 stefan huggenberger et al.



tube from the right bony nostril to the distal sac at the tip of
the nose (Figures 1–4). The entrance of the right nasal passage
into the distal sac is equipped with a pair of thick horizontal
lips (museau de singe, monkey lips) consisting of extremely
dense connective tissue confluent with the rostral part of the
case (Figures 1, 4 & 5). On the left, the distal sac is connected
with the nasal vestibulum beneath the blowhole (Figure 1). At
the caudal end of the spermaceti organ, where the skull forms
a steep transverse wall behind the facial depression reminis-
cent of an amphitheatre (Figures 1 & 6) (Norris & Harvey,
1972), the right nasal passage opens dorsally into another
flat sub-vertical air sac (frontal sac). Thus, the spermaceti
organ borders both rostrally and caudally on extended air
sacs. On top and on both sides, the spermaceti organ and
the case, respectively, are surrounded by a strong layer of mus-
culature (maxillonasolabialis muscle). The fibre bundles and
tendons of this muscle run longitudinally from the dorsal
edge of the amphitheatre to the connective tissue of the case
behind the monkey lips (Figures 1–5).

The left nasal passage is very different from the right one in
both shape and course. In contrast to the right nasal passage
the left nasal passage runs rather superficially (Figures 1–3
& 5A) and is more prominent. The left nasal passage runs
from the left bony naris to the vestibulum beneath the blow-
hole. Thus both nasal passages are interconnected with each
other via the vestibulum and distal sac (Figures 1, 2 & 5A).

The anatomy of the ‘biggest nose on record’ (Raven &
Gregory, 1933) has received a great deal of attention over

time and thus various hypotheses regarding the function
of this enlarged ‘organ’ came on file. Most suggestions as to
the functional implications of the nasal complex fall into
two broad categories: buoyancy regulation and sound gener-
ation. In the 1970s Clarke (1970, 1978a) expanded an earlier
notion of Raven & Gregory (1933) that the sperm whale
might be able to control its buoyancy by alternately heating
and cooling the large lipid structures within the nose. On
the other hand, Norris & Harvey (1972) proposed a primarily
acoustic function for the sperm whale nose. This idea
prompted Norris & Møhl (1983) to suggest the possibility of
acoustic debilitation of prey by means of the toothed whale
nasal apparatus, a function that may have reached its zenith
in the sperm whale. Recent examinations interpret this enor-
mous nasal apparatus of sperm whales as a bio-acoustic
machine capable of generating extremely loud click sounds
by a pneumatic mechanism at the monkey lips (Cranford
et al., 1996; Cranford, 1999; Møhl, 2001; Madsen et al.,
2002a, 2003; Møhl et al., 2003a, b). Accordingly, the function-
al implications of this hypertrophied nose are not only respir-
ation (adult toothed whales are anosmic) (Buhl & Oelschläger,
1986; Kishida et al., 2007) but also the generation of the
loudest sounds in the animal kingdom with source levels of
up to 236 dB re 1 mPa (Møhl et al., 2000, 2003a; Zimmer
et al., 2005b). Because large sound generation apparatuses
can generate highly directional sound beams sperm whales
have, additionally, longer detection ranges than small odonto-
cetes (Madsen & Surlykke, 2013).

Fig. 2. (A), Frontal view of the reconstructed sperm whale head with the topography of the terminal acoustic window of the junk (see main text) and the distal sac;
dense connective tissue (case, rein of case) and maxillonasolabialis muscle are semi-transparent. (B), Coronal section (dorsal pointing up) of the reconstructed
sperm whale head. In the area of the connecting acoustic window (CAW; see main text) the spermaceti organ and junk are separated from each other by the
oblique right nasal passage and the fatty right nasal passage muscle. The section level approximates Figure 3, for colour code see Figure 1.

the nose of the sperm whale 3



Sperm whales use different types of sounds to maintain
their complex social relationships, to navigate and to locate
prey. Accordingly, it has been suggested that highly direction-
al clicks are involved in echolocation (Møhl et al., 2000; Jaquet
et al., 2001; Teloni et al., 2005; Watwood et al., 2006; André
et al., 2007) whereas stereotyped patterns of clicks, termed
codas, are assumed to be less directional and may serve com-
munication and social interaction (Watkins & Schevill, 1977;
Weilgart & Whitehead, 1993; Møhl et al., 2000, 2003b;
Madsen et al., 2002a; Marcoux et al., 2006; Watwood et al.,
2006; Schulz et al., 2008). These click sounds of sperm
whales typically consist of trains of rhythmically spaced,
decaying pulses with centroid frequencies of 15 kHz (Møhl,
2001; Møhl et al., 2003b). Further types of sperm whale voca-
lizations are listed in Table 1.

C O N S T R U C T I O N O F A 3 D S P E R M
W H A L E H E A D M O D E L

To demonstrate and interpret the complex three-dimensional
anatomy of the sperm whale head and particularly of the dom-
inating and asymmetric nasal complex we constructed a
computer-based polygon model. For the construction of this
model information from the literature was mainly based on
in-depth examinations of two male young postnatal animals
(calves), which were scaled up to the adult size (see below).

The head of Calf 1 (3.41 m total body length), which died in
a temporary rehabilitation facility, was formalin-fixed. Further
details of this specimen are published elsewhere (Ridgway &

Carder, 2001; Huggenberger et al., 2006). After the removal
of the superficial layers (skin, hypodermal layers and superficial
muscles), this head was scanned using computer-assisted tom-
ography (CT, slice thickness 0.9 cm, 6 dpi) and magnetic reson-
ance imaging (T1 and T2 weighted MRI, slice thickness 1.1 cm,
13 dpi; Siemens Somatom and Siemens Magnetom scanners).
The specimen was then cryo-sectioned into 13 coronal slices
of approximately 5 cm thickness using a commercial
band-saw and photographed. The remaining front and rear
parts of the head including the monkey lips rostrally and the
caudal end of the nasal complex was MRI scanned again
(slice thickness 0.4 cm, 26 dpi) (Huggenberger et al., 2006)
and dissected macroscopically.

The head of Calf 2 (4.25 m total body length) was studied
by means of a complete CT data set available as a commercial
screen saver developed by Ted W. Cranford (2013). Further
details of the scanning procedure used for this specimen are
published elsewhere (Cranford, 1999). After documentation
of the scans, this specimen was carefully dissected at the
Southwest Fisheries Science Center (National Marine
Fisheries Service, San Diego, CA, USA). In this way, it was
possible to control the results gained from the CT scans and
to identify a series of structures not sufficiently characterized
by computer tomography due to low differences in signal
strength or resolution limits.

The data of Calf 1 and Calf 2 were verified by a series of
photos of 10 coronal cryo-sections of approximately 7.8 cm
thickness of a third calf (4.21 m total body length NSMT
M34233) kindly provided by T. Yamada (National Museum
of Nature and Science, Tokyo, Japan).

Fig. 3. Coronal section (dorsal pointing up) of a newborn sperm whale head through the area of the connecting acoustic window. The section levels approximate
each other (cf. Figure 4A). CT scan (A) and cryo-section (B) of Calf 1; the superficial layers of the nasal complex (blubber fat as well as dorsal and left portions of
maxillonasolabialis muscle) were removed prior to scanning to fit the head into the CT system; the original head contour was graphically reconstructed using the
colour code of Figure 1. The right nasal passage is artificially widened due to tissue shrinkage by formalin fixation.

4 stefan huggenberger et al.



Additionally, the nasal complexes of two young sperm
whale bulls (14.6 and 14.8 m total body length), stranded in
2002 in the Wadden Sea of the German Bight, were dissected
superficially (monkey lips, distal and frontal sac regions,
spermaceti organ). Further details for these specimens are
published elsewhere (Huggenberger, 2004).

The anatomical data acquired were used to develop a three-
dimensional (3D) reconstruction of the adult sperm whale
nose using 3ds max 2010 (Autodesk GmbH, Munich,
Germany) in the following steps.

A prototype version of the model was created by Anthro
Media (Berlin, Germany) and broadcast in a TV documentary

Fig. 4. Position and structure of the monkey lips in the sperm whale nasal complex. (A), Left lateral dissection of a sperm whale head (Calf 1, dorsal points up). The
maxillonasolabialis muscle is removed and the distal sac is opened to show the monkey lips. The junk is dissected para-sagittally (cf. Figure 3). The left nasal
passage is opened and its muscle is removed (cf. Figure 3). Note that the black epithelium of the left nasal tract is detached. The arrow approximates the
planes of the scan and the cryo-section in Figure 3. (B), Right lateral view of the sperm whale monkey lips (Calf 1, rostral faces right, dorsal points up). The
dorsal lip is removed up to its mid-sagittal plane so that the connection of spermaceti fat and connective tissue is visible. Grey arrow indicates the tongue of
the groove and tongue complex of the lips. Note that the whitish band parallel to the groove and tongue folds is darkened due to the fixation of the specimen.
(C), Schematic line drawing of the plicae on the inner surfaces of the distal right nasal passage and the monkey lips of Calf 1 (left: dorsal surface [upper
monkey lip] in ventral view; right: ventral surface [lower monkey lip] in dorsal view; rostral facing up). Approximately one third of the total number of plicae
is shown. The photo inset presents the actual surface of the ventral monkey lip of an adult sperm whale (photo width represents 5 cm) projected on the same
relative position and size in the drawing showing the whitish band of the groove and tongue complex. Note that young postnatal and adult sperm whales
show the same pattern and about the same number of plicae on the monkey lips.

the nose of the sperm whale 5



(Anthro Media, 2008). Starting with this prototype we added
further information and structures to the 3D model step by
step by using 2D pixel graphics as templates which were tem-
porarily positioned within the 3D model. The shapes of
internal structures were modelled by hand using 3ds max
and aligned to these templates. The templates were (1st)
MRI figures and photos of cryo-sections of Calf 1 in transverse
planes and mid-sagittal plane (MRI) and (2nd) hand-made
segmentations of single sections of the CT data set (screen
saver) in horizontal, transverse and sagittal planes of Calf 2.
These latter segmentations were drawn on overhead transpar-
encies fixed on the computer screen and scanned to grey-scale
2D pixel graphics afterwards.

Thereafter, allometric changes from the calf to the adult
were considered on the basis of photos of an adult female

skull in lateral and dorsal view (Figure 6) and measurements
of the adult male skull stored in the British Natural History
Museum in London (UK; skull length approximately
500 cm). These measurements were plotted as a series of 2D
plots and used as additional templates in 3ds max.
Moreover, we used figures and descriptions of the anatomy
of adult sperm whales in numerous publications (Flower,
1867; van Beneden & Gervais, 1868; Clarke, 1970, 1978b;
Behrmann & Klima, 1985; Klima et al., 1986a, b; Gambell,
1995; Cranford, 1999; Klima, 1999, 1990; Huggenberger,
2004; Huggenberger et al., 2006; Nakamura et al., 2013) to
adjust allometric changes by hand. As the last step we adjusted
the shape of the whole nasal complex including internal struc-
tures (except the skull and bordering surfaces) to the external
shape of sperm whale heads using lateral and dorsal

Fig. 5. (A), Left lateral view (dorsal pointing up) of the reconstructed sperm whale head; dense connective tissue (case, rein of case) and maxillonasolabialis muscle
semi-transparent. (B), Sagittal view of the reconstructed sperm whale head (dorsal pointing up, tip of nose facing left). The green line represents the proposed
acute-angled main acoustic pathway throughout the bent acoustic horn (Møhl, 2001) and their (preceding) reverberation within the spermaceti organ (theory
of Norris & Harvey (1972); see main text). On its presumed path, the sound waves travel through the connecting acoustic window (CAW) into the junk and
are released via the terminal acoustic window (TAW) into the water (bent acoustic horn hypothesis (Møhl, 2001); see main text).

6 stefan huggenberger et al.



underwater photos and figures from textbooks as templates
(Martin, 1991; Ellis, 1996; Steffen & Steffen, 2003).

Whereas there seems to be good correspondence between
all postnatal animals as to the morphology and topography
of the nasal structures, there are some points of uncertainty
regarding the anatomy of the adult in comparison to that of
the calves: it is not known how many lens-like fat bodies
exist in the junk of adult sperm whales and whether they are
connected with each other rostroventrally as is the case in
calves. According to the schematic sagittal section in Clarke
(1978b) the number of lenses in the adult animal is similar
to that in calves but a ventral connection between the rostral
lenses was not described in adults. Moreover, we do not
know the exact shape of the adult spermaceti organ and the
exact topographical relations of the nasal components to
each other because it is not possible to apply three-dimensional
imaging methods, such as CT and MRI, to adult sperm whales
due to their size. In order to get a maximum of information
into our three-dimensional reconstruction of an adult sperm
whale head, we extrapolated these reconstructions of our

young sperm whale calves to the dimension and external
form of adult sperm whale heads. In the case of details such
as the number, shape and connections between lenses as well
as the shape and size of the spermaceti organ, the data of the
calves supplied by CT scanning are probably more correct
than macroscopic dissections of the large adults, which are
extremely difficult to handle.

T O P O G R A P H I C A L A N A T O M Y

Skull
Within the toothed whale group, the skull of the sperm
whale is unique in its size and shape (Figures 1, 5 & 6). It
consists of slender jaws and a compact brain case. The
anterior part of the upper skull is represented by the flat
and elongate rostrum (vomer and rostral cartilage, upper
jaw elements), which tapers like a wedge at its anterior
end (Figures 1C & 6). Caudally, the skull extends into a

Fig. 6. (A), Dorsal view of the skull in the adult female sperm whale (rostral pointing right; skull length 330 cm; specimen no. 253051) shows its main components,
the long rostrum (right two-thirds) and the amphitheatre (left third). The scheme below shows the borders of the individual structures. Inset approximates the
borders of close-up (B), which was, however, taken from a sub-adult sperm whale bull skull (length 150 cm; specimen no. 35315) to show the area of the bony
nares. (C), Scheme of a medial view of a mid-sagittal section of the skull of an adult male sperm whale (skull length �580 cm; specimen no. 301634). The skulls are
stored in the National Museum of Natural History, Smithsonian Institution, Washington, DC, USA.

the nose of the sperm whale 7



transverse and sub-vertical caudal crest above and behind
the brain case and just before the level of the occipital con-
dyles (Figures 1 & 5). The rounded inner surface of this
caudal crest, reminiscent of an amphitheatre (Norris &
Harvey, 1972), is formed predominantly by caudal elongations
of the broadened upper jaw elements (premaxillaries, maxil-
laries; Figure 6). The neurocranium, extending from the
rostral end of the ethmoid region to the occipital condyles, is
short with respect to the broad rostrum. Due to the dispropor-
tionate growth of the skull in adult sperm whales, the neurocra-
nium with the brain gets restricted to the caudalmost part of the
skull base (Figure 6C). Apparently, the very low position of the
brain case is due to the fact that the back of the amphitheatre
(supraoccipital crest) has become extremely high: the latter
anchors the hypertrophied nasal complex caudally and, at the
same time, acts as an attachment site for the strong superficial
muscles which run to the blowhole area and hold the hypertro-
phied nasal complex in position (maxillonasolabialis muscle,
see below).

As in other cetaceans, the bony nostrils in sperm whales
lead ventrally into short, nearly vertical bony passages and
to the inner nasal openings (bony choanae). These passages
have a smooth inner surface and lack nasal conchae. In con-
trast to other toothed whales, the two bony nasal openings
of sperm whales strongly differ in size (Figure 6; see below),
with the left naris being much wider than the right one. Due
to a general asymmetry of the facial skull in toothed whales,
the associated bony elements (premaxillary, maxillary bone)
on the right side of the naris region are wider and the area
of the bony nares is slightly twisted clockwise (dorsal
aspect) so that the small right bony nostril is situated caudal
to the level of the large left bony nostril (Figure 6).

The zygomatic arch, thin and rod-like in other toothed
whales and forming the ventral border of the orbita, is
robust in sperm whales (Figures 1 & 5A). It seems that, on
both sides, this element, which mediates between the maxil-
lary, frontal and squamosal bones, may help to stabilize the
supraoccipital crest. For the same purpose, the postorbital
process of the frontal and the squamosal bone come close to

one another and the intermittent gap is bridged by dense con-
nective tissue (secondary zygomatic arch) (Oelschläger, 1990).

Nasal passages
Unique among the toothed whales the blowhole of sperm
whales is situated rostrodorsally at the tip of the snout
(Figure 1). Accordingly, the nasal passages have been
extended into elongated tubes lined by brown or black epithe-
lium and run from the blowhole region in a ventrocaudal dir-
ection to the bony nares in the deep facial depression of the
skull (Figures 1 & 5). Additionally, in the sperm whale, the
blowhole is peculiar in its shape, i.e. it is located on the left-
hand side near the dorsal tip of the snout and S-shaped in
dorsal view (Figure 1C). It leads into a vestibule which, stand-
ing parasagittally, has two additional openings (Figure 1C, F):
the rostroventral corner is continuous with the distal sac via a
narrow channel and the caudoventral corner of the vestibule
opens into the left nasal passage. This passage runs directly
caudally below the left surface of the nose but gradually
arches ventrally along the cartilaginous nasal septum
(Klima, 1999) to the wide left bony naris (Figures 1 & 6).
Along most of its course the collapsed left nasal passage is
C-shaped in cross-section. This crescent shape is due to the
bulging of the left nasal passage muscle lateroventrally into
the lumen of this passage (Figures 2 & 3).

In contrast, the right nasal passage is broad, flattened
dorsoventrally, and runs rostrocaudally between the two
hypertrophied fat bodies (spermaceti organ and junk;
Figures 1–3 & 5). This passage opens rostrally into the
distal sac (Figures 1 & 5) which extends behind the dorsoros-
tral tip of the snout, and caudally into the frontal sac.
Interestingly, there is a striking difference between the size
(area) of the epithelial lining in the two nasal passages: the
inner surface of the right passage is more than twice as large
as that of the left passage (Figures 2 & 3). This is in strict con-
trast to the size of the associated bony nares, where the diam-
eter of the right opening is only one third to one fourth that of
the left (Figure 6). The dissection of non-fixed dead stranded

Table 1. Principal types of sperm whale clicks. Other vocalizations, e.g. chirps, gunshots, pips, squeals, squarks or yelps that have been reported from
sperm whales are considered to be a likely result of rapid sequences of clicks, the functions of which remain unclear (Goold, 1999; Madsen, 2002;
Whitehead, 2003; Weir et al., 2007). Calf grunts of low directionality and centroid frequencies around 0.5 kHz are thought to be generated at the con-
nection between the right nasal passage and the frontal sac (Madsen et al., 2003). The trumpet sounds are a likely by-product of the click generation

mechanism (Teloni et al., 2005).

Sounds Directionality
(centroid frequency)

Decay rate of
pulse’s intensity

Proposed function

Calf click Low (0.5 kHz) Single-pulsed Communication (Madsen et al., 2003)
Chirrup click 2(5 kHz) Low Communication (Madsen, 2002)
Coda click Low (5 kHz) Low Communication (Watkins & Schevill, 1977; Watkins et al., 1985;

Weilgart & Whitehead, 1993; Whitehead & Weilgart, 2000;
Madsen, 2002; Madsen et al., 2002a)

Creak click High (15 kHz) High Buzzes used for homing echolocation (Madsen, 2002; Madsen et al.,
2002b; Whitehead, 2003)

Rapid click High (–) Single-pulsed Echolocation? (Goold, 1999; Madsen et al., 2002b)
Slow click (clang) Low (3 kHz) Low ( faint multi-pulsed

structure)
Long-range communication (Weilgart & Whitehead, 1993;

Whitehead & Weilgart, 2000; Madsen et al., 2002b; Whitehead,
2003; Oliveira et al., 2013)

Usual click High (15 kHz) High Mid-range echolocation∗ (Madsen et al., 2002b; Møhl et al., 2003b;
Teloni et al., 2008)

∗The term ‘mid-range echolocation’ refers to distances of at least several hundreds of metres (André, 2009).

8 stefan huggenberger et al.



specimens showed that the left nasal passage was always par-
tially open and the right passage was collapsed, leaving two
narrow lateral channels running to the distal sac (except in
Calf 1, Figure 3A, probably due to tissue shrinkage during for-
malin fixation).

The aperture between the flattened right nasal passage and
the distal sac is equipped with a special type of outlet which
superficially resembles the lips of a monkey and accordingly
was termed ‘museau de singe’ (Figures 1 & 4) (Pouchet &
Beauregard, 1885). In the sperm whale, these monkey lips
are a thick flap valve consisting of extremely dense collagen
which frame the slit-like aperture and seem to represent an air-
tight valve because these lips are closed tightly in dead animals
(Norris & Harvey, 1972). The monkey lips are slightly inclined
to the right side so that the left angle of the ‘gape’ stands higher.
The plane of the rostral part of the right nasal passage shows
the same degree of inclination (Figures 1–3) but gradually
becomes horizontal towards the right bony naris.

Inside the aperture, the epithelium of the monkey lips is
differentiated as a groove and tongue structure paralleling
the ‘gape’ of the lips (Figure 4B). The lower lip forms the
groove and the upper lip represents the tongue component.
Whereas the monkey lips are covered with black epithelium,
the opposing surfaces of the groove and tongue structure are
whitish in fresh animals (Figure 4; in Figure 4B this band is
darkened probably due to the formalin fixation of the speci-
men). Next to the groove and tongue structure of the
monkey lips the epithelium forms tiny furrows or plicae
(Figure 4C). These plicae originate from a centre at the right
lateral margin and approximately 10–15 cm caudal to the
monkey gape and fan out over the whole width of
the monkey lips (Figure 4C). The set of plicae runs from the
centre along the right lateral channel of the right nasal
passage caudally (Figure 4C).

The frontal sac, as the second accessory nasal air space,
extends on the concave rostral slope of the amphitheatre
and covers most of its surface (Figures 1 & 5; see below).
Via a narrow extension this sac communicates with the
right nasal passage just dorsal to the right bony nostril. The
rostral wall of the frontal sac is represented by the smooth
caudal surface of the spermaceti organ. The caudal wall of
this air sac comprises a sheet of connective tissue which is
attached to the back of the amphitheatre and covered by an
epithelium equipped with small bubbles filled with serous
liquid (Norris & Harvey, 1972).

Nasal fat bodies and dense connective tissue
The sperm whale’s nose mainly consists of two big longitu-
dinal fat (wax) bodies, the ventral junk and the dorsal
spermaceti organ. As a whole, the junk is characterized by
the shape reminiscent of a blunt and stout hatchet. It rests
on the bony rostrum of the skull and has, at least in its
rostral part, a nearly symmetrical position within the
sperm whale’s head (Figures 1– 3 & 5). In its caudal third,
the junk is flanked by two thick lateral ribbons of dense con-
nective tissue (reins of case; Figures 1 & 2). Although the
junk shapes the ventral tip of the sperm whale snout, it is dis-
tinctly shorter than the spermaceti organ. It ends caudally
well before the level of the bony nares (Figures 1 & 2). In
detail, the junk represents a complex structure and consists
of loose connective tissue in which parallel lens-like fatty ele-
ments are embedded. Each lens is oriented vertically and the

whole set of lenses extends caudally between the spermaceti
organ and the bony rostrum (Figures 1, 4A & 5). Here, the
junk is separated from the fat of the spermaceti organ by
the right nasal passage and its fatty muscle (Figures 1 – 3 &
5), an important detail for functional considerations (con-
necting acoustic window; see below). Interestingly, the
rostral-most lenses are confluent ventrally to form a
rounded extension of the nose which hangs over the tip of
the bony rostrum, just before the gape of the mouth
(Figures 1 & 5). In this rostral part, the junk fat reaches
the surface of the sperm whale head and is free from the
reins of the case. Caudally, both the layers of loose connect-
ive tissue and the lenticular elements progressively become
thinner and the lenses merge into a continuous and tapering
fatty cone (Figure 1). This cone, also reminiscent of a
‘mouth-piece’, turns slightly dorsocaudally along the
bottom of the skull amphitheatre and in the direction of
the frontal air sac; it ends between the skull roof and the
caudal portion of the spermaceti organ. The whole set of
fatty elements in the junk thus resembles a cornucopia or
funnel.

Within the hypertrophied nose, the dominant structure is
the cylindrical to fusiform spermaceti organ which contributes
much to the size and shape of the sperm whale head as a
whole. This ‘organ’ spans the entire length of the nasal
complex between the monkey lips rostrally and the back of
the amphitheatre caudally (Figures 1, 4A & 5). Whereas the
apex of the spermaceti organ is located slightly to the right
of the nose it ends caudally in the centre of the amphitheatre,
just above the right bony naris (Figures 1 & 5). This fat body
rests on the junk and is enclosed in a thick sheath of connect-
ive tissue referred to as the case (Figures 1–5) (Raven &
Gregory, 1933). Rostrally, the case of the spermaceti organ is
continuous with the concave monkey lips (Figures 1, 4 & 5).
According to the CT data sets available, the connective
tissue of the case in our larger sperm whale head (Calf 2)
attains its maximal density in the monkey lips. The taut case
consists of a tough criss-cross network of collagenous fibres,
and it keeps the soft fat tissue in shape. The case opens ven-
trally and to the left so that the junk and the spermaceti
organ are only separated by the right nasal passage and its
fatty muscle (Figures 1–3 & 5). The blunt caudal end of the
spermaceti organ, being slightly oval in cross-section, rests
with its flat and smooth surface on the sub-vertical back of
the amphitheatre with its bubble-containing epithelium. The
smooth surface of the spermaceti organ in this area and the
irregular surface of the epithelium on the amphitheatre consti-
tute the frontal air sac.

On both sides, the epicranial complex with its fat bodies is
surrounded by oblique ribbons of superficial subdermal dense
connective tissue which we refer to as reins of the case and
which encompass and suspend the soft tissues of the nose
from the rear part of the skull (Figures 1–3). In the dorsoros-
tral region of the nose (blowhole and monkey lip area), the
rein passes into the case, with the distal sac being interposed
between the two collagenous structures (reins of case,
monkey lips; Figures 1–3 & 5). Obviously, this complex of
dense connective tissue at the dorsorostral tip of the sperm
whale nose serves as an attachment site for the tendons of
the maxillonasolabialis muscle (Figure 1; see below). In our
three-dimensional reconstruction of an adult sperm whale
head all this collagen (reins, tendons, case) forms a thick
dorsal and lateral sheath around the rostral half of the

the nose of the sperm whale 9



spermaceti organ (Figures 1 & 5). In contrast, the rostroven-
tral region of the epicranial complex is free from the reins
(Figures 1 & 5) so the junk is largely subcutaneous here.

Nasal cartilages
In the sperm whale forehead, there is a fork-like cartilaginous
structure (Y-shaped in lateral view). The short base of this fork
originates from the edge of the mesethmoid bone between the
bony nares (Figures 1–3 & 6). The small plate of the meseth-
moid bone and the base of the fork are inclined to the left side
of the head and partially cover the wider left bony naris
(Figure 6). The ventral prong of this fork, the rostral cartilage
(syn. mesorostral cartilage, cartilaginous rostrum, rostrum
nasi) (Klima, 1990, 1999), is rod-like and extends along the
longitudinal groove of the vomer (mesorostral canal)
between the premaxillary bones as far as the tip of the
rostrum (Figures 1–3 & 6). This rostral cartilage develops
from the embryonic septum nasi (Klima, 1999).

The dorsal prong of the cartilaginous fork, referred to as
nasal roof cartilage and formed by the embryonic tectum
nasi and septum nasi, is a thin and slender perpendicular
blade which follows the medial wall of the left nasal passage
on its way to the blowhole (Figures 1–3 & 6) (Klima, 1999).
Thus, the cartilage describes part of a spiral as it first moves
to the left and dorsally along the concave skull roof, then
bends dorsorostrally and runs between the left nasal passage
and the case of the spermaceti organ. In its initial (ventrocau-
dal) segment the cartilage appears irregular in shape and
wavelike (Huggenberger et al., 2006). These ‘waves’ were not
reconstructed in our three-dimensional model of an adult
sperm whale head. However, the nasal roof cartilage was
reconstructed to approximate the dimensions found in the lit-
erature: in the full-grown sperm whale, this cartilage (Klima,
1999) is several metres long, about 32–45 cm high (dorsoven-
tral extension) and 18–35 mm thick (Behrmann & Klima,
1985). In the direction of the blowhole the nasal roof cartilage
tapers markedly and, in the adult whale, dissolves and comes
close to an ovoid arrangement of about a dozen isolated pieces
of cartilage, so-called nostril cartilages, that underlie the
sigmoid blowhole (diameter of ovoid arrangement about
80 cm in a whale of 18 m length) (Behrmann & Klima,
1985; Klima, 1990). In the sperm whale calves, no such
arrangement of cartilaginous elements around the blowhole
was found and was not reconstructed in our three-
dimensional model of an adult sperm whale head.

Nasal musculature
The large maxillonasolabialis muscle of the sperm whale runs
straight from the lateral and caudal margins of the amphi-
theatre in the rear part of the skull to the blowhole region
(Figure 1). The prominent dorsal part originates from dense
connective tissue at the vertex of skull and ensheaths the
spermaceti organ dorsally and laterally. Halfway to the blow-
hole this dorsal muscle transforms into a layer of numerous
strong tendons (Figure 4E), which pass into the extremely
dense tissue at the upper monkey lip and case, respectively,
surrounding the spermaceti complex. According to the fibre
orientation, the contraction of this longitudinal part of the
dorsal maxillonasolabialis muscle should pull the blowhole
area and the spermaceti organ caudalward and slightly
upward. Two additional portions of this muscle originate on

both sides of the skull along the lateral margins of the amphi-
theatre between the antorbital notch and the infraorbital
foramen (Figures 1 & 6). From here, they run obliquely to
the sides of the monkey lips where they attach. A slight asym-
metry is obvious: the oblique muscle on the right side is wider
in cross-section than its counterpart on the left-hand side and
reaches further ventrally (Figures 1–3). Together, the dorsal
and lateral parts of the maxillonasolabialis muscle resemble
an asymmetric ‘inverse half-pipe’ surrounding the case
superficially.

Two other skeletal muscles accompany one nasal passage
each. The left nasal passage muscle (Figures 1–3) extends
from the left bony naris rostrally to the vestibulum below the
blowhole. On its way it shows a constant topographical rela-
tionship to the left nasal passage and the nasal roof cartilage,
with the air passage in a more dorsal position, the cartilage
medial to it and the muscle immediately left and more
ventral to the passage (Figures 1–3 & 7). In our sperm whale
calves, the left muscle bulges into the left nasal passage; its
fibre bundles are relatively short, run perpendicular to the
lateral wall of the passage ventrally and attach to the connective
tissue of the junk. As tested by parallel pull of the muscle fibres,
the muscle should be able to open the left nasal passage. In the
caudal part, where the left nasal passage turns ventrally, the left
nasal passage muscle is thick and club-shaped and occupies the
space between the spermaceti organ and the left wall of the
amphitheatre. Concluding from the orientation of its fibres in
a more rostrocaudal direction, this strong part of the muscle
can pull the rostral wall of the left nasal passage rostrally in
order to open the entrance into the left bony nasal canal.

The right nasal passage muscle (Figures 1–3) is flat, nearly
band-shaped and rich in fat. It starts from the right bony naris,
runs below the right nasal passage, and ends caudal to the
lower monkey lip. The texture of the fibre bundles in the
right nasal passage muscle is diffuse which makes the defin-
ition of its ventral and lateral margins in the scans and in
the three-dimensional reconstruction of an adult sperm
whale head difficult. Most fibres run rostroventrally and
thus should be able to open the right nasal passage on
contraction.

F U N C T I O N A L I N T E R P R E T A T I O N O F
T H E N A S A L C O M P L E X

In the sperm whale head, the skull is relatively small and only
comprises about 11% of total head mass (i.e. 2.2 tons of as
much as 20 tons; example: adult male of 18 m length and
57 tons total body mass) (Behrmann & Klima, 1985). The
remaining 89% of the head is represented mostly by soft
tissue of the nasal complex and its accessory structures, par-
ticularly the extremely large fat bodies (junk, spermaceti
organ). Thus the skull ‘is degraded to a marginal structure’
(Klima, 1990), which can only incompletely seat this excep-
tionally large epicranial complex. An important accessory sus-
pension seems to be granted by the reins of the case consisting
of dense collagen which also serve as attachment sites for the
longitudinal and oblique (maxillonasolabialis) muscles. On
both sides the reins originate around the zygomatic arch,
which is rather thick and strong in the sperm whale in com-
parison with the situation in other toothed whales, leaving
an ‘orbita’ free of connective tissue (Figure 1). Accordingly,
on both sides of the head, the zygomatic arch is part of an

10 stefan huggenberger et al.



attachment site for subdermal tough connective tissue of the
reins of the case which suspend the rostral part of the nose
from the lateral margins of the amphitheatre (Figures 1 & 5A).

Respiration
As mentioned above, the two nasal passages in the sperm
whale are disparate in shape and topography and obviously
specialized for different functional requirements (Norris &
Harvey, 1972; Huggenberger et al., 2006). This is already
obvious in the general appearance of the two canals.
Whereas the left nasal passage has about the same diameter
along its whole course including the left bony nostril, the
right nasal passage is characterized by marked changes in
shape and width. Thus, the right passage, situated between
(a) the right bony nostril and the monkey lips and (b)
between the two large fat bodies, appears more like a
bellows that serves as a reservoir for air. More specifically,
the considerable size difference in the aperture of the two
external bony nasal openings in the skull of the sperm
whale can be correlated with differences in the presumed
function of the associated nasal passage: The wide left bony
naris is a simple continuation of the left nasal passage
running directly to the blowhole, and it is responsible for
quick and efficient breathing during surfacing
(Huggenberger et al., 2006). In contrast, the narrow right
bony naris leads to the monkey lips via the enlarged right
nasal passage which has two additional extensions (frontal
and distal sac) and seems to be involved in phonation
(Norris & Harvey, 1972; Møhl, 2001). In other words,
whereas the left nasal passage may serve the quick exchange
of large quantities of air under high pressure, the right
passage may deal with relatively small quantities of air (as indi-
cated by the small diameter of the right bony naris) during
phonation both at the surface and during diving, when water
pressure shrinks air spaces to tiny volumes. Due to this func-
tional separation, sound generation of a sperm whale could
be observed during respiration (Wahlberg et al., 2005).

From the topographical situation in sperm whale calves it
appears that the slender, flat and thus blade-like nasal roof
cartilage, which runs along the left nasal passage medially,
probably stabilizes the left passage against the pull of the left
nasal passage muscle which opens it (Klima, 1990, 1999).
This may prevent the passage from collapse during negative
pressure events of inhalation. The massive presence of
elastic fibres within the hyaline cartilaginous tissue of the
dorsal roof cartilage was interpreted as a possible adaptation
to repetitive deformation of this structure during such
events of high pressure gradients (Huggenberger et al., 2006).

Sound generation and emission
Pouchet & Beauregard (1885) first described the enigmatic
‘museau de singe’ within the sperm whale nose. As stated
above, this bipartite valve is believed to be the initial site of
sound generation (Cranford et al., 1996; Cranford, 1999;
Møhl, 2001; Ridgway & Carder, 2001; Møhl et al., 2003a).
The initial pulse of a sperm whale click is thought to be pro-
duced by a pneumatically driven clapping mechanism in
which air is transported from the right nasal passage via the
gape of the monkey lips into the distal sac (Norris &
Harvey, 1972). As is hypothesized for other toothed whales,
the air stream ‘passes forward between the monkey lips,

causing them to open and then slap together in a series of
events whose repetition rate is regulated by factors such as
air pressure and/or muscle tension on vibratory elements’
(Cranford et al., 1996). Vibrations of the monkey lips
caused by high-pressure injection of air through the aperture
of the lips are presumably transferred to the tip of and into the
fusiform spermaceti organ. The concentric organization of the
spermaceti organ seen in adult animals as well as the imped-
ance mismatch at the boundary between the fat body and the
case may help to channel the sound waves coming from the
monkey lips backward in the direction of the frontal sac.
Acoustic impedance mismatch between neighbouring struc-
tures is correlated (among other factors) to differences in
tissue density visualized in the CT scans. It is therefore
highly probable that the caudal end of the spermaceti organ
(resembling a drumhead), the adjacent air space, the opposing
epithelium of the frontal sac as well as the osseous back of the
skull amphitheatre form a multi-layered structure by which
sound can be reflected. The caudal inner surface of the
frontal sac is equipped with a field of densely packed
bubbles containing serous fluid. Norris & Harvey (1972) saw
the function of these bubbles in the capture and distribution
of small volumes of residual air in a filigree of communicating
air spaces. Thus, the incompressible bubbles may help to resist
total collapse of the frontal sac under high pressure during
deep dives of the animals.

According to Norris & Harvey (1972) the pulse pattern
within the clicks is the result of one initial pulse generated
pneumatically at the monkey lips (Cranford et al., 1996), its
multiple reflections between the two opposed acoustic
mirrors (distal sac and frontal sac; Figure 5B) and thus the
repetitive travelling of sound within and along the spermaceti
organ. Therefore, the inter-pulse interval should represent the
two-way sound travel time between the acoustic mirrors
(Norris & Harvey, 1972; Cranford, 1999; Mathias et al.,
2009). However, this theory does not answer the question
whether the junk has a potential acoustic function. A recent
hypothesis developed by Møhl and co-workers (Møhl, 2001;
Møhl et al., 2003a, b; Zimmer et al., 2005b) supports the
Norris & Harvey theory (1972) and proposes a sound path
through the junk into the water (Figure 5B). In this model,
the spermaceti organ and the junk together form a bent ‘acous-
tic horn’ in which, as a first step, sound generated at the
monkey lips is reflected to and fro by air-filled cavities (distal
sac and frontal sac). The initial click is reverberated several
times within the spermaceti organ (Norris & Harvey, 1972;
Cranford et al., 1996; Møhl, 2001; Ridgway & Carder, 2001;
Møhl et al., 2003a, b) and, during each cycle, part of the
sound energy exits into the junk. From here, the sound is
guided into the water at the lower tip of the nose (Zimmer
et al., 2005a). By means of the fat lenses and the intermediate
soft connective tissue in the junk, sound may be guided to
the front of the head and emitted into the water. This ‘bent
acoustic horn hypothesis’ (Møhl, 2001; Møhl et al., 2003a, b;
Zimmer et al., 2005b) explains why most of the sperm whale
clicks consist of a series of decaying pulses as well as how
and where these individual pulses are produced and released
into the water. Moreover, it explains a ‘leakage’ of sound
energy which can be observed between the pulses and is inter-
preted as direct reflections from the frontal sac (Norris &
Harvey, 1972; Ridgway & Carder, 2001; Schulz et al., 2008).

The potential function of the fatty lenses of the junk as
acoustic lenses was first outlined by Kenneth S. Norris in

the nose of the sperm whale 11



the 1980s (Cranford, 1999). On its way through the junk,
sound may be focused by the lenticular structures (Møhl,
2001) since fat tissue has lower sound propagation velocities
than the intercalated connective tissue of the junk (Malins &
Varanasi, 1975; Flewellen & Morris, 1978; Goold et al.,
1996). Thus the stack of lenticular fat bodies seems to repre-
sent an acoustic pathway along the axis of this system
(Figure 5B). In the rostroventral region of the junk,
however, the tissue is more or less homogeneous and the fat
lenses merge ventrally into a larger fat body in the two
calves examined. In this area the junk tapers from the sides
in the ventral direction, with the superficial fat being located
subcutaneously at the ventral-most part of the nose just in
front of the tip of the rostrum (Figures 1 & 5). The dense con-
nective tissue covers the entire rostral region in front of the
monkey lips, the spermaceti organ, and the junk laterally
but is completely absent in the rostroventral region of the
junk. A likely interpretation of this observation is that the
rostral and rostroventral parts of the junk are excellent candi-
dates for acoustic windows (terminal acoustic window)
guiding the sound out of the sperm whale head as proposed
by the ‘bent acoustic horn hypothesis’. The longitudinal axes
of the bent acoustic horn (Møhl, 2001; Møhl et al., 2003a,
b) consisting of both fat bodies (spermaceti organ and
junk), which form an angle of 18–208 in lateral aspect, also
seem to be offset from one another in the transverse plane
(Figures 1C–3). More specifically, reviewing the potential
sound path through the fat bodies, the centre of the spermaceti
organ in its rostral half does not lie in a mid-sagittal plane but
is located distinctly to the right side of the animal. The caudal
end of the spermaceti organ, however, fits symmetrically into
the amphitheatre (Figures 1C–3). Accordingly, the potential
sound path in the spermaceti organ swings back from the
monkey lips on the right to the centre of the acoustic mirror
at the amphitheatre, continues through a ventral window in
the case (connecting acoustic window; Figure 5B: CAW)
slightly to the left and through the junk and finally swings
back to the midsagittal plane at the terminal acoustic
window (Figures 1 & 2) situated at the rostroventral tip of
the sperm whale nose (Figure 5B: TAW).

Projected on a sagittal plane, the bent acoustic horn cru-
cially depends on the angle between the axis of the spermaceti
organ and the plane of the acoustic mirror of the frontal sac
and amphitheatre, respectively. In the adult sperm whale,
this angle guarantees sound reflection at the frontal sac in
the direction of the junk (green line in Figure 5B).

As discussed above the two fat bodies are largely continu-
ous in the area of the proposed sound path (Cranford, 1999;
Møhl, 2001) via fat-containing connective and muscle tissue
through the connecting acoustic window in the case. In this
area, where the case is lacking, the fat bodies are only sepa-
rated by the interposed flat right nasal passage and its fatty
muscle (Figures 1–3 & 5). At this central position, the right
nasal passage, its muscle and the spermaceti organ are of a
similar width (Figure 1C).

The lipids of the melon in delphinids reportedly are toxic to
the animal (Morris, 1986) and the same may be true for lipids
in the spermaceti organ of sperm whales. Both in starved
neonate and old sperm whale specimens, the spermaceti
organ retains its size, volume and intrinsic pressure, implying
that the wax esters are metabolically inaccessible (Madsen,
2002). Macroscopic dissection did not reveal a significant
blood supply necessary for a noteworthy turnover of these

fats. Thus, the fat bodies in the nasal complex of sperm
whales do not serve as an energy store that can be metabolized
when needed (Madsen, 2002). These facts emphasize the func-
tionally derived character of the ‘acoustic fats’ in toothed
whales as well as the importance of these structures for the
aquatic lifestyle (e.g. echolocation).

Pneumatic changes in the right nasal passage
and air recycling
Sperm whales are capable of diving to enormous depths in
pursuit of their prey, which has profound effects on the
volume of air available for sound production. It is still not
known how these animals can produce click sounds by
means of a pneumatically driven mechanism with rapidly
shrinking volumes of air during dives down to more than
1000 m (Papastavrou et al., 1989; Wahlberg, 2002). In dol-
phins, air in the nasal complex is probably pressurized by
piston-like movements of the larynx in order to drive click
production (Cranford et al., 1996; Huggenberger et al.,
2008). In a diving 15 m sperm whale with a (vital) lung cap-
acity of approximately 750 l at surface level (Clarke, 1978a),
however, only a volume of about 7.5 l is left at 1000 m
depth for the production of sonar signals. It is plausible
that, during dives, the animals transfer a significant amount
of air from the lungs into the nasal system. However, it is
not probable that sperm whales produce the air pressure to
drive sound generation by movements of their larynx as sug-
gested for dolphins and porpoises (Huggenberger et al., 2008).
For this scenario diving sperm whales would need to pressur-
ize air throughout the whole right nasal passage. In this situ-
ation, however, small quantities of air would hardly suffice
phonation at the monkey lips. Thus, from an anatomical
point of view, it is plausible that the pressure needed for the
generation of pulsed sounds may be produced only by struc-
tures immediately associated with the right nasal passage/
monkey lip unit (Norris & Harvey, 1972). This is in line
with the observation that sperm whales can breathe and
click simultaneously (Wahlberg et al., 2005).

The pulling force of the maxillonasolabialis muscle, covering
the nasal complex dorsally and laterally, was estimated to be
100 kN in adult male sperm whales (Norris & Møhl, 1983). In
this respect, the high transverse back of the amphitheatre at
the rear end of the skull serves as an abutment for both the
spermaceti organ and the muscles which originate here.
Controlled retraction of the maxillonasolabialis muscle
complex (lateral and dorsal portions) may build up considerable
tension in the whole epicranial complex resulting in a compres-
sion of air in the mid and rear portion of the right nasal passage
until the latter collapses (Huggenberger et al., 2014).
Concomitantly, small quantities of residual air could be
shifted along the right nasal passage in the direction of the
monkey lips which can be used here for click generation. This
process may happen rather like the squeezing of toothpaste
out of a tube (from the rear to the front) and be similar to the
mechanism proposed by Norris & Møhl (1983). However,
these authors (Norris & Møhl, 1983) did not describe this mech-
anism in detail. Fine-tuning and the directionality of air flow to
generate click sounds could be controlled by the right nasal
passage muscle. Altogether it seems likely that the right nasal
passage serves as an air-collecting system in which small
quanta of air are forced in the direction of the monkey lips.

12 stefan huggenberger et al.



In the sperm whale, according to our morphological exami-
nations, small amounts of pressurized air, collected and con-
ducted in the right lateral channel of the collapsed right nasal
passage, can stream through the monkey lips, distributed by
the system of branching thin furrows (Norris & Harvey,
1972). These small furrows may cause the air to spread regularly
over the inner surface of the nearly closed lips (Norris & Harvey,
1972). As a result, the lips can act as two entities and clap their
whole inner surfaces together. This simultaneous action should
produce an even and broad pressure (sound) wave in the adja-
cent tissue (spermaceti organ) as a main prerequisite for the
emission of high-intensity short acoustic pulses.

Coda clicks consist of high-repetition pulses which decay
more slowly in intensity compared with those found in
usual (echolocation) clicks (Marcoux et al., 2006; Schulz
et al., 2009). Moreover, the additional pulses of echolocation
clicks are lower in amplitude in relation to the first (p1)
pulse if recorded on-axis in comparison to off-axis recordings
(Møhl et al., 2003b; Zimmer et al., 2005a; Antunes et al.,
2010). According to the Norris & Harvey theory (1972), the
higher number of successive pulses in coda clicks of sperm
whales (in comparison to echolocation clicks) are generated
by additional reflections between the two acoustic mirrors,
the distal sac and the frontal sac (Cranford, 1999; Møhl,
2001; Madsen et al., 2002a; Møhl et al., 2003a, b). Therefore
it is likely that the right nasal passage may be the control
device for the acoustic mechanism to switch between two
modes of sound generation (Huggenberger et al., 2014). If
the right nasal passage contains a small volume of air at its
connecting acoustic window it would reflect and thus trap
most of the energy within the spermaceti organ. Due to the
impedance mismatch between tissue and air only part of the
sound energy is transmitted via the junk into the water so
that multiple cycles of pulses of decaying intensity are gener-
ated (coda click generation). In contrast, the local collapse of
the right nasal passage at the connecting acoustic window, e.g.
due to the shift of air in the direction of the monkey lips by
means of muscle action or water pressure, may allow most
of the sound energy of the initial pulse to pass into the junk.
Thus, additional reflections (pulses) are fewer and less ener-
getic (echolocation click) (Huggenberger et al., 2014).

As mentioned above, the pressure of the air stream through
the monkey lips may be generated by muscle action of the
maxillonasolabialis muscle. If only a relatively small volume
of air is present in the right nasal passage, the pull of the max-
illonasolabialis muscle should cause, at least in part, a collapse
of the mid and rear portions of this nasal passage, i.e. in the
area of the connecting acoustic window (Huggenberger
et al., 2014). In this case, most of the sound energy should
enter the junk in the first pulse p1 (echolocation click).
However, if the right nasal passage is filled with a higher
amount of air, this slight bending should create air pressure
for phonation even without a collapse of the passage (coda
click generation). Fine tuning of the air distribution may be
provided by the right nasal passage muscle which accompan-
ies the right nasal passage along most of its length (Figures 1–
3 & 5) (Clarke, 1978b; Huggenberger et al., 2014). To switch
between the generation cycles of different click types (echo-
location clicks and coda clicks) air may be transported from
the right nasal passage to the nasopharynx and vice versa by
piston-like movements of the larynx as was presumed for
other toothed whales as a general mechanism in sound pro-
duction (Cranford et al., 1996; Møhl et al., 2003b).

In the collapsing right nasal passage during diving, residual
air must be transported forward to the monkey lips to feed the
sound generation process for echolocation clicks. According
to our morphological examinations, the right nasal passage
is equipped with ‘residual channels’ at its lateral contours
which may conduct air in the pressurized tract and persist
even when its central part is collapsed (Figure 2B). As a
result, even small amounts of pressurized air, collected and
conducted in the lateral channels of the collapsed right nasal
passage, can flow at high velocities through the monkey lips.
Partial sound reflections at these air-filled lateral channels of
the collapsed right nasal passage may be the reason for the
fact that echolocation clicks show additional pulses in
higher amplitude when recorded off-axis in comparison to
on-axis recordings.

The function of the right nasal passage as an acoustic inter-
face also implies that the idea of the spermaceti organ as a
buoyancy device for diving is questionable: Clarke (1970,
1978a, 2003) hypothesized that the specific weight of the
spermaceti wax can be changed to adjust the buoyancy of a
sperm whale either by cooling the spermaceti organ due to
the ingestion of sea water into the right nasal passage or by
heating it via blood vessels within the case. However, due to
the poor angioarchitectonics along the spermaceti organ (no
obvious blood supply within most of the case), this hypothesis
is unlikely since, under such conditions, the heating of large
amounts of fat would certainly be cumbersome and time-
consuming. Moreover, the unique structure of the right
nasal passage can be explained satisfactorily by its acoustic
function and not as a device for cooling the spermaceti
organ. The argument that sperm whales do not usually click
at the beginning of deep dives (Whitehead, 2003; Teloni
et al., 2005), when seawater is presumed to be in the right
nasal passage to cool the spermaceti organ (Clarke, 1970), is
illogical given the fact that their food mainly consists of
squid found at even greater depths (Whitehead, 2009).

The mechanism of phonation with changing amounts of
air in the right nasal passage can explain the differences
between coda clicks and echolocation clicks (Huggenberger
et al., 2014) and how air is pressurized in this passage
without the help of larynx-associated muscles (Wahlberg
et al., 2005). It is not clear, however, how other sperm whale
vocalizations such as creaks, slow clicks or trumpet sounds
(see Table 1) are generated. Moreover, it is unknown which
structures and/or tissues may serve as additional devices to
focus echolocation clicks more than coda clicks. However, it
is plausible that the sound beam focus is modulated by
other air spaces and/or tissue interfaces. More specifically, it
can be speculated that the actual shape of the distal and
frontal sacs, which depends on their volume and thus on
muscle tonicity and air pressure, respectively, may play an
important role in focusing click sounds. Thus, changes in
the amount of air in the frontal sac could alter the direction-
ality of the emitted sound beam:

(a) For more focused beams (echolocation clicks), this sac
should decrease in volume, approximating the shape of
the rounded back of the amphitheatre, then being remin-
iscent of a parabolic mirror (Figure 7A).

(b) For less directional beams (coda clicks), this sac may
contain larger air volumes bulging out rostrally
(Figure 7B). The latter situation would also be consistent
with the extended pulse structure of coda clicks (Schulz

the nose of the sperm whale 13



et al., 2009) because the two reflective surfaces (rostral
and caudal walls of the frontal sac) would be further
away from each other.

Whenever the strong maxillonasolabial muscle contracts to
shift air along the right nasal passage in the direction of
the monkey lips, the air in the frontal sac should be pressur-
ized simultaneously (Figure 7). The fluid-filled bubbles in the
caudal wall of the frontal sac may have to withstand strong
pressure exerted on the spermaceti organ in an axial direc-
tion but should keep an intrinsic ‘reticular’ system of air
spaces (Norris & Harvey, 1972). By this they may prevent
the total collapse of the frontal sac and thus maintain the
function of the caudal acoustic reflector (Norris & Harvey,
1972). The fact that the mean diameter of the bubbles in
the frontal sac is shorter than the wavelength of the peak fre-
quency of adult sperm whale sounds may be correlated with
the function of the sac as an acoustic mirror. Such bubbles
were found in adult animals and the larger sperm whale
calf (Calf 2) but not in the smaller specimen investigated
(Calf 1). Instead, in this younger animal, the caudal epithe-
lium of the frontal sac exhibits pinholes (not shown in
figures) which may represent an early developmental stage
of the epithelial specialization. Moreover, this fact may
point out that the epithelial bubbles are adaptations to the
physical conditions in deep-diving with shrinking volumes
of air because young sperm whales do not dive as deep as
adults (Papastavrou et al., 1989); they stay at the surface

and are ‘baby-sat’ by other adult females while their
mothers hunt at greater depths (Gordon, 1987; Whitehead,
1996; Madsen et al., 2003).

After a sound generation cycle, the ‘used’ air may be
recycled directly from the distal sac via backward suction
through the monkey lips into the right nasal passage caused
by the contraction of associated muscles. Tension of only
the dorsal portion of the maxillonasolabialis muscle should
open the monkey lips while contractions of the right nasal
passage muscle may open the volume of the nasal tract.
However, the potential for a circular pattern of air transport
in the nose of a sperm whale (Norris & Harvey, 1972) is the-
oretically given since the left nasal passage and right nasal
passage are interconnected via the vestibulum of the blowhole
and the distal sac rostrally (Figure 1) and via the inner nasal
openings (choanae) caudally (Norris & Harvey, 1972). This
configuration would allow continuous air flow in one direc-
tion through the right nasal passage, the monkey lips, distal
sac, vestibulum, left nasal passage, bony nostrils, the nasopha-
ryngeal space and back to the right nasal passage. This possi-
bility seems intriguing but may only fit the situation in a
non-diving whale: the hydrostatic pressure during diving
should compress the resident air volume to such a degree
that a direct recycling from the distal sac through the
monkey lips into the right nasal passage is more likely. The
latter recycling pattern, reciprocal to the air movement
during sound generation, is also seen in dolphins (Norris
et al., 1971; Norris, 1980).

Fig. 7. Horizontal view of the reconstructed sperm whale head (tip of nose facing right; for sectional level see inset) showing the proposed mechanism of
echolocation click focusing in the adult sperm whale head (A). Green arrows indicate the proposed direction of the sound reflected at the frontal sac. Large
black arrows stand for the pull of the maxillonasolabialis muscle which compresses the air within the frontal sac and gives a more rounded shape to the
acoustic mirror (black arrowheads). In contrast, a relaxed muscle and thus an inflated air sac may generate a flat acoustic mirror (B) creating a less focused
sound beam (coda click). For colour code see Figure 1.

14 stefan huggenberger et al.



Sexual selection
The toothed whale suborder shows a lot of functional equiva-
lence across the structures of the epicranial complex. This is sup-
ported by accumulated evidence from visual inspection (Norris
et al., 1971; Norris, 1980; Ridgway et al., 1980), manual palpa-
tion (Amundin & Andersen, 1983; Ridgway & Carder, 2001),
high-speed video endoscopy in dolphins (Cranford, 2000;
Cranford et al., 2011), the generation and examination of artifi-
cial sounds in dead animals (Møhl, 2001; Møhl et al., 2003a) as
well as the analysis of acoustic behaviour (Wahlberg, 2002;
Zimmer et al., 2005a, b; Beedholm & Møhl, 2006). Altogether
this implies that such structures in the epicranial complex are
specific for the toothed whale sound generation and emission
system. Accordingly, Cranford (1999) concluded that, in the
sperm whale, the function of the nose is similar to that in
other toothed whales but that it may have reached its
immense size in response to a combination of selective pres-
sures, most notably those associated with feeding ecology (mid-
range echolocation) and sexual selection.

The impressive dimorphism of the nasal complex in sperm
whales (Nishiwaki et al., 1963; Berzin, 1972; Nakamura et al.,
2013) was interpreted by Cranford (1999) in terms of acoustic
sexual selection since larger males have longer inter-click and
inter-pulse intervals than smaller animals which is in agree-
ment with the theory of Norris & Harvey (1972). Because
there is some evidence for female choice in sperm whales
(Whitehead, 2003), males with longer inter-pulse intervals
should be more attractive for females.

Another hypothesis by Carrier et al. (2002) interprets the
hypertrophied nose of sperm whales as a potential weapon
specialized in male-male aggression. In this respect, the use
of the spermaceti organ as a battering ram (Carrier et al.,
2002; Lusseau, 2003) is not plausible: the sonar system is so
important for the survival of sperm whales that these
animals would probably not risk damage to this vital device
in regular competitive fights. Although the rostral part of
the spermaceti organ may be protected by thick connective
tissue of the case, the sound generator (monkey lips) at its
rostral tip would be in an exposed position during such
fights. Furthermore, neither in the skull nor in the spine are
there strong skeletal structures such as bony bracing elements,
which could divert or absorb the mechanic forces of ramming.

O N T O G E N E T I C A N D
P H Y L O G E N E T I C I M P L I C A T I O N S

In contrast to other cetaceans, sperm whales have two long
nasal cartilaginous structures which do not ossify even in
old specimens:

(a) The long rostral cartilage (cartilaginous rostrum), which is
the centre of the rostrum in all adult cetaceans (Klima,
1990, 1999).

(b) The nasal roof cartilage, which is typical for the adult
sperm whale and extends diagonally through their nasal
complex (Figures 1–3 & 5) (Flower, 1867; Behrmann &
Klima, 1985; Klima, 1990, 1999; Huggenberger et al., 2006).

The nasal roof cartilage of the sperm whale running along the
left nasal passage was described first by Behrmann & Klima
(1985). It is interesting to note that, whereas the rostral cartil-
age consists of hyaline cartilage, the nasal roof cartilage is an

intermediate between hyaline and elastic cartilage (Klima
et al., 1986a, b; Huggenberger et al., 2006). In view of its deli-
cateness, the nasal roof cartilage cannot support the nasal
complex as a whole but seems to serve the operation of the
left nasal passage during respiration (Huggenberger et al.,
2006). Because the nasal roof cartilage is equivalent to the
tectum nasi and the dorsocaudal part of the septum nasi of
late embryonic and foetal stages (Behrmann & Klima, 1985;
Klima, 1999) it illustrates the original midsagittal plane of
the toothed whale bauplan before the extreme modification
of the sperm whale head came about: during evolution, it
was obviously displaced to the left by the increasing size of
the spermaceti organ (Cranford et al., 1996). According to
the developmental pattern of the nasal roof cartilage, the cet-
acean suborder can be divided into at least three groups:
baleen whales, sperm whales (physeterids) and the remaining
non-physeterid toothed whales. In this context, the nasal roof
cartilage of sperm whales resembles the situation in baleen
whales, and both these groups differ from the non-physeterid
toothed whales (Klima, 1995, 1999). These findings have been
interpreted in favour of a closer relationship of sperm whales
with the baleen whales than with the remaining toothed
whales (Klima, 1999) in accordance with the analysis of
Milinkovitch (1995) which was based on genetic studies. In
the meantime, a plethora of papers (old and new) have char-
acterized the sperm whales as genuine toothed whales which,
however, seem to have diverted early from the toothed whale
clade (Barnes et al., 1985; Heyning, 1989; Cranford et al.,
1996; Berta & Sumich, 1999; Fordyce & de Muizon, 2001;
Price et al., 2005; Fordyce, 2009a, b; Geisler et al., 2014).

The two cartilaginous structures in the forehead of the
adult sperm whale both have important implications for the
reconstruction of the development and evolution of their
nose. The rostral cartilage was described as an ontogenetic
‘pacemaker’ in the formation of the cetacean rostrum
because, as a central structure, it seems to drive the elongation
of the rostrum by means of strong cartilaginous tissue prolif-
eration and thus longitudinal growth, which is followed at
some distance by the much slower growth and elongation of
the dermal premaxillary, maxillary and vomer bones (Klima
et al., 1986a, b; Klima, 1987, 1999).

At least as important for the interpretation of the cetacean
rostrum is the nasal roof cartilage. In the mature condition,
the shape of this upper cartilage and its topographical rela-
tions with neighbouring structures are unparalleled through-
out the animal kingdom. This cartilage was interpreted first
in detail by Milan Klima (1990). Therefore and because of
the heuristic value of this structure for the understanding of
the sperm whale nose (see below) it is referred to as ‘Klima’s
cartilage’.

In the terrestrial ancestors of the cetaceans among the
Cetartiodactyla as well as in the first Archaeoceti, the nostrils
were still in a more or less terminal position (Gingerich et al.,
2001; Thewissen et al., 2001; Fahlke et al., 2011). In contrast,
in more modern cetaceans, these nasal openings were shifted
backward along the mid-line of the upper jaw to a position
just before the brain case. This shift was part of a total
reorganization of the nasal region accompanied by the elong-
ation and broadening of the upper jaw bones rostral and
caudal to the bony nostrils, covering the bony elements of
the forehead (telescoping) (Miller, 1923). Concomitantly,
the nasal passages were rotated about 908 upward and back-
ward so that in all extant non-physeterid toothed whales they

the nose of the sperm whale 15



stand nearly perpendicular to the skull base (Figure 8B)
(Klima, 1987). In toothed whales, generally, the reorganiza-
tion of the nose led to the reduction of the peripheral olfac-
tory system (Oelschläger & Buhl, 1985a, b; Oelschläger &
Kemp, 1998; Oelschläger & Oelschläger, 2002, 2009;
Oelschläger, 2008; Oelschläger et al., 2010) and left over
respiratory tubes secondarily equipped with accessory air

sacs and used for the generation and emission of sonar
signals (Figure 8A) (Norris, 1980; Cranford, 2000).
However, whereas in most extant toothed whales, the blow-
hole and the bony nostrils are situated immediately before
the brain case of the skull, the sperm whale shows a highly
derived situation. Due to the development of the spermaceti
organ as a hypertrophied ‘new’ acoustic fat body out of the

Fig. 8. Comparison of delphinid and sperm whale heads: schematic parasagittal views (right side of head) of a delphinid (A, B) and sagittal projection of an adult
sperm whale head (C). The boxed area in (A) is shown at higher magnification in (B). Proposed homologous structures within the nasal complex are given in the
same colouring and hatching: purple and black hatching, vestibulum; purple and white hatching, right (naso-) frontal sac; red and white hatching,
maxillonasolabialis muscle; red and black hatching, nasal passage muscle/nasal plug muscle; light yellow and black hatching, right posterior dorsal bursa/
spermaceti organ; dark yellow and black hatching, melon/junk; shade of body in grey.

16 stefan huggenberger et al.



small right caudal dorsal bursa (see below; Figure 8A, B)
(Cranford et al., 1996), the blowhole with the phonetic
apparatus (monkey lips) was shifted far rostrally. By that,
the nasal passages connecting the blowhole and the bony
nostrils were strongly elongated. Concluding from all this,
the course of Klima’s cartilage throughout the epicranial
complex stands for the evolutionary shift of the blowhole
(with the phonetic apparatus) in a secondary terminal pos-
ition. This course can be seen as a trajectory of this
process which, in principle, is repeated during the foetal
period of sperm whale development (Klima, 1999).

Homologies in toothed whale forehead
structures
Interestingly, there is no aquatic mammal that evolved a nasal
complex with the external openings on the vertex of the fore-
head in the way cetaceans did. However, during the Triassic
era there were crocodile-like phytosaurs (Phytosauridae,
Reptilia) that were probably adapted to an at least semi-
aquatic freshwater lifestyle. As a convergence to the situation
in cetaceans, their nasal passages were also positioned far
caudally and in front of the brain case. In addition, the bony
nasal openings of phytosaurs were on top of a prominence
and thus in most species on the most dorsal point of the
skull (Mazin, 2001; Britannica Online Encyclopedia, 2013).

Within the Mammalia, it seems that the modifications of
the nasal design and the corresponding osteological transfor-
mations were most pronounced in cetaceans (Frey et al.,
2007). Accordingly, the homologization of nasal structures
in toothed whales with those in non-cetaceans is difficult.
Murie (1874) suggested that dolphin nasal air sacs may be
homologous to the nasal diverticula of the Saiga antelope
(Saiga tatarica). Saiga antelopes have an extended vestibulum
nasi with lateral recesses that may be homologous to the nasal
sacs of the dromedary (Camelus dromedarius) (Clifford &
Witmer, 2004). In contrast, Purves & Pilleri (1978) hypothe-
sized that only the vestibular sacs are homologous to the ves-
tibulum nasi and the anterior part of the nasal tract in
terrestrial mammals. The nasofrontal sacs can be homologized
with the frontal and ethmoid sinuses of terrestrial mammals
(Purves & Pilleri, 1978). Besides it was speculated that the
three floors of nasal air sacs (vestibular, nasofrontal, and pre-
maxillary sacs) represent the three nasal segments (upper,
middle and lower) of the nasal cavity in terrestrial mammals
(Agarkov et al., 1979; Solntseva & Rodionov, 2012).

Concerning the comparative anatomy of toothed whales,
there were several attempts to homologize the nasal structures.
Schenkkan & Purves (1973) hypothesized that the monkey
lips of physeterids are homologous to these lips in the right
nasal passage of other toothed whales. Some years later,
Cranford et al. (1996), reviewed the discussion on homologies
in the toothed whale nasal complex and concluded that the
spermaceti organ in the sperm whales Physeter and Kogia
spp. is probably homologous to the right caudal dorsal
bursa of non-physeterid toothed whales. This fatty structure
shows the same topographic relationships in all toothed
whales. Here, it is located in the caudal wall of the right
nasal passage and behind the caudal monkey lip (the dorsal
monkey lip in the sperm whale). This hypothesis implies
that the spermaceti organ did not develop de novo, as had
been suggested previously (Heyning, 1989), but evolved with

the exceptional hypertrophy of the right side of the forehead
in sperm whales (Cranford et al., 1996). Accordingly, the
so-called ‘case’ that contains the sperm whale’s spermaceti
organ is probably homologous to the connective tissue
pouch, which encases the acoustic fat of the posterior bursa
in dolphins and porpoises (Cranford et al., 1996).

In the adult sperm whale, the right side of the head dom-
inates so much over the corresponding structures on the left
that the centres of right structures are situated nearly in the
mid-sagittal plane (Figures 2 & 3). This results in a marked
but ‘balanced’ asymmetry (spermaceti organ slightly more to
the right-hand side and, as a consequence, the junk slightly
more to the left; see Figures 1C & 2) which is nearly indiscern-
ible in external view (exception: the position of the blowhole,
which is shifted to the left).

The melon and the junk, respectively, are also in the same
relative topographical position within the head and may be
homologous (Cranford et al., 1996): in both physeterids and
non-physeterids these fat bodies rest on the bony rostrum
anterior to the nasal passages. The loose connective tissue of
the junk in the sperm whale, interspersed with numerous
fatty lenses, may not only serve as an impedance transformer
for outgoing sound beams but also as a basis for the suspen-
sion of the spermaceti organ.

Although in dolphins both pairs of monkey lips seem to be
active in sound production, there is a beginning specialization
as to their functional properties. Either of the left and right
sound generators may produce different peak frequencies
within a single click (Cranford et al., 1996, 2011; Cranford,
2000) or, as shown for delphinids (Tursiops truncatus,
Pseudorca crassidens) and a porpoise (Phocoena phocoena),
only the right side was used to generate a single click
(Madsen et al., 2010, 2013). The delphinids tested by
Madsen et al. (2013) used the left monkey lips only to
produce whistles. In sperm whales, only the right pair of
monkey lips has been retained whereas the left pair has van-
ished. The interpretation, that the sperm whale exhibits an
extreme in the functional segregation of the two nasal tracts,
helps to explain why asymmetry in toothed whales is mainly
restricted to the epicranial complex and to the skull roof.
Ventral aspects of the skull do not exhibit such a degree of
asymmetry (Flower, 1867; van Beneden & Gervais, 1868;
MacLeod et al., 2007; Mead & Fordyce, 2009). In the most
extreme skulls of toothed whales (Kogia spp.), asymmetry in
the ventral skull is restricted to the shape and size of the
choanae and bony nasal tubes and to the vomer element,
altogether the area of the nasal skull (Duguy, 1995a, b;
MacLeod et al., 2007).

From the fossil record it appears that the facial skulls of
early cetaceans were bilaterally symmetrical (Fordyce & de
Muizon, 2001) or slightly asymmetrical (Fahlke et al., 2011).
The Archaeoceti, fully adapted to aquatic life, still had subter-
minal bony nostrils and paranasal sinuses. In these animals,
the nostrils had already started to migrate caudalward,
leading to more efficient surfacing for breathing between
dives. The midline sutures of their skulls were slightly dis-
torted clockwise (Fahlke et al., 2011) but the skull bones of
both sides were equal in size and in position relative to the
midline suture, as is the case in all fossil and extant baleen
whales (van Beneden & Gervais, 1868; Heyning, 1989;
Heyning & Mead, 1990). The first toothed whales of the
Oligocene with their caudal position of the bony nostrils
and a facial depression (indicative of a melon and thus the

the nose of the sperm whale 17



ability to echolocate (Geisler et al., 2014)) started to shift the
bony nares slightly to the left by means of a stronger broaden-
ing of skull roof elements on the right (and to twist the area
clockwise in dorsal view) (Fordyce & de Muizon, 2001).
This asymmetry of the skull roof brought the right bony
naris and its monkey lips into a more axial position, a fact
which could be related to most non-physeterid toothed
whales. In sperm whales, this primary bilateral asymmetry
was intensified by the extreme expansion of the right posterior
dorsal bursa of toothed whales into the spermaceti organ and
the extension of this thickened fat body to the left into a near-
midsagittal position (Cranford et al., 1996). In extant sperm
whales, the right anterior dorsal bursa and both left dorsal
bursae seem to have been lost.

Mead (1972; Cranford et al., 1996) recognized the unpaired
vestibulum between the blowhole and the monkey lips as a
common entity in delphinids that becomes highly modified
in some toothed whale groups. This vestibulum in delphinids
as well as in phocoenids has paired outpockets, termed vestibu-
lar sacs, with their openings located just dorsal to the monkey
lips (Mead, 1975; Curry, 1992; Cranford et al., 1996;
Huggenberger et al., 2009). The distal sac of sperm whales is
in a similar relative position to the monkey lips as the right ves-
tibular sac in dolphins. A similar situation is found in Kogia
spp.: Kogia’s vestibular sac is in the same position to neighbour-
ing structures such as the blowhole, the vestibulum and the
monkey lips. In Kogia spp., the vestibular sac is only present
on the right-hand side (as in the sperm whale) but characterized
by a central cushion of tough connective tissue, the function of
which cannot be fully explained yet (Schenkkan & Purves, 1973;
Cranford et al., 1996; Huggenberger, 2004). According to these
similarities in their relative position, it is likely that the vestibu-
lum represents a unified (apomorphic) character of the toothed
whales as a whole, and that its outpockets formally called ves-
tibular sacs in delphinids, phocoenids and Kogia spp. as well
as distal sac in Physeter are indeed modifications of the vestibu-
lum (Figure 8).

The vestibulum of the toothed whale blowhole should not
be equated with the vestibulum nasi of non-cetacean
mammals. Concluding from the shape of the facial skull,
i.e. the position of the bony nasal openings (aperturae nasi
osseae) and the relative position of the nasal complex, by
the soft parts of the toothed whale nose with its nasal air
sacs and fat bodies should be homologous to the vestibulum
nasi of other mammals. Both structures, the toothed whale
nasal complex and the mammalian vestibulum nasi are
located superficial of the aperturae nasi osseae.
Accordingly, toothed whales have evolved the most extraor-
dinary and probably the most complex vestibulum nasi
among mammals. This interpretation, however, needs to be
verified by further investigations.

The caudal right nasofrontal sac in non-physeterid toothed
whales (Lawrence & Schevill, 1956; Mead, 1975; Heyning,
1989; Cranford et al., 1996; Huggenberger et al., 2009), the
(right) nasofrontal sac in Kogia spp., and the frontal sac in
the sperm whale all show the same relative position to the
fat bodies (caudal dorsal bursa and spermaceti organ, respect-
ively) and to the skull. Therefore, it appears that these (naso-)
frontal sacs are also homologous structures found throughout
the Odontoceti (Figure 8).

Because of the morphogenetic distance between sperm
whales (physeterids) and other toothed whales (Fordyce &
de Muizon, 2001; Price et al., 2005), it is difficult to derive

or homologize single components of the maxillonasolabialis
muscle complex across the toothed whales. However, it is
very likely that, as a whole, the epicranial muscles in all the
toothed whales go back to a common ancestral configuration
thus the earliest toothed whales showed the same general
facial configuration (i.e. the supraorbital process of the
maxilla formed the origin of a large volume of facial
muscles) (Fordyce & de Muizon, 2001; Geisler et al., 2014)
as modern dolphins. In the case of the sperm whale, these
muscles reflect the profound phylogenetic modifications of
the epicranial complex in this species which led to a unique
situation with respect to that in terrestrial mammals
(Oelschläger, 2008; Oelschläger et al., 2010). In parallel to
the secondary rostral shift of the blowhole to the dorsal tip
of the sperm whale snout, the course of the muscle fibre
bundles from the margins of the skull roof to the blowhole
has changed from a more concentric (radial) orientation of
up to six muscle layers in dolphins and porpoises (Lawrence
& Schevill, 1956; Mead, 1975; Heyning, 1989; Huggenberger
et al., 2009) to a more longitudinal orientation of a single
powerful muscle (maxillonasolabialis muscle) in sperm
whales. Besides the specific course of Klima’s cartilage from
the bony nares to the blowhole area this is another hint for
the secondary shift of the external nasal opening into a ter-
minal position during the ontogenesis and evolution of
sperm whales.

Moreover, it seems that the nasal passage muscles found in
sperm whales are homologous to the nasal plug muscles in
other toothed whales due to their close topographical relation-
ship: in all toothed whale groups examined so far, each of
these muscles is located rostral to the associated nasal
passage (rostro-ventral in the sperm whale due to the second-
ary turn-over of the nasal passages in the rostral direction)
and acts as a dilator of the latter (Lawrence & Schevill, 1956;
Mead, 1975; Heyning, 1989; Huggenberger et al., 2009).
Accordingly, the musculature in the epicranial complex of
the sperm whale is likely homologous to that of dolphins
innervated by the facial nerve (Mead, 1975; Rauschmann,
1992; Rommel et al., 2002, 2009; Rauschmann et al., 2006;
Huggenberger et al., 2009). In contrast to the situation in
non-cetacean mammals, this cranial nerve runs without
significant ramification from the tympanoperiotic complex
to and below the orbita, turns upward around the lateral
margin of the skull roof via the antorbital notch, and then
ramifies strongly in order to innervate the blowhole muscula-
ture (Rauschmann, 1992; Rommel et al., 2002, 2009). In the
sperm whale, not only the diameter but also the number of
axons of the facial nerve is much higher than in other
toothed whales investigated so far, and also in comparison
to baleen whales of the same body size (Oelschläger &
Kemp, 1998; Oelschläger & Oelschläger, 2002, 2009). This
correlates, on the one hand, with the extreme absolute and
relative size of the head and the nasal musculature and, on
the other hand, with the fact that baleen whales do not
echolocate and possess a much less developed nasal area (no
epicranial complex).

These proposed homologies of epicranial structures
across the toothed whale suborder (Figure 8) imply that
the ancestors of all extant toothed whales were echolocators.
This assumption corresponds with the fact that the asym-
metry of the nasal complex in toothed whales shows the
same general pattern (Ness, 1967) and that all toothed
whales from their earliest origins show evidence for

18 stefan huggenberger et al.



echolocation (Fordyce & de Muizon, 2001; Rauschmann
et al., 2006; Geisler et al., 2014). These findings, in turn,
imply that the active sonar system has evolved only once
and that the hypertrophy of the sperm whale nasal
complex represents an adaptation of the design of the
toothed whale sound generation apparatus to mid-range
echolocation in the open ocean.

Nomenclature of nasal structures in toothed
whales
So far, there is no consensus for a valid taxonomy of nasal struc-
tures in toothed whales. Most terms of structures are based on
generic names proposed in classical papers, sometimes in lan-
guages others than English (Sibson, 1848; Flower, 1867; van
Beneden & Gervais, 1868; Pouchet & Beauregard, 1885;
Kükenthal, 1893; Boenninghaus, 1903; Raven & Gregory, 1933;
Lawrence & Schevill, 1956; Moris, 1969; Norris & Harvey,
1972, 1974; Norris, 1980). For instance, the terms ‘junk’ and
‘spermaceti organ’ as well as ‘case’ were probably coined a
long time ago by whalers (Scammon, 1874) who could not
assess the comparative anatomical and functional implications
of these tissues. Moreover, the term ‘dorsal bursa’ (Cranford,
1988) is misleading because these fat bodies (corpora adiposa)
do not resemble a mammalian bursa (bursa synovialis).

The nasal muscular system is a derivative of the mamma-
lian facial muscles (M. maxillonasolabialis; Huber 1934;
Huggenberger et al., 2009) innervated by the seventh cranial
nerve. However, not much is known about the origin and
affiliation of functional units in different toothed whale
species. A homologization of single muscular units of dolphins
with those of terrestrial mammals is completely lacking. As a
consequence, the nomenclature is problematic. So far, e.g.,
there is still no name for the nasal plug muscle.

In order to propose a valid nomenclature for nasal struc-
tures in toothed whales according to common rules (World
Association of Veterinary Anatomists, 2012) the terms of
structures common to most toothed whales (see
‘Homologies in Toothed Whale Forehead Structures’) are
listed in Table 2.

A C K N O W L E D G E M E N T S

We cordially thank Sam H. Ridgway (US Navy Marine
Mammal Program, San Diego, CA, USA) and Ted
W. Cranford (University of Southern California, San Diego,
CA, USA) for the donation of neonate sperm whale material.
Robert L. Brownell Jr. and William B. Perrin (Southwest
Fisheries Science Center, National Marine Fisheries Service,
San Diego, CA, USA) are thanked for making possible the dis-
section of a sperm whale neonate at their facilities. We are
grateful to Georg Matjasko (Institute of Anatomy III, Dr
Senckenbergische Anatomie, Frankfurt am Main, Germany)
for his help in preparing the cryosections. Thomas J. Vogl
and the staff of the Institute for Diagnostic and
Interventional Radiology (Medical Faculty, Johann
Wolfgang Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main, Germany)
are thanked for their enormous help in the capture of MRI
and CT data sets of neonate sperm whale material. Tadasu
K. Yamada (National Museum of Nature and Science,
Tokyo, Japan) kindly provided photographic material of a
sperm whale calf head. We cordially thank Volker Barth
and Holger Karsten (Anthro-Media, Berlin, Germany) for
their kind help in reconstructing the sperm whale head. Our
sincere thanks go to Jutta S. Oelschläger (Frankfurt am
Main, Germany) for delicate graphical work and to Peter
T. Madsen (University of Århus, Denmark), Magnus
Wahlberg (Fjord & Bælt and University of Southern
Denmark, Kerteminde, Denmark) and Bertel Møhl
(University of Århus, Denmark) for helpful discussions and
reviewing an earlier version of this manuscript. The senior
author (H.H.A.O.) is indebted to Ted Cranford for the
unique opportunity to work with him on his sperm whale
material. John C. Goold and Lynda L. Goold kindly provided
detailed measurements of a skull of an adult sperm whale bull.
We thank James G. Mead and Charles W. Potter (National
Museum of Natural History, Smithsonian Institution,
Washington, DC, USA) for the opportunity to study
toothed whale skulls under their care. The continuous
support of our work by Jörg H. Stehle (Institute of Anatomy
III, Dr Senckenbergische Anatomie, Frankfurt am Main,
Germany) is gratefully acknowledged.

Table 2. Proposed new nomenclature of toothed whale nasal structures.

Proposed nomenclature Old nomenclature

Corpus adiposum nasalis anterior Anterior dorsal bursa (anterior bursa cantantis) (Cranford et al.,
1996)

Corpus adiposum nasalis posterior Posterior dorsal bursa (posterior bursa cantantis) (Cranford et al.,
1996) or spermaceti organ

Corpus adiposum nasalis terminalis Melon and junk
Musculus maxillonasolabialis (Huber, 1934; Huggenberger et al.,

2009)
Muscles inserting in the melon and around the soft nasal passages

Musculus maxillonasolabialis, pars valvae nasalis ventralis Nasal plug muscle
Saccus nasalis nasofrontalis Nasofrontal sac
Saccus nasalis praemaxillaris Premaxillary sac
Saccus nasalis vestibularis Vestibular sac
Valva nasalis dorsalis (Rodionov & Markov, 1992) Lip of blowhole
Valva nasalis intermedia Monkey lips
Valva nasalis ventralis (Rodionov & Markov, 1992) Nasal plug
Vestibulum nasi superficialis∗ Vestibulum of blowhole

∗The toothed whale nasal complex as a whole seems to be homologous to the vestibulum nasi of non-cetacean mammals. Thus, the vestibulum of the
toothed whale blowhole may be only the superficial part of the vestibulum nasi of non-cetacean mammals (see ‘Homologies in toothed whale forehead
structures’). The proposed nomenclature includes only terms of structures typical for odontocetes.

the nose of the sperm whale 19



F I N A N C I A L S U P P O R T

This project depended heavily on the financial support of the
junior author (S.H.) by a postgraduate scholarship of the
Johann Wolfgang Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main,
Germany and the German Academic Exchange Service
(DAAD). We cordially thank the Dr Senckenberg foundation
in Frankfurt am Main, Germany, for generously sponsoring
our work on whales and dolphins over many years.

R E F E R E N C E S

Agarkov G.B., Khomenko B.G. and Manger A.P. (1979) Functional
morphology of cetaceans. (Cited after Solntseva and Rodionov, 2012).
Kiev: Naukova Dumka.

Amundin M. and Andersen S.H. (1983) Bony nares air pressure and
nasal plug muscle activity during click production in the harbour por-
poise, Phocoena phocoena, and the bottlenosed dolphin, Tursiops trun-
catus. Journal of Experimental Biology 105, 275–282.

André M. (2009) The sperm whale sonar: monitoring and use in mitigation
of anthropogenic noise effects in the marine environment. Nuclear
Instruments and Methods in Physics Research Section A: Accelerators,
Spectrometers, Detectors and Associated Equipment 602, 262–267.

André M., Johansson T., Delory E. and van der Schaar M. (2007)
Foraging on squid: the sperm whale mid-range sonar. Journal of the
Marine Biological Association of the United Kingdom 87, 59–67.

Anthro Media (2008) Pottwal Ahoi! Mit Moby Dick auf Tiefseetauchgang.
Television documentary, ARTE, 2 September 2008.

Antunes R., Rendell L. and Gordon J. (2010) Measuring inter-pulse
intervals in sperm whale clicks: consistency of automatic estimation
methods. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 127, 3239–3247.

Au W.W.L., Kastelein R.A., Benoit-Bird K.J., Cranford T.W. and
McKenna M.F. (2006) Acoustic radiation from the head of echolocat-
ing harbor porpoises (Phocoena phocoena). Journal of Experimental
Biology 209, 2726–2733.

Barnes L.G., Domning D.P. and Ray C.E. (1985) Status of studies on
fossil marine mammals. Marine Mammal Science 1, 15–53.

Beedholm K. and Møhl B. (2006) Directionality of sperm whale sonar
clicks and its relation to piston radiation theory. Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America 119, EL14–EL19.

Behrmann G. and Klima M. (1985) Cartilaginous structures in the fore-
head of the sperm whale Physeter macrocephalus. Zeitschrift für
Säugetierkunde 50, 347–356.

Berta A. and Sumich J.L. (1999) Marine mammals: evolutionary biology.
San Diego, CA: Academic Press.

Berzin A.A. (1972) The sperm whale. Jerusalem: Israel Program for
Scientific Translations (available from the U.S. Dept. of Commerce,
National Technical Information Service, Springfield, VA).

Boenninghaus G. (1903) Der Rachen von Phocaena communis Less. Eine
biologische Studie. Zoologische Jahrbücher 17, 1–98.

Britannica Online Encyclopedia (2013) Phytosaur (reptile suborder),
available at: http://www.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/458968/
phytosaur.

Buhl E.H. and Oelschläger H.A. (1986) Ontogenetic development of the
nervus terminalis in toothed whales. Evidence for its non-olfactory
nature. Anatomy and Embryology 173, 285–294.

Carrier D.R., Deban S.M. and Otterstrom J. (2002) The face that sank
the Essex: potential function of the spermaceti organ in aggression.
Journal of Experimental Biology 205, 1755–1763.

Clarke M.R. (1970) Function of the spermaceti organ of the sperm whale.
Nature 228, 873–874.

Clarke M.R. (1978a) Buoyancy control as a function of the spermaceti
organ in the sperm whale. Journal of the Marine Biological
Association of the United Kingdom 58, 27–71.

Clarke M.R. (1978b) Structure and proportions of the spermaceti organ in
the sperm whale. Journal of the Marine Biological Association of the
United Kingdom 58, 1–17.

Clarke M.R. (2003) Production and control of sound by the small sperm
whales, Kogia breviceps and K. sima and their implications for other
Cetacea. Journal of the Marine Biological Association of the United
Kingdom 83, 241–263.

Clifford A.B. and Witmer L.M. (2004) Case studies in novel narial
anatomy: 3. Structure and function of the nasal cavity of saiga
(Artiodactyla: Bovidae: Saiga tatarica). Journal of Zoology 264,
217–230.

Cranford T.W. (1988) The anatomy of acoustic structures in the spinner
dolphin forehead as shown by x-ray computed tomography and com-
puter graphics. In Nachtigall P.E. and Moor P.W.B. (eds) Animal
sonar: processes and performance. Nato ASI Series A. New York, NY:
Plenum Press, pp. 67–77.

Cranford T.W. (1999) The sperm whale’s nose: sexual selection on a
grand scale. Marine Mammal Science 15, 1133–1157.

Cranford T.W. (2000) In search of impulse sound sources in odontocetes.
In Au W.W.L., Popper A.N. and Fay R.R. (eds) Hearing by whales and
dolphins. New York, NY: Springer, pp. 109–155.

Cranford T.W. (2013) Unique Whale Science Images. Welcome to Whale
Science, available at: http://www.spermwhale.org/.

Cranford T.W. and Amundin M. (2004) Biosonar pulse production in
odontocetes: the state of our knowledge. In Thomas J.A., Moss C.F.
and Vater M. (eds) Echolocation in bats and dolphins. Chicago, IL:
University of Chicago Press, pp. 27–35.

Cranford T.W., Amundin M. and Norris K.S. (1996) Functional morph-
ology and homology in the odontocete nasal complex: implications for
sound generation. Journal of Morphology 228, 223–285.

Cranford T.W., Elsberry W.R., Blackwood D.J., Carr J.A., Kamolnick T.,
Todd M., Bonn W.G.V., Carder D.A., Ridgway S.H., Bozlinski D.M.
and Decker E.C. (2000) Two independent sonar signal generators in the
bottlenose dolphin: physiologic evidence and implications. Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America 108, 2613–2614.

Cranford T.W., Elsberry W.R., Van Bonn W.G., Jeffress J.A., Chaplin
M.S., Blackwood D.J., Carder D.A., Kamolnick T., Todd M.A. and
Ridgway S.H. (2011) Observation and analysis of sonar signal gener-
ation in the bottlenose dolphin (Tursiops truncatus): evidence for two
sonar sources. Journal of Experimental Marine Biology and Ecology
407, 81–96.

Curry B.E. (1992) Facial anatomy and potential function of facial struc-
tures for sound production in the harbor porpoise (Phocoena pho-
coena) and Dall’s porpoise (Phocoenoides dalli). Canadian Journal of
Zoology 70, 2103–2114.

Dubrovsky N., Gladilin A., Møhl B. and Wahlberg M. (2004) Modeling
of the dolphin’s clicking sound source: the influence of the critical
parameters. Acoustical Physics 50, 463–468.

Duguy R. (1995a) Kogia breviceps (de Blainville, 1838) – Zwergpottwal.
In Robineau D., Duguy R. and Klima M. (eds) Meeressäuger – Wale
und Delphine 2. Handbuch der Säuetiere Europas. Wiesbaden: Aula,
pp. 598–614.

Duguy R. (1995b) Kogia simus (Owen, 1866) – Kleinpottwal. In Robineau D.,
Duguy R. and Klima M. (eds) Meeressäuger – Wale und Delphine 2.
Handbuch der Säuetiere Europas. Wiesbaden: Aula, pp. 615–623.

20 stefan huggenberger et al.

http://www.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/458968/phytosaur
http://www.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/458968/phytosaur
http://www.spermwhale.org/


Ellis R. (1996) The book of whales. New York, NY: Alfred A. Knopf.

Fahlke J.M., Gingerich P.D., Welsh R.C. and Wood A.R. (2011) Cranial
asymmetry in Eocene archaeocete whales and the evolution of direc-
tional hearing in water. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences USA 108, 14545–14548.

Flewellen C.G. and Morris R.J. (1978) Sound velocity measurements on
samples from the spermaceti organ of the sperm whale (Physeter
catodon). Deep Sea Research 25, 269–277.

Flower W.H. (1867) On the osteology of the cachalot or sperm whale
(Physeter macrocephalus). Transactions of the Zoological Society
London 6, 309–372.

Fordyce R.E. (2009a) Cetacean evolution. In Perrin W.F., Würsig B. and
Thewissen J.G.M. (eds) Encyclopedia of marine mammals. San Diego,
CA: Academic Press, pp. 201–207.

Fordyce R.E. (2009b) Cetacean fossil record. In Perrin W.F., Würsig B.
and Thewissen J.G.M. (eds) Encyclopedia of marine mammals. San
Diego, CA: Academic Press, pp. 207–215.

Fordyce R.E. and de Muizon C. (2001) Evolutionary history of the ceta-
ceans: a review. In Mazin J.M. and de Buffrénil V. (eds) Secondary
adaptation of tetrapods to life in water. Munich: Dr Friedrich Pfeil,
pp. 169–234.

Frey R., Volodin I. and Volodina E. (2007) A nose that roars: anatomical
specializations and behavioural features of rutting male saiga. Journal
of Anatomy 211, 717–736.

Gambell R. (1995) Physeter catodon Linnaeus, 1758 – Pottwal. In
Robineau D., Duguy R. and Klima M. (eds) Meeressäuger – Wale
und Delphine 2. Handbuch der Säuetiere Europas. Wiesbaden: Aula,
pp. 625–646.

Geisler J.H., Colbert M.W. and Carew J.L. (2014) A new fossil species
supports an early origin for toothed whale echolocation. Nature 508,
383–386.

Gingerich P.D., ul Haq M., Zalmout I.S., Khan I.H. and Malkani M.S.
(2001) Origin of whales from early artiodactyls: hands and feet of
eocene Protocetidae from Pakistan. Science 293, 2239–2242.

Goold J.C. (1999) Behavioural and acoustic observations of sperm whales
in Scapa Flow, Orkney Islands. Journal of the Marine Biological
Association of the United Kingdom 79, 541–550.

Goold J.C., Bennell J.D. and Jones S.E. (1996) Sound velocity measure-
ments in spermaceti oil under the combined influences of temperature
and pressure. Deep Sea Research Part I: Oceanographic Research Papers
43, 961–969.

Gordon J.C.D. (1987) Sperm whale groups and social behaviour observed
off Sri Lanka. Reports of the International Whaling Commission 37,
205–217.

Heyning J.E. (1989) Comparative facial anatomy of beaked whales
(Ziphiidae) and a systematic revision among the families of extant
Odontoceti. Contributions in Science 405, 1–64.

Heyning J.E. and Mead J.G. (1990) Evolution of the nasal anatomy of
cetaceans. In Thomas J.A. and Kastelein R.A. (eds) Sensory abilities
of cetaceans. New York, NY: Plenum Press, pp. 67–79.

Huber E. (1934) Contribution to palaeontology IV: anatomical notes on
pinnipedia and cetacea. Publication of the Carnegie Institution
Washington 447, 105–136.

Huggenberger S. (2004) Functional morphology, development, and evolu-
tion of the upper respiratory tract in toothed whales (Odontoceti).
Doctoral dissertation. Department of Biology, Johann Wolfgang
Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main, Germany.

Huggenberger S., Ridgway S.H., Oelschläger H.H.A., Kirschenbauer I.,
Vogl T.J. and Klima M. (2006) Histological analysis of the nasal roof

cartilage in a neonate sperm whale (Physeter macrocephalus –
Mammalia, Odontoceti). Zoologischer Anzeiger 244, 229–238.

Huggenberger S., Rauschmann M.A. and Oelschläger H.H.A. (2008)
Functional morphology of the hyolaryngeal complex of the harbor
porpoise (Phocoena phocoena): implications for its role in sound pro-
duction and respiration. Anatomical Record 291, 1262–1270.

Huggenberger S., Rauschmann M.A., Vogl T.J. and Oelschläger H.H.A.
(2009) Functional morphology of the nasal complex in the harbor por-
poise (Phocoena phocoena L.). Anatomical Record 292, 902–920.

Huggenberger S., André M. and Oelschläger H.H.A. (2014) An acoustic
valve within the nose of sperm whales Physeter macrocephalus.
Mammal Review 44, 81–87.

Jaquet N., Dawson S. and Douglas L. (2001) Vocal behavior of male
sperm whales: why do they click? Journal of the Acoustical Society of
America 109, 2254–2259.

Kishida T., Kubota S., Shirayama Y. and Fukami H. (2007) The olfac-
tory receptor gene repertoires in secondary-adapted marine verte-
brates: evidence for reduction of the functional proportions in
cetaceans. Biology Letters 3, 428–430.

Klima M. (1987) Morphogenesis of the nasal structures of the skull in
toothed whales (Odontoceti). In Kuhn H.J. and Zeller U. (eds)
Morphogenesis of the mammalian skull. Hamburg: Paul Parey, pp.
105–122.

Klima M. (1990) Histologische Untersuchungen an Knorpelstrukturen im
Vorderkopf des Pottwals Physeter macrocephalus. Gegenbaurs
Morphologisches Jahrbuch 136, 1–16.

Klima M. (1995) Cetacean phylogeny and systematics based on the mor-
phogenesis of the nasal skull. Aquatic Mammals 21, 79–89.

Klima M. (1999) Development of the cetacean nasal skull. Advances in
Anatomy, Embryology, and Cell Biology 149, 1–143.

Klima M., Seel M. and Deimer P. (1986a) Die Entwicklung des hochspezia-
lisierten Nasenschädels beim Pottwal (Physeter macrocephalus). Teil I.
Gegenbaurs Morphologisches Jahrbuch 132, 245–285.

Klima M., Seel M. and Deimer P. (1986b) Die Entwicklung des hochspe-
zialisierten Nasenschädels beim Pottwal (Physeter macrocephalus).
Teil II. Gegenbaurs Morphologisches Jahrbuch 132, 349–374.

Kükenthal W. (1893) Vergleichend-anatomische und entwicklungs-
geschichtliche Untersuchungen an Walthieren. Denkschriften der
Medicinisch-Naturwissenschftlichen Gesellschaft zu Jena 3, 1–447.

Lawrence B. and Schevill W.E. (1956) The functional anatomy of the
delphinid nose. Bulletin of the Museum of Comparative Zoology 114,
103–151.

Lusseau D. (2003) The emergence of cetaceans: phylogenetic analysis of
male social behaviour supports the Cetartiodactyla clade. Journal of
Evolutionary Biology 16, 531–535.

MacLeod C.D., Reidenberg J.S., Weller M., Santos M.B., Herman J.,
Goold J. and Pierce G.J. (2007) Breaking symmetry: the marine envir-
onment, prey size, and the evolution of asymmetry in cetacean skulls.
Anatomical Record 290, 539–545.

Madsen P.T. (2002) Sperm whale sound production. Doctoral dissertation.
Department of Biology, University of Aarhus, Aarhus, Denmark.

Madsen P.T. and Surlykke A. (2013) Functional convergence in bat and
toothed whale biosonars. Physiology 28, 276–283.

Madsen P.T., Payne R., Kristiansen N.U., Wahlberg M., Kerr I. and
Møhl B. (2002a) Sperm whale sound production studied with ultra-
sound time/depth-recording tags. Journal of Experimental Biology
205, 1899–1906.

Madsen P.T., Wahlberg M. and Møhl B. (2002b) Male sperm whale
(Physeter macrocephalus) acoustics in a high-latitude habitat:

the nose of the sperm whale 21



implications for echolocation and communication. Behavioral Ecology
and Sociobiology 53, 31–41.

Madsen P.T., Carder D.A., Au W.W.L., Nachtigall P.E., Møhl B. and
Ridgway S.H. (2003) Sound production in neonate sperm whales (L).
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 113, 2988–2991.

Madsen P.T., Wisniewska D. and Beedholm K. (2010) Single source
sound production and dynamic beam formation in echolocating
harbour porpoises (Phocoena phocoena). Journal of Experimental
Biology 213, 3105–3110.

Madsen P.T., Lammers M., Wisniewska D. and Beedholm K. (2013)
Nasal sound production in echolocating delphinids (Tursiops trunca-
tus and Pseudorca crassidens) is dynamic, but unilateral: clicking on
the right side and whistling on the left side. Journal of Experimental
Biology 216, 4091–4102.

Malins D.C. and Varanasi U. (1975) The biochemistry of lipids in acous-
tic tissues. In Malins D.C. and Sargent J.R. (eds) Biochemical and bio-
physical perspectives in marine biology. New York, NY: Academic
Press, pp. 237–290.

Marcoux M., Whitehead H. and Rendell L. (2006) Coda vocalizations
recorded in breeding areas are almost entirely produced by mature
female sperm whales (Physeter macrocephalus). Canadian Journal of
Zoology 84, 609–614.

Martin A.R. (1991) Das große Bestimmungsbuch der Wale und Delphine.
München: Mosaik.

Mathias D., Thode A., Straley J. and Folkert K. (2009) Relationship
between sperm whale (Physeter macrocephalus) click structure and
size derived from videocamera images of a depredating whale
(sperm whale prey acquisition). Journal of the Acoustical Society of
America 125, 3444–3453.

Mazin J.M. (2001) Mesozoic marine reptiles: an overview. In Mazin J.M.
and de Buffrénil V. (eds) Secondary adaptation of tetrapods to life in
water. Munich: Dr Friedrich Pfeil, pp. 95–117.

Mead J.G. (1972) Anatomy of the external nasal passages and facial
complex in the Delphinidae (Mammalia, Cetacea) (cited after
Cranford et al., 1996). Doctoral dissertation. Department of Biology,
University of Chicago, IL, USA.

Mead J.G. (1975) Anatomy of the external nasal passages and facial
complex in the Delphinidae (Mammalia, Cetacea). Smithsonian
Contributions to Zoology 207, 1–72.

Mead J.G. and Fordyce R.E. (2009) The therian skull: a lexicon with
emphasis on the odontocetes. Smithsonian Contributions to Zoology
627, 1–216.

Milinkovitch M.C. (1995) Molecular phylogeny of cetaceans prompts
revision of morphological transformations. Trends in Ecology and
Evolution 10, 328–334.

Miller G.S. (1923) The telescoping of the cetacean skull. Smithsonian
Miscellaneous Collections 76, 1–71.

Møhl B. (2001) Sound transmission in the nose of the sperm whale
Physeter catodon. A post mortem study. Journal of Comparative
Physiology. A, Sensory, Neural, and Behavioral Physiology 187,
335–340.

Møhl B., Wahlberg M., Madsen P.T., Miller L.A. and Surlykke A. (2000)
Sperm whale clicks: directionality and source level revisited. Journal of
the Acoustical Society of America 107, 638–648.

Møhl B., Madsen P.T., Wahlberg M., Au W.W.L., Nachtigall P.E. and
Ridgway S.H. (2003a) Sound transmission in the spermaceti
complex of a recently expired sperm whale calf. Acoustics Research
Letters Online 4, 19–24.

Møhl B., Wahlberg M., Madsen P.T., Heerfordt A. and Lund A. (2003b)
The monopulsed nature of sperm whale clicks. Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America 114, 1143–1154.

Moris F. (1969) Etude anatomique de la region cephalique du marsouin,
Phocaena phocaena L. (Cetacee, Odontocete). Mammalia 33,
666–705.

Morris R.J. (1986) The acoustic faculty of dolphins. In Bryden M.M. and
Harrison R.J. (eds) Research on dolphins. New York, NY: Clarendon
Press, pp. 369–399.

Murie J. (1874) On the organization of the caaing whale, Globiocephalus
melas. Transactions of the Zoological Society of London 8, 235–301.

Nakamura G., Zenitani R. and Kato H. (2013) Relative skull growth of
the sperm whale, Physeter macrocephalus, with a note of sexual
dimorphism. Mammal Study 38, 177–186.

Ness A.R. (1967) A measure of asymmetry of the skulls of odontocete
whales. Journal of Zoology 153, 209–221.

Nishiwaki M., Ohsumi S. and Maeda Y. (1963) Change of form in the
sperm whale accompanied with growth. Scientific Reports of the
Whales Research Institute Tokyo 17, 1–17.

Norris K.S. (1980) Peripheral sound processing in odontocetes. In Busnel
R.G. and Fish J.F. (eds) Animal sonar systems. New York, NY: Plenum
Press, pp. 495–509.

Norris K.S. and Harvey G.W. (1972) A theory of the function of the
spermaceti organ of the sperm whale (Physeter catodon). In Galler
S.R., Schmidt-Koenig K., Jacobs G.J. and Belleville R.E. (eds) Animal
orientation and navigation. NASA Special Publication. Washington,
DC: Scientific and Technical Information Office, National
Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), pp. 397–417.

Norris K.S. and Harvey G.W. (1974) Sound transmission in the porpoise
head. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 56, 659–664.

Norris K.S. and Møhl B. (1983) Can odontocetes debilitate prey with
sound? American Naturalist 122, 85–104.

Norris K.S., Dormer K.J., Pegg J. and Liese G.J. (1971) The mechanisms
of sound production and air recycling in porpoises: a preliminary
report. In Proceedings of the 8th Annual Conference on Biological
Sonar and Diving Mammals. Menlo Park, CA: Stanford Research
Institute.

Oelschläger H.A. (1990) Evolutionary morphology and acoustics in the
dolphin skull. In Thomas J.A. and Kastelein R.A. (eds) Sensory abilities
of cetaceans: laboratory and field evidence. New York, NY: Plenum
Press, pp. 137–162.

Oelschläger H.H.A. (2008) The dolphin brain – a challenge for synthetic
neurobiology. Brain Research Bulletin 75, 450–459.

Oelschläger H.A. and Buhl E.H. (1985a) Development and rudimenta-
tion of the peripheral olfactory system in the harbor porpoise
Phocoena phocoena (Mammalia: Cetacea). Journal of Morphology
184, 351–360.

Oelschläger H.A. and Buhl E.H. (1985b) Occurrence of an olfactory-bulb
in the early development of the harbor porpoise (Phocoena phocoena L.).
Fortschritte der Zoologie 30, 695–698.

Oelschläger H.H.A. and Kemp B. (1998) Ontogenesis of the sperm whale
brain. Journal of Comparative Neurology 399, 210–228.

Oelschläger H.H.A. and Oelschläger J.S. (2002) Brain. In Perrin W.F.,
Würsig B. and Thewissen J.G.M. (eds) Encyclopedia of marine
mammals. San Diego, CA: Academic Press, pp. 133–158.

Oelschläger H.H.A. and Oelschläger J.S. (2009) Brain. In Perrin W.F.,
Würsig B. and Thewissen J.G.M. (eds) Encyclopedia of marine
mammals. San Diego, CA: Academic Press, pp. 134–149.

22 stefan huggenberger et al.



Oelschläger H.H.A., Ridgway S.H. and Knauth M. (2010) Cetacean
brain evolution: dwarf sperm whale (Kogia sima) and common
dolphin (Delphinus delphis) – an investigation with high-resolution
3D MRI. Brain, Behavior and Evolution 75, 33–62.

Oliveira C., Wahlberg M., Johnson M., Miller P.J.O. and Madsen P.T.
(2013) The function of male sperm whale slow clicks in a high latitude
habitat: communication, echolocation, or prey debilitation? Journal of
the Acoustical Society of America 133, 3135–3144.

Papastavrou V., Smith S.C. and Whitehead H. (1989) Diving behaviour
of the sperm whale, Physeter macrocephalus, off the Galapagos Islands.
Canadian Journal of Zoology 67, 839–846.

Pouchet G. and Beauregard H. (1885) Note sur “l’organe des sperma-
ceti”. Comptes Rendus de la Société de Biologie Paris 8, 342–344.

Price S.A., Bininda-Emonds O.R.P. and Gittleman J.L. (2005) A com-
plete phylogeny of the whales, dolphins and even-toed hoofed
mammals (Cetartiodactyla). Biological Reviews of the Cambridge
Philosophical Society 80, 445–473.

Purves P.E. and Pilleri G. (1978) The functional anatomy and general
biology of Pseudorca crassidens (Owen) with a review of the hydrody-
namica and acoustics in Cetacea. In Pilleri G. (ed.) Investigations on
Cetacea. Berne: Institute of Brain Anatomy, University of Berne, pp.
67–228.

Rauschmann M.A. (1992) Morphologie des Kopfes beim Schlanken
Delphin Stenella attenuata mit besonderer Berücksichtigung der
Hirnnerven. Inaugural-Dissertation. Fachbereich Medizin, Johann
Wolfgang Goethe-Universität, Frankfurt am Main, Germany.

Rauschmann M.A., Huggenberger S., Kossatz L.S. and Oelschläger
H.H.A. (2006) Head morphology in perinatal dolphins: a window
into phylogeny and ontogeny. Journal of Morphology 267, 1295–1315.

Raven H.C. and Gregory W.K. (1933) The spermaceti organ and nasal
passages of the sperm whale (Physeter catodon) and other odontocetes.
American Museum Novitates 677, 1–17.

Rice D.W. (1998) Marine mammals of the world – systematics and distri-
bution. Lawrence, KS: Allan Press.

Ridgway S.H. and Carder D.A. (2001) Assessing hearing and sound pro-
duction in cetaceans not available for behavioral audiograms: experi-
ences with sperm, pygmy sperm, and gray whales. Aquatic
Mammals 27, 267–276.

Ridgway S.H., Carder D.A. and Green R.F. (1980) Electromyographic
and pressure events in the nasolaryngeal system of dolphins during
sound production. In Busnel R.G. and Fish J.F. (eds) Animal sonar
systems. New York, NY: Plenum Press, pp. 239–249.

Rodionov V.A. and Markov V.I. (1992) Functional anatomy of the nasal
system in the bottlenose dolphin. In Thomas J.A., Kastelein R.A. and
Supin A.Y. (eds) Marine mammal sensory systems. New York: Plenum
Press, pp. 147–177.

Rommel S.A., Pabst D.A. and McLellan W.A. (2002) Skull anatomy. In
Perrin W.F., Würsig B. and Thewissen J.G.M. (eds) Encyclopedia of
marine mammals. San Diego, CA: Academic Press, pp. 1103–1117.

Rommel S.A., Pabst D.A. and McLellan W.A. (2009) Skull anatomy. In
Perrin W.F., Würsig B. and Thewissen J.G.M. (eds) Encyclopedia of
marine mammals. San Diego, CA: Academic Press, pp. 1033–1047.

Scammon C.M. (1874) The marine mammals of the Northwestern Coast of
North America. Republication: 1968. New York, NY: Dover
Publications, 319 pp. San Francisco, CA: John H. Carmany and
Company and G.P. Putnam’s Sons.

Schenkkan E.J. and Purves P.E. (1973) The comparative anatomy of the
nasal tract and the function of the spermaceti organ in Physeteridae
(Mammalia, Odontoceti). Bijdragen tot de Dierkunde 43, 93–112.

Schulz T.M., Whitehead H., Gero S. and Rendell L. (2008) Overlapping
and matching of codas in vocal interactions between sperm whales:
insights into communication function. Animal Behaviour 76,
1977–1988.

Schulz T.M., Whitehead H. and Rendell L. (2009) Off-axis effects on the
multi-pulse structure of sperm whale coda clicks. Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America 125, 1768–1773.

Sibson F. (1848) On the blow-hole of the porpoise. Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society of London 138, 117–123.

Solntseva G.N. and Rodionov V.A. (2012) Structural and functional
organization of sound generation and sound perception organs in dol-
phins. Acta Zoologica Bulgarica 69, 159–173.

Steffen A. and Steffen W. (2003) Pottwale: Im dunklen Blau des Meeres.
Bonn: Heel.

Teloni V., Mark J.P., Patrick M.J.O. and Peter M.T. (2008) Shallow food
for deep divers: dynamic foraging behavior of male sperm whales in a
high latitude habitat. Journal of Experimental Marine Biology and
Ecology 354, 119–131.

Teloni V., Zimmer W.M.X. and Tyack P.L. (2005) Sperm whale trumpet
sounds. Bioacoustics 15, 163–174.

Thewissen J.G.M., Williams E.M., Roe L.J. and Hussain S.T. (2001)
Skeletons of terrestrial cetaceans and the relationship of whales to
artiodactyls. Nature 413, 277–281.

van Beneden P.J. and Gervais P. (1868) Ostéographie des Cétacés Vivants
et Fossiles, Comprenant la Description et l’Iconographie du Squelette et
du Système Dentaire de ces Animaux: ainsi que des documents relatifs à
leur histoire naturelle. Paris: Arthus Bertrand.

Wahlberg M. (2002) The acoustic behaviour of diving sperm whales
observed with a hydrophone array. Journal of Experimental Marine
Biology and Ecology 281, 53–62.

Wahlberg M., Frantzis A., Alexiadou P., Madsen P.T. and Møhl B.
(2005) Click production during breathing in a sperm whale
(Physeter macrocephalus). Journal of the Acoustical Society of
America 118, 3404–3407.

Watkins W.A. and Schevill W.E. (1977) Sperm whale codas. Journal of
the Acoustical Society of America 62, 1485–1490.

Watkins W.A., Moore K.E. and Tyack P.L. (1985) Sperm whale acoustic
behaviors in the Southeast Caribbean. Cetology 49, 1–15.

Watwood S.L., Miller P.J.O., Johnson M., Madsen P.T. and Tyack P.L.
(2006) Deep-diving foraging behaviour of sperm whales (Physeter
macrocephalus). Journal of Animal Ecology 75, 814–825.

Weilgart L. and Whitehead H. (1993) Coda communication by sperm
whales (Physeter macrocephalus) off the Galápagos Islands.
Canadian Journal of Zoology 71, 744–752.

Weir C.R., Frantzis A., Alexiadou P. and Goold J.C. (2007) The burst-
pulse nature of sounds emitted by sperm whales (Physeter macroce-
phalus). Journal of the Marine Biological Association of the United
Kingdom 87, 39–46.

Whitehead H. (1996) Babysitting, dive synchrony, and indications of allo-
parental care in sperm whales. Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology 38,
237–244.

Whitehead H. (2003) Sperm whales: social evolution in the ocean. Chicago,
IL: University of Chicago Press.

Whitehead H. (2009) Sperm whale Physeter macrocephalus. In Perrin
W.F., Würsig B. and Thewissen J.G.M. (eds) Encyclopedia of marine
mammals. San Diego, CA: Academic Press, pp. 1091–1097.

Whitehead H. and Weilgart L. (2000) The sperm whale: social females
and roving males. In Mann J., Connor R.C., Tyack P.L. and

the nose of the sperm whale 23



Whitehead H. (eds) Cetacean societies. Chicago, IL: University of
Chicago Press, pp. 154–172.

World Association of Veterinary Anatomists (2012) Nomina Anatomica
Veterinaria (NAV). Nomina Anatomica Veterinaria, available at:
http://www.wava-amav.org.

Zimmer W.M.X., Madsen P.T., Teloni V., Johnson M.P. and Tyack P.L.
(2005a) Off-axis effects on the multipulse structure of sperm whale
usual clicks with implications for sound production. Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America 118, 3337–3345.

and

Zimmer W.M.X., Tyack P.L., Johnson M.P. and Madsen P.T. (2005b)
Three-dimensional beam pattern of regular sperm whale clicks con-
firms bent-horn hypothesis. Journal of the Acoustical Society of
America 117, 1473–1485.

Correspondence should be addressed to:
S. Huggenberger
Department II of Anatomy, University of Cologne, 50924
Cologne, Germany
email: st.huggenberger@uni-koeln.de

24 stefan huggenberger et al.

http://www.wava-amav.org
http://www.wava-amav.org
mailto:st.huggenberger@uni-<?h 0,14>koeln.de
mailto:st.huggenberger@uni-<?h 0,14>koeln.de

	The nose of the sperm whale: overviews of functional design, structural homologies and evolution
	INTRODUCTION
	CONSTRUCTION OF A 3D SPERM WHALE HEAD MODEL
	TOPOGRAPHICAL ANATOMY
	Skull
	Nasal passages
	Nasal fat bodies and dense connective tissue
	Nasal cartilages
	Nasal musculature

	FUNCTIONAL INTERPRETATION OF THE NASAL COMPLEX
	Respiration
	Sound generation and emission
	Pneumatic changes in the right nasal passage and air recycling
	Sexual selection

	ONTOGENETIC AND PHYLOGENETIC IMPLICATIONS
	Homologies in toothed whale forehead structures
	Nomenclature of nasal structures in toothed whales
	ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

	FINANCIAL SUPPORT
	References


