












































Microsoft Word - WindFarm_Martech-Full(2).doc


 

 

Modelling the underwater noise associated to the construction and operation of 

offshore wind turbines 

 
Joan V. Castell

1
, Mike van der Schaar

1
, Alex Mas

1
, Serge Zaugg

1
, Ludwig Houegnigan

1
, Maria 

Morell
1
, Marta Solé

1
, Michel André

1 

 

1 Laboratori d’Aplicacions Bioacústiques, Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya, Espanya. 

 

  
Abstract – The operation and in particular the construction of 
offshore wind converters induce considerable underwater noise 

emissions. It is assumed that small whales and seals can be 

affected by noise from machines and vessels, piling and 

installation of the wind turbines. Piling, in particular using 

hydraulic hammers creates impulsive noise with considerable 

high energy levels. Currently, only little knowledge about the 

effects of different noises to marine life is available. Here, we 

present an ongoing project from the Laboratory of Applied 

Bioacoustics (Technical University of Catalonia): to simulate the 

generation, radiation and propagation of underwater noise; to 

develop forecasting hydro sound models of offshore wind 

converters and future noise reduction methods during pile 

driving; to determine the impact area of offshore wind farms; to 

allow the formulation of recommendations for acoustic emission 

thresholds; and to develop standard procedures for the 

determination and assessment of noise emissions. 

 

 Keywords – Offshore wind farm, pile driving, underwater noise. 

 

INTRODUCTION 

 

Control measurement campaigns have been conducted 

during construction of several wind farms in Europe, 

specially in Great Britain and Germany [1] [2], but the lack 

of accurate models on sound generation and propagation in 

shallow water scenarios and on the scientific evidence of 

the effects on marine life prevents a decided call for 

legislation being made on mitigation mechanisms, 

maximum levels, safety distances from specially sensitive 

areas, etc. We propose developing analytical and numerical 

models to assess the structural and environmental radiating 

noise directly produced by the construction and operation 

of wind turbines.  

 

Pile Driving Noise. 

 

Wind turbines are structures anchored to the sea bed 

with cylindrical steel piles. The exact supporting pile size 

depends on the wind turbine size and type. For a 2MW 

wind turbine (like Vestas V-80 type) the pile measures 

about four meters in diameter, weighs about 275 tones and 

is nailed to the sea bed a minimum of 25 meters 

underground. 

 The process of putting the pile in place is performed by 

means of vibration or impact hammers of very high energy. 

For instance the IHC S-600 hammer model, used in 

offshore pile driving, delivers an energy of 600 kNm (kJ) 

in each blow and at forty blows per minute rate. Needless 

to say that each impact of these hydraulic hammers during 

the piling process is prone to produce a significant amount 

of acoustic energy that propagates into the marine 

environment and, as other high intensity sources, may 

severely affect marine organisms [3] [4]. 

To accurately predict this noise several phenomena must 

be taken into account: 

-The impulsive sound that results from the impact. 

-The ringing sound that results from the excited 

vibration modes of the structure. 

-That the supporting pile is immersed in two dense 

mediums: part in water and part in the fluid-like sandy 

bottom which will affect the vibration modes.   

- That suitable places for wind farms have water depths 

of about 20 meters or less. This constitutes a very specific 

scenario for sound propagation, known as shallow or very 

shallow waters.     

 

Fig. 1 Pile driving process. [2] 
 

Wind Farm Operation Noise.  

 

The noise generated by the routine operation of the 

turbines is well studied in the case of onshore wind farms 

as it sometimes causes complaints from close by 

inhabitants. This noise is mainly produced by the 

turbulences caused by the movement of the blades 

(airborne) and secondarily by the mechanisms in the gear 

box (structureborne). But in the offshore case these noise 

sources will not directly induce any underwater noise since 



the big difference between the impedances of the two 

mediums involved (air and water) favours the reflection of 

the sound back to the atmosphere and so prevents it from 

entering the water layer from this path. 

The main way operation noise can enter the water is via 

the structural vibration of the supporting pile. This 

vibration will be of course related to the blades vibration 

and to the gear box operation, part of their vibratory energy 

being transmitted to the supporting pile that then induces 

sound pressure waves in the water. 

To accurately predict this noise several considerations 

must be taken into account: 

-The mechanical complexity and possible variability of 

the vibration inducers (blades and gear box) makes it too 

adventurous to try to predict their vibrations (amplitude, 

frequency content and velocity vectors) from a primary 

finite element analysis. Empirical measurements will be 

necessary. 

-During operation the supporting pile will enter a 

continuous induced stationary vibratory state.  

-The supporting pile is immersed in two dense 

mediums: part in water and part in the fluid-like sandy 

bottom. This will affect the vibration modes.   

- Shallow or very shallow water constitutes an acoustic 

waveguide with its specific propagation modes, cut-off 

frequencies, modal dispersion and the like.     

 

 
Fig. 2 Offshore wind farm in operation. 

PILE DRIVING NOISE PREDICTION 

 

The pile driving mechanism is conceptually basic and a 

complete analytical approach can be tried though it is not 

immediate. 

 The hammer impact can be viewed as the impact of two 

cylinders and the noise generated during the impact at the 

point of contact can be calculated from the impulsive 

acceleration of the structure walls. 

A classical reference on impact noise is the series of 

articles from Richards [5].  

Nevertheless this impact sound peak will be produced 

out of the water and although its analysis is necessary 

before going further in this study, its effects underwater 

will be presumably negligible since it will be strongly 

attenuated by reflection in the water interface. 

Structural pressure waves will travel along the pile after 

the impact. Depending on the boundary conditions they 

will travel back to the impact point due to reflections even 

before the impact process is finished. These structural 

waves, essentially longitudinal will induce surface normal 

accelerations due to Poisson effect, by which a longitudinal 

wave induces motions transverse to the wave direction. 

Flexural wave types, although not possible in pure 

longitudinal force excitation are not discarded and its 

appearance must be investigated. Both types of waves can 

induce sound in the surrounding fluid media: air, water or 

sand and despite the successive reflections, the nature of 

the sound is expected to be impulsive due to the length of 

the pile and its structural loses and to the dispersive 

boundary conditions at the pile ends.  

A good reference to understanding the impact induced 

structural deformation and vibration is the book by 

Goldsmith [6]. 

A frequency domain analysis is possible as well, by 

treating the impact of the hammer as an impulse excitation 

with certain frequency content depending on its duration 

and shape. Then the response of the system to this 

excitation can be calculated in frequency domain if the 

frequency response function of the cylindrical shell is 

known. This is a rather complicated matter and extensive 

literature is available. As early as 1973 Leissa [7] presented 

a review on shell vibration with up to ten different 

approaches to the problem and more than a thousand 

references.  

In time domain or in frequency domain, the objective of 

the former analysis is to account for the surface normal 

acceleration of the cylindrical shell, needed for computing 

the sound pressure radiated as the last step in the problem.  
 

WIND FARM OPERATION NOISE PREDICTION 

 

Due to the complexity of the vibration mechanisms 

involved (rotating blades and gear box) neither an 

analytical prediction, nor a reliable finite element 

simulation can be made about the feeding forces of the 

system, thus a measurement based model seems 

compulsory in this case.  

Depending on the measurement results and its frequency 

content a Modal approach or an energy (SEA, statistical 

energy analysis) approach of the problem will be preferred. 



In this analysis care must be taken in properly 

considering the structural load that a dense medium like 

water (or water soaked sand) infringes on the structural 

vibration and on the efficiency by which these vibrations 

can radiate sound due to the phenomena of subsonic and 

supersonic structural waves in relation to the velocity of 

sound in the medium. The SEA approach is particularly 

suited if vibration/sound mitigation techniques are to be 

introduced in the simulation. 

 

NUMERICAL SIMULATIONS 

 

Clearly, the analytical approaches to the problem are 

intricate and up to this date full of uncertainties but 

nevertheless necessary to give insight into the physical 

mechanisms of vibration and sound emission and a 

necessary basis to scientifically demonstrate and explain 

the direct observations and the results from the numerical 

simulations to be made. 

The structural vibration, in the piling process or in 

continuous operation, can be modelled using finite element 

methods (FEM), accounting for the fluid loading of the 

structure by the use of infinite finite elements or similar 

techniques. For the sound propagation, other methods like 

boundary element methods (BEM) can be better suited for 

the complex waveguide-like scenario of the shallow waters 

where wind farms are constructed. Simplification 

techniques like fast multipole expansion (FME) could be 

used if judged necessary. 

Care must be taken that the algorithm properly treats the 

physical presence of the pile, which can’t be approximated 

as a point source, at least in its vertical coordinate. All 

available propagation algorithms do work with point 

sources [8] and although raw superposition techniques can 

be used to deal with the problem a preferred and more 

elegant solution would be to develop specific formulas that 

take advantage of the cylindrical symmetry of the problem. 

 On the other hand and despite the technique, the 

algorithm must allow the estimation of the noise radiated 

from a hypothetical number of different elements (wind 

mills) in arbitrary positions and in a variety of 

environments in terms of water depth, bottom slope and 

composition, etc. In terms of sound levels, the last process 

is crucial to advise on the noise introduced in the 

environment and accordingly decide on the maximum 

number of elements that would compose a sustainable wind 

farm field. 

 

MEASUREMENTS 

 

In order to improve the models, to drive out 

uncertainties and to corroborate the predictions, a series of 

experimental measurements is planned. This will be done 

by carefully placing accelerometers and extensional gauges 

in the pile to measure vibrations and by placing 

hydrophones at different depths and distances to measure 

the radiated sound. As an example, the existence (or not) of 

flexional structural waves in the pile can be detected and 

differentiated from the longitudinal ones measuring the 

dispersion along the pile with two accelerometers at 

different depths.  

To confirm the shape and spectra of the emitted pulses 

is other obvious objective and data is already available in 

the published literature [2]. 

  

   
Fig. 3 Pile driving noise measurements. Reproduced from [2] 

 

ENVIRONMENTAL EFFECTS 

 

Both pile driving noise and operation noise are to be 

studied since both can have an effect on sea life. Pile 

driving noise is much more powerful and can do serious 

physical harm to some animals but is a transitory operation 

that lasts for some months during the wind farm 

construction and then stops. Wind farm continuous 

operation noise on the other hand is much lower but will be 

uninterrupted at the site for many years. It could affect the 

behaviour of some species, possibly altering the ecosystem 

equilibrium of the site. 

Neither the impulsive nor the long term noise effects on 

marine life are clearly stated yet and although the negative 

effects clearly are accepted to exist, the boundary levels are 

not clear.  This is a parallel research that in conjunction 

with the wind farm noise research will allow advice and 

recommendations to be given for acoustic emission 

thresholds and to determine the impact area of the offshore 

wind farms.  

 

REFERENCES 

 
[1] Karl-Heinz Elmer, Wolf-Jürgen Gerasch, Thomas Neumann, 

Joachim Gabriel, Klaus Betke, Rainer Matuschek, Manfred Schultz - von 

Glahn  “Standard Procedures for the Determination and Assessment 

of Noise Impact on Sea Life by Offshore Wind Farms” (CRI, DEWI, 

itap 2004).. 

[2] Nedwell, J., Langworthy, J. and Howell, D. 2003. Assessment of 

Sub-Sea Acoustic Noise and Vibration from Offshore Wind Turbines 

and its Impact on Marine Wildlife; Initial Measurements of 

Underwater Noise during Construction of Offshore Windfarms, and 

Comparison with Background Noise. The Crown States Office, 2003. 

Commissioned by COWRIE 

[3] Morell, M., Degollada, E., van der Schaar, M., Alonso, J.M., 

Delory, E., López, A., Dewez, A., André, M. 2007. Comparative 

morphometry of odontocete ears through computerized tomography. 

Journal of the Marine Biological Association of the United Kingdom, vol 

87, issue 1, p.69-76 

[4] André, M. Noise, Acoustic Signals and Marine Mammals: a 

possible balance? Proceedings of the Sea Tech Week, Brest, France, Oct 

2006 

[5] E.J. Richards, ME Westcott, R.K. Jeyapalan. On the Prediction of 

Impact Noise. Journal of Sound and Vibration 1979. 

[6] W. Goldsmith. Impact. The theory and physical behaviour of 

colliding solids. Edward Arnold 1960. Dover 2001. 

[7] A. Leissa. Vibrations of shells. NASA 1973, Acoustic Society of 

America, 1993. 

[8] Jensen, Kuperman, Porter & Schmidt. Computational Ocean 

Acoustics.  American Institute of Physics (1994) 


